7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 1/324
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Rosemount, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 2018-03, passed July 17, 2018.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the City Council, this City Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of the City of Rosemount.
This City Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the ROSEMOUNT CITY CODE, and it is hereby published by authority of the Council and shall
be kept up to date as provided in Section 1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to
the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause, relating thereto, as well as to the section
itself, when reference is made to this City Code by title in any legal documents.
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section 1-2-1 of this Code.
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the City Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this City Code. Each such replacement page shall
be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the City Code.
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that
the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be insertedaccording to the official instructions when so
authorized by the City Council. The Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the
Clerk. Any person having in his custody an official copy of the City Code shall make every effort to maintain said Code in an up to date and efficient
manner. He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered to him or made available to him through the office
of the City Clerk. Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and
shall be returned to the office of the Clerk when directed so to do by order of the City Council. (1983 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this City Code or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections, and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporation; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement
ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the City; zoning
and subdivision ordinances; and all special ordinances.
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 2/324
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be
repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as this City Code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case this City Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only.
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force atthe time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the
same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein
repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of
this City Code.
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this City Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining
portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or
phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1983 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single
matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters,
parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not
be applied to any section of this code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context may be
repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or "subsection"
or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant to amend passage and effective
dates of such original ordinances. (1983 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such
meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
CITY: The city of Rosemount, county of Dakota, state of Minnesota.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
city of Rosemount".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: A crime for which a sentence of not more than ninety (90) days or a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or both,
may be imposed.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the city; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the community.
OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 3/324
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Rosemount".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such
building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every
right or interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise,
articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write,
by his proper mark. (1983 Code; amd. Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (1983 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this code, where no other penalty is set forth, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any one offense, or by imprisonment in the city or county jail for a period of not more
than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code where a duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action which is of a
continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect under
which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (1983 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or
penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intent of the council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specificallyand clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1983 Code)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 4/324
Chapter 5
ELECTIONS
1-5-1: DATE OF ELECTIONS:
A. The municipal primary election for the purpose of nominating elective officers in the city shall be held on the same day as the state primary election of
any year in which a municipal general election is to be held, commencing with the even year elections in 2010.
B. The municipal general election in the city shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of every even numbered year,
commencing with the even year elections in 1998. There will be no municipal general election in 1997. (Ord. 2010-03, 2-16-2010)
1-5-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
A. The mayor shall be elected for a four (4) year term commencing with the city election in 1998.
B. Two (2) council members shall be elected for four (4) year terms at each biennial municipal general election commencing in 1998.
C. To provide an orderly transition to the even year election plan, the two (2) year term of office of the mayor and four (4) year terms of city council
members are hereby amended as follows:
1. The terms of the mayor and two (2) council members whose current terms are scheduled to expire on the first business day in January 1998, shall
expire on the first business day in January 1999, and those offices shall be filled at the election to be held in 1998.
2. The terms of the two (2) city council members whose terms are scheduled to expire on the first business day in January 2000, shall expire on the
first business day in January 2001, and those offices shall be filled at the election to be held in 2000. (Ord. IV.2, 6-4-1996)
1-5-3: VACANCIES:
If a vacancy in the office of mayor or city council member occurs with more than three hundred sixty five (365) days remaining in the term, the position will
be filled for the unexpired term by a person elected at a special election to be held not sooner than sixty (60) days or later than ninety (90) days after the
occurrence of the vacancy; provided, however, that if: a) the next general municipal election occurs within three hundred sixty five (365) days of the
occurrence of the vacancy, and b) the vacancy occurs before the first day to file affidavits of candidacy for that election, then the position will be filled by a
person elected at a special election held concurrently with that general municipal election. (Ord. IV.3, 11-19-2003)
Chapter 6
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
1-6-1: SALARIES AND COMPENSATION:
A. Salaries Established: Commencing January 1, 2019, the salaries for Mayor and Council for the City shall be as follows:
Mayor $9,453.00 annually
Council members 7,193.00 annually
B. Salary Adjustment: Every other year, the Mayor and Council shall receive a salary adjustment in an amount that equals the cost of living increase
provided to the City's non-union employees. Any salary adjustment must be approved by ordinance of the City Council.
C. Workers' Compensation Act: Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, section 176.011, subdivision 9, clause 6, the elected officials of the City are hereby
included in coverage of the Minnesota Workers' Compensation Act. (Ord. 2018-3, 7-17-2018)
Chapter 7
CODE OF ETHICS
1-7-1: STATEMENT OF POLICY:
Proper and efficient operation of Municipal government in the City, requires that its public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the citizens;
that Municipal governmental decisions and policy be made in accord with the proper procedures established by the City; that Municipal public office not be
used for personal gain; and that the citizens of the City have confidence in the integrity of its Municipal government. (Ord. II.7, 6-1-93)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 5/324
1-7-2: CREATION AND PURPOSE OF CODE:
In recognition of the above-stated policy, there is hereby established this Code of Ethics for all public officials of the City. The purpose of this Code is to
establish ethical standards of conduct for all public officials by delineating those actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the City and by
directing disclosure by public officials of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the City. (Ord. II.7, 6-1-93)
1-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, terms defined herein shall have the following meaning ascribed to them:
BUSINESS ENTITY: Any business, proprietorship, firm, partnership, person in representative or fiduciary capacity, association, venture, trust or
corporation.
CITY: The City of Rosemount, Minnesota.
INTEREST: Direct or indirect financial or material benefitrealized by a public official as a result of a contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of
an official act or action by or with the City except for such contracts or transactions which confer a similar benefit on a significant number of persons who
are not public officials.
For the purposes of this Code, a public official shall be deemed to have an interest in the affairs of:
A. Any person related to him/her by blood or marriage in a degree closer than the fourth degree of consanguinity or affinity (determined by civil law).
B. Any person or business entity with whom a contractual relationship exists with the public official.
C. Any business entity in which the public official is an employee, officer or director or member having a financial interest.
D. Any business entity in which in excess of five percent (5%) of the total stock or total legal and beneficial ownership is controlled or owned directly or
indirectly by the public official.
PUBLIC OFFICIAL: Any person, officer or employee holding a position by election, appointment or employment in the service of the City, whether paid or
unpaid, including members of any board, committee or commission thereof. (Ord. II.7, 6-1-93)
1-7-4: RESPONSIBILITIES OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS:
Public officials are agents of public purpose and hold office for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the constitution of the United States, the
constitution of the State of Minnesota and to carry out impartially, all laws of the United States, State of Minnesota, Dakota County and the City of
Rosemount. Public officials must undertake their official duties with the highest standards of morality and discharge the specific duties of their respective
offices, regardless of personal considerations, recognizing that the public interest must be their primary concern. Their conduct in carrying out their official
responsibilities must be above reproach. (Ord. II.7, 6-1-93)
1-7-5: STANDARDS OF SERVICE:
A. Adherence to Objectives: All public officials of Rosemount should be loyal to the political objectives expressed by theelectorate and the programs
developed by appropriate Municipal action to achieve those objectives. Appointed officials and employees should adhere to the rules of work and
performance established as the standards for the positions by their appointing authorities.
B. Conformance with Law/Cooperation: Public officials shall not exceed their authority or breach the law or ask others to do so. They should work in full
cooperation with other public officials, unless prohibited from doing so by law or by legally recognized confidentiality of their work. (Ord. II.7, 6-1-93)
1-7-6: PROHIBITION OF SPECIAL TREATMENT:
A. Use of Public Property: No public official shall request or permit the use of City-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal
convenience or profit, except when such items are available to the public generally or are provided pursuant to Municipal policy for the use of such
public official in the conduct of Rosemount Municipal business.
B. Equal Treatment of Citizens: No public official shall grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available
to every other citizen. (Ord. II.7, 6-1-93)
1-7-7: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
No public official shall engage in any business or transaction or shall have an interest which is incompatible with the discharge in the public interest of
his/her official duties or which would tend to impair his/her independence of judgment or action in the performance of his/her official duties. Conflicts of
interest include, but are not limited to the following:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 6/324
A. Incompatible Employment: No public official shall engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interest when such employment
or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his/her official duties or would tend to impair his/her independence of judgment or action in the
performance of those official duties.
B. Use of Information: No public official shall use any information gained exclusively from his/her public position or endeavors to in any way further his/her
interests.
C. Disclosure of Confidential Information: No public official shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the
property, governmental or other affairs of the City.
D. Gifts and Favors: No public official shall accept any giftof more than token value, whether in the form of a service, loan, thing or promise, from any
person, firm or corporation which to the public official's knowledge is interested directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings
with the City. Additionally, the public official shall not accept any gift, favor or thing of more than token value that may tend to influence him/her in the
discharge of official duties or grant in the discharge of said duties, any improper favor, service or thing of more than negligible value. For purposes of
this Section, "token value" shall mean a gift, favor or thing worth no more than twenty five dollars ($25.00).
E. Representation of Private Interests: No official whose salary is paid in full or in part by the City shall undertake any of the following actions.
1. Appearances Before City Agencies: Except as provided in subsection E4 of this Section, no public official shall appear on behalf of the private
interests of any person or entity before any agency, board, committee, commission or other entity of the City.
2. Proceedings Involving the City: Except as provided in subsection E4 of this Section, no public official shall represent the private interests of a person
or entity in any threatened or commenced legal action or legal proceeding in which the City is a party when such private interests are contrary to the
interests of the City.
3. Consultation/Advice to Private Interests: No public official shall counsel or provide advice regarding the private interests of any person or entity with
respect to a threatened or commenced legal action or legal proceeding in which the City is a party when such private interests are contrary to the
City's interests.
4. Representation Exception: A public official may represent his/her own private interests before the City in matters or proceedings set forth in
subsections E1 and E2 of this Section if:
a. The public official renounces his/her public position and authority at all times relevant to representation of his/her own interests; and
b. Such representation is limited to the public official's own interests and does not directly encompass representation of the private interests of
another person or entity.
F. Contracts with the City: Except as otherwise provided in Minnesota Statutes, sections 471.87 through 471.89, no public official shall take part in the
making of a sale, lease or contract for the City when he/she has an interest in the transaction; nor shall a member of the City be directly or indirectly
interested in any contract the City Council makes.
G. Interest in Legislation: No public official shall use his/her official position with the City to influence the passage or defeat of legislation, whether at the
Municipal or State level, in which the public official has an interest. (Ord. II.7, 6-1-93)
1-7-8: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
A. Solicitations: No public official shall in any way solicit funds for any political party or for any political purpose from another public official.
B. Promises and Appointments: No public official shall promise an appointment to any City position or any other benefit or reward emanating from the
official powers of the public official to a person in exchange for political activity. (Ord. II.7, 6-1-93)
1-7-9: APPLICABILITY OF CODE:
A. Broad Construction: It is intended that this Code of Ethics be construed broadly so as to encompass all questionable situations and actions.
B. Advisory Opinions:
1. How Requested: Where any public official has a doubt as to the applicability of any provision to this Code to a particular situation, or as to the
definition of terms used herein, he/she may apply to the City Attorney for an advisory opinion. The public official shall have the opportunity to present
his/her interpretation of the facts at issue and the applicability of provisions of this Code before such advisory opinion is rendered.
2. Status of Advisory Opinion: The opinion rendered by the City Attorney, until amended or revoked, shall be binding on the City, the City Council and
the City Attorney in any subsequent actions concerning the public official who sought the opinion and acted on it in good faith, unless material facts
were omitted or misstated in the public official's request for the advisory opinion. The opinion shall not be binding in any action initiated by any
citizen.
3. Availability of Information: Any advisory opinion of the City Attorney shall be made public upon request. However, the names of all persons or
business entities mentioned in the opinion, except that of the public official requesting the opinion, shall be deemed private information and shall not
be disclosed by the City Attorney, unless the persons or business entities mentioned in the opinion waive such confidentiality. (Ord. II.7, 6-1-93)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 7/324
1-7-10: PENALTIES AND FORFEIT OF POSITION:
A. City Council Members: Any member of the City Council who violates this Code should consider whether voluntary resignation or other disciplinary
action is indicated to promote the best interest of the City. The remainder of the City Council may censure any member of the Council who violates this
Code.
B. Other Public Official: Any appointed officials or other employees of the City may be subject to suspension or dismissal from office as a result of violation
of this Code. (Ord. II.7, 6-1-93)
1-7-11: DISTRIBUTION OF CODE:
The City Clerk shall cause a copy of this Code to be distributed to every public official of the City within thirty (30) days after enactment of this Code. Each
new public official appointed or engaged after initial distribution to this Code shall be furnished a copy before entering upon his/her Municipal duties. (Ord.
II.7, 6-1-93)
1-7-12: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this Code is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, or if the application of this Code to any person or
circumstances is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the remaining provisions of this Code, which
shall be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional provision. (Ord. II.7, 6-1-93)
Chapter 8
CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND
1-8-1: INVESTIGATION:
The Police Department is authorized to do a criminal history background investigation on applicants for positions and licenses with the City as provided by
this Section. This Section applies only to applicants who are finalists for paid or volunteer positions or who are applicants for City licenses. Before the
investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the Police Department in writing to undertake the investigation and to release the information to
the City Council, City Administrator and other City staff as appropriate. Except in the case of exceptions set forth in Minnesota Statutes, section 364.09,
should the City reject the applicant's request for employment due, partially or solely, to the applicant's prior conviction of a crime, or deny the applicant's
request for a license due, partially or solely, to the applicant's prior conviction of a crime, the City Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the
following:
A. The grounds and reasons for the denial;
B. The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minnesota Statutes, section 364.06;
C. The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment or a license; and
D. That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication. (Ord. II.8, 11-4-1997)
Chapter 9
AUTHORITY TO ISSUE CITATIONS
1-9-1: AUTHORITY TO ISSUE CITATIONS:
A. Except as expressly modified by this section, no person other than a peace officer, constable, or part-time peace officer may issue a citation in lieu of
arrest or continued detention, ask a person receiving a citation to give a written promise to appear in court, or take a person into custody as permitted
by Minnesota Statutes, section 629.34.
B. The city code enforcement official or building official may issue a citation in lieu of arrest where the code enforcement official or building official has
probable cause to believe that a person or corporation to whom the citation is issued has violated any of the following provisions of this code, or any
state statutes that relate to the same subject matter and provide for a criminal penalty:
1. Title 8, chapter 2 (parking).
2. Title 9, chapter 4 (building and property maintenance).
3. Ordinance B (zoning regulations). (Ord. II.10, 12-5-2000)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 8/324
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
PLANNING COMMISSION
2-1-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION:
A city planning commission for the city is hereby established. The commission shall be the city planning agency.
Such planning commission shall consist of up to seven (7) members to be appointed by the city council and may be removed by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of
the council. Planning commission members may be removed by the city council at any time when, in the judgment of the council, the public welfare will be
promoted by such removal.
Terms of the commissioners shall be determined in the planning commission bylaws. (Ord. 2015-03, 4-7-2015)
2-1-2: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
A. Supporting Staff: The city council shall provide adequate personnel to assist the commission in fulfilling its duties as stated herein.
B. Meetings, Records, Expenditures: The commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month. It shall adopt rules for the transaction of
business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions and findings, which record shall be a public record. Expenditures of the commission
shall be within amounts appropriated for certain purposes by the city council. (Ord. VIII.3, 3-6-2000)
C. Officers: The commission will elect a chairperson, vice chairperson and other officers as determined in the bylaws. (Ord. VIII.6, 3-6-2003)
2-1-3: OATH; COMPENSATION:
Every appointed member shall, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, take an oath that he will faithfully discharge the duties of his office.
Compensation for the members shall be determined by the city council. (Ord. VIII.5, 4-17-2001)
2-1-4: ZONING POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Prepare Comprehensive Plan: It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission to prepare and update a comprehensive city plan for the
physical, economic and social development of the city. The plan shall be submitted to the city council for adoption according to procedures set forth by
the city council.
B. Prepare Zoning Ordinance: After the adoption of a land use plan for the municipality, the planning commission, for the purpose of carrying out the
policies and goals of the land use plan, may, and upon instructions by the city council, shall prepare a proposed zoning ordinance and submit it to the
governing body with its recommendations.
C. Development Review: The commission shall review and act upon all development proposals in the city according to the authority and procedures set
forth in the zoning and subdivision regulations. The commission shall annually review the five (5) year capital improvement program and submit its
recommendations to the city council. (Ord. XVII-1, 3-4-1971; amd. 1983 Code; Ord. VIII.5, 4-17-2001)
Chapter 2
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
2-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION:
A City Parks and Recreation Commission is hereby established for the City.
The commission shall consist of up to nine (9) members appointed by the City Council. Terms of the members shall be determined in the commission
bylaws. (Ord. 2017-01, 4-4-2017)
2-2-2: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
The commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from its members together with such other officers it deems necessary. The commission
shall meet at least once a month and shall submit its official meeting minutes to the City Council each and every month. (Ord. VIII.6, 3-6-2003)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 9/324
2-2-3: OATH; COMPENSATION1:
Every appointed member shall, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, take an oath that he will faithfully discharge the duties of his office.
Compensation for the members shall be determined by the City Council. (Ord. VIII-1, 10-5-1971; amd. 1983 Code)
2-2-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Advice And Recommendations: The commission shall have the duty to advise the City Council in the acquisition and maintenance of parks,
playgrounds and other public lands. It shall also have the duty of making recommendations and supervising the City recreation system. The
commission shall recommend to the City Council expansion and plans for the development of the City park and recreation system. The commission
shall further make recommendations as to desired regulatory ordinances and make recommendations as to any matters relating to the park and
recreation system of the City.
B. Investigate Needs Of System: The commission shall have no power to make contracts, levy taxes, borrow money or condemn property, but shall have
the full power and responsibility to investigate requirements and needs of the City park and recreation system and to assist the Council in formulating
the terms of and the procedure for accomplishing that goal. (Ord. VIII-1, 10-5-1971)
Chapter 3
CIVIL DEFENSE AGENCY AND COMMITTEE
2-3-1: CIVIL DEFENSE AGENCY:
A. Establishment: There is hereby established a local Civil Defense Agency, pursuant to the requirement of Minnesota Statutes, chapter 12, to provide for
the exercise of necessary powers during civil defense emergencies, for the purpose set forth in said chapter 12.
B. Coordination with Other Agencies: The civil defense functions of the City shall be coordinated to the extent practicable with comparable functions of the
Federal, State and other local governments, as well as private agencies.
C. Liability Provisions: All functions hereunder and all other activities relating to civil defense are hereby declared to be governmental functions. The City
and, except in cases of wilful misconduct, its officers, agents, employees or representatives engaged in any civil defense activities, while complying
with or attempting to comply with the Minnesota Civil Defense Act1 or with this Chapter or any rule, regulation or order made thereunder, shall not be
liable for the death of or injury to persons or damage to property as a result of such activity. The provisions of this subsection shall not affect the right of
any person to receive benefits to which he would otherwise be entitled under this Chapter or under the Workmen's Compensation Law, or under any
pension law, nor the right of any such person to receive benefits or compensation under acts of Congress.
2-3-2: CIVIL DEFENSE COORDINATOR:
A. Appointment; Responsibility: The Civil Defense Agency shall be under the supervision and control of a Coordinator of Civil Defense, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor for an indefinite term and who may be removed by him at any time. The Coordinator shall be paid his ordinary and necessary
operating expenses and such salary as the Council shall from time to time provide by resolution. The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the
administration of the Civil Defense Agency, subject to the direction and control of the Mayor. The Agency shall be organizedinto such divisions and
bureaus, consistent with the State and local civil defense plans, as the Coordinator deems necessary.
B. Powers and Duties:
1. Studies and Surveys: The Coordinator shall make such studies and surveys of the manpower, industries, resources and facilities of the City as he
deems necessary to determine their adequacy for civil defense and to plan for their most efficient use in time of a civil defense emergency.
2. Preparation of General Plan: The Coordinator shall prepare a comprehensive general plan for the civil defense of the City and shall present such
plan to the Council for approval. When the Council has approved the plan by resolution, it shall be the duty of all Municipal agencies and all civil
defense forces of the City to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may be modified in like manner from time
to time.
3. Report to Council: The Coordinator shall, as soon as possible after the end of each fiscal year, prepare and present to the Council for the information
of the Council and the public, a comprehensive report of the activities of the Civil Defense Agency during the year.
4. Emergency Hospitals: Consistent with the civil defense plan, the Coordinator shall provide and equip emergency hospitals, casualty stations,
ambulances, canteens, evacuation centers and other facilities or conveyances for the care of injured or homeless persons.
C. Cooperation With Other Agencies: The Coordinator shall utilize the personnel, services and equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments
and other agencies of the City to the maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all such departments and agencies shall, to the
maximum extent practicable, cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the local Civil Defense Agency and to the Governor upon
request. The head of each department and agency, in cooperation with and under the direction of the Coordinator, shall be responsible for the planning
and programming of such civil defense activities as will involve the utilization of the facilities of his department or agency.
D. Training and Preparation:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 10/324
1. Training and Information: In accordance with the State and City civil defense plans, the Coordinator shall institute such training programs and public
information programs and shall take all other preparatory steps, including the partial or full mobilization of civil defense forces in advance of actual
disaster, as may be necessary to the prompt and effective operation of the City civil defense plan in time of a civil defense emergency. He may from
time to time conduct such practice air raid alerts or other civil defense exercises as he may deemnecessary.
2. Recruitment and Training: The Coordinator shall, in cooperation with existing City departments and agencies affected, organize, recruit and train air
raid wardens, auxiliary police, auxiliary firemen, emergency medical personnel and any other personnel that may be required on a volunteer basis to
carry out the civil defense plan of the City and the State. The Coordinator may dismiss any civil defense volunteer at any time and require him to
surrender any equipment and identification device furnished by the City.
2-3-3: CIVIL DEFENSE PERSONNEL, VOLUNTEERS:
A. Personnel Designated: Civil defense forces shall consist of personnel employed by the City and any other volunteer or paid member of the local Civil
Defense Agency engaged in carrying on civil defense functions in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Emergency Call For Volunteers: Civil defense volunteers shall be called into service only in case of a civil defense emergency for which the regular
Municipal forces are inadequate or for necessary training and preparation for such emergencies.
C. Personnel Procedures, Application: Personnel procedures of the City applicable to regular employees shall not apply to volunteer civil defense workers
but shall apply to paid employees of the Civil Defense Agency.
D. Identification Required: Each civil defense volunteer shall be provided with such suitable insignia or other identification as may be required by the
Coordinator. Such identification shall be in a form and style approved by the Federal government. No volunteer shall exercise any authority over the
persons or property of others without his identification of a volunteer or otherwise represent himself to be an authorized volunteer.
2-3-4: CIVIL DEFENSE ADVISORY COMMITTEE CREATED:
There is hereby created within the Civil Defense Agency a Civil Defense Advisory Committee, hereinafter called the Committee, the members of which
shall be appointed by the Mayor. The Mayor shall be chairman and the Coordinator shall be secretary of the Committee. The Committee shall advise the
Coordinator and the Council on all matters pertaining to civil defense. Each member shall serve without compensation and shall hold office at the pleasure
of the Mayor.
2-3-5: CIVIL DEFENSE FUND CREATED:
There is hereby established in the City Treasury a special fund to be known as the Civil Defense Fund. Into this Fund shall beplaced the proceeds of taxes
levied for civil defense, money transferred from other funds, gifts and other revenues to the Civil Defense Agency. From it shall be made expenditures for
the operation and maintenance of the Civil Defense Agency and other expenditures for civil defense. Regular accounting, disbursement, purchasing,
budgeting and other financial procedures of the City shall apply to the Civil Defense Fund insofar as practicable, but budgeting requirements and other
financial procedures shall not apply to expenditures from the Fund in any case when their application would prevent compliance with terms and conditions
of a Federal or State grant of money or property for civil defense purposes. (Ord. IX.1, 7-15-75)
Chapter 4
PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
2-4-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION:
The public utilities commission of the city as authorized by Minnesota Statutes, sections 412.321 through 412.391, which sections are hereby expressly
accepted, is hereby established.
The commission shall consist of three (3) members appointed by the city council for three (3) year terms. Terms will commence on April 1 of the year
appointed. (Ord. VIII.5, 4-17-2001)
Ex officio members of the commission shall be the city administrator and the mayor. (Ord. VII.6, 2-18-1992)
The public works director for the city will act as the executive director for the utilities commission. In that capacity the executive director will take direction
from the commission, report to the commission with information and recommendations on all matters at the direction of the commission or on his/her own
initiative.
Secretarial service to the commission shall be provided by city staff as directed by the commission executive director.
The commission will meet at least once monthly at a time and place set by majority votes of the commission. These will be considered public meetings.
(Ord. VII.5, 4-5-1988)
2-4-2: ORGANIZATION:
The provisions of Minnesota Statutes, section 412.321 shall apply to the composition, terms, appointment, qualifications and removal of members of the
commission. (Ord. VII.5, 4-5-1988)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 11/324
2-4-3: OATH; COMPENSATION1:
Every appointed member shall, before entering upon the discharge of his/her duties, take an oath that he will faithfully discharge the duties of his office.
Compensation for the members shall bedetermined by the city council. (Ord. VIII.5, 4-17-2001)
2-4-4: POWERS AND DUTIES, JURISDICTION:
A. The public utilities commission shall have responsibility over the following public utilities of the city2:
1. City operated water systems.
2. City operated sanitary sewer systems.
3. City operated storm water systems.
4. Other utility systems serving the general public in Rosemount where the city has a determined part in determining the need and level of such
service.
5. Any public buildings owned and operated by the city for functions directly relating to items in subsections A1 through A4 of this section.
B. With respect to the public utilities commission areas of jurisdiction enumerated above, the public utilities commission shall have the powers prescribed
by law3 and more specifically as follows: (Ord. VII.5, 4-5-1988)
1. To review and adopt operating budgets and authorize expenditures for funds specifically set out for use in the operation and maintenance of the
above referenced utilities.
2. To review all proposed developments in the city including residential, industrial and commercial in nature and make recommendations, as part of that
review process, to the city council on these proposed developments as they relate to the needs of the community in all areas of the above referenced
utilities. These reviews being a required part of the approval process for proposed developments.
3. At least annually, at the commission's regularly scheduled January meeting, or more frequently if deemed necessary by the commission, review all
user fees, connection charges and other associated forms of revenue to these utilities and present recommendations to the city council regarding
these fees. Adding or deleting of such fees will also be determined, through this process. (Ord. VIII.3, 3-6-2000)
C. The public utilities commission shall also be responsible for review of cable services within the city for the following purposes:
1. To monitor the cable company's performance as to level ofservice.
2. To advise and make recommendations to the city council concerning use of franchise fees.
D. The commission jurisdiction is limited to what is specified in the cable franchise agreements. It has no power to adjust or approve cable rates or to
require the cable company to improve level of service or to expand into new service areas within the city. The commission may do the following:
1. Review and adopt operating budgets with respect to the amount of revenue the city receives from the franchise fee.
2. Authorize expenditures for funds specifically budgeted by the commission.
3. Conciliate disagreements among the cable company, subscribers and users of the system.
4. Submit an annual report to the cable company and city council assessing the company's performance according to the terms of the franchise
agreement. (Ord. VII.6, 2-18-1992)
Title 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
LIQUOR REGULATIONS
3-1-1: PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED:
Except to the extent the provisions of this chapter are more restrictive, the provisions of Minnesota statutes, chapter 340A, as amended from time to time,
relating to the definition of terms, licensing, consumption, sales, hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution and
consumption of intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor are adopted and made a part of this chapter as if set out in full. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Any beverage containing more than 0.5 percent alcohol by volume.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 12/324
APPLICANT: Any person making an application for a license under this chapter.
BREWERY, SMALL: A facility that produces not more than twenty thousand (20,000) barrels of malt liquor in a calendar year as regulated by Minnesota
statutes, as may be amended.
BREWPUB: A restaurant with a microbrewery use operated on the same premises as the restaurant.
CLUB: As defined in Minnesota statutes, chapter 340A, as amended.
COCKTAIL ROOM: An area within a microdistillery, or a premises adjacent to the microdistillery and under the same ownership as the microdistillery, that
provides the on-sale of the distilled liquor produced by the microdistillery.
COMMISSIONER: The state commissioner of public safety.
DISTILLERY, MICRO: A facility that produces not more than forty thousand (40,000) proof gallons of distilled spirits in a calendar year as regulated by
Minnesota statutes, as may be amended.
HOTEL: An establishment where, in consideration of payment therefor, food and lodging are regularly furnished to transients and which has a resident
proprietor or manager; a dining room serving the general public at tables and having facilities for seating at least thirty (30) guests at one time; and at least
twenty five (25) guestrooms.
INTOXICATING LIQUOR: Ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous and malt beverages containing more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight.
LICENSE: A document, issued by the city, permitting an applicant to carry on and transact the business stated therein.
LICENSEE: An applicant who, pursuant to the approved application, holds a valid, current, unexpired license, which has neither been revoked nor is then
under suspension, from the city for carrying on the business stated therein.
MALT LIQUOR: Any beer, ale, or other beverage made from malt by fermentation and containing not less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume.
OFF-SALE: The sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for consumption off the licensed premises only.
OPERATING OFFICER, MANAGER OR AGENT: A natural person, who is a resident of the state of Minnesota, appointed in writing to take full
responsibility for the conduct of the licensed premises and serves as agent for service of notices and other process relating to the license.
PREMISES: The licensed premises as described in the issued license. In the case of a restaurant or a club licensed for on-sales of alcoholic beverages
and located on a golf course, "licensed premises" means the entire golf course except for areas where motor vehicles are regularly parked or operated.
SALE, SELL AND SOLD: Includes all barters and all manners or means of furnishing intoxicating and 3.2 percent malt liquors or wine in violation or
evasion of law and also includes the usual meaning of the terms.
TAPROOM: An area within a microbrewery, small brewery or brewery; or a premises adjacent to the microbrewery, small brewery or brewery and under
the same ownership as the microbrewery, small brewery or brewery; that provides the on-sale of the malt liquor produced by the microbrewery, small
brewery or brewery.
3.2 PERCENT MALT LIQUOR: Malt liquor containing not less than 0.5 percent alcohol by volume nor more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight.
TOTAL REVENUES: All revenues from the sale of food, alcoholic beverages and nonalcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises during the
hours when the sale of alcoholic beverages is allowed.
WINE: A beverage made by normal alcoholic fermentation of grapes, grape juice, other fruits or honey or a beverage made from other agricultural
products, imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider, perry, and sake, containing not less than 0.5 percent nor more than twenty four percent
(24%) alcohol by volume for nonindustrial use. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-3: LICENSES REQUIRED:
A. General Requirement: No person, except as provided in Minnesota statutes, sections 340A.301 and 340A.510, regarding samples at off-sale
establishments, and manufacturers and wholesalers to the extent authorized by law, shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell, keep for sale or deliver any
intoxicating liquor, 3.2 percent malt liquor or wine without first having received a license to do so as provided in this chapter; nor shall any private club
or public place, directly or indirectly, or upon any pretense or by any device, allow the consumption or display of intoxicating liquor or serve any liquid
for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor without first obtaining a license from the city as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-3-1: LICENSE TYPES:
A. On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor Licenses: On-sale licenses shall be issued only to hotels, restaurants and exclusive liquor stores and shall permit on-sale of
liquor or wine. On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses shall be of two (2) classes.
1. Class B licenses may be issued only to the following:
a. Restaurants where fifty one percent (51%) or more of total revenues are derived from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises during hours when the sale of alcoholic beverages is allowed.
b. Restaurants operated in conjunction with a bowling center, movie theater, or live theater, where twenty five percent (25%) or more of total
revenues are derived from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises during hours when the sale of alcoholic
beverages is allowed.
c. Hotels as defined in Minnesota statutes 340A.101, subdivision 13.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 13/324
2. Class A licenses may be issued to hotels, restaurants and exclusive liquor stores and are unrestricted as to the percentage of revenues derived from
the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages.
B. On-Sale Wine Licenses: On-sale wine licenses shall be issued only to restaurants meeting the qualifications of Minnesota statutes, section 340A.404,
subdivision 5, and whose total revenues are at least fifty one percent (51%) attributable to the sale of food and shall permit only the sale of wine not
exceeding twenty four percent (24%) alcohol by volume, for consumption on the licensed premises only, in conjunction with the sale of food. A holder of
an on-sale wine license who is also licensed to sell 3.2 percent malt liquors at on-sale may sell intoxicating malt liquor at on-sale without an additional
license.
C. Club On-Sale Intoxicating Licenses: Club on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses shall be issued only to clubs or congressionally chartered veterans
organizations which meet the qualifications of Minnesota statutes, section 340A.404, subdivision 1.
D. Special License For Sunday Sales: A special license authorizing sales on Sunday in conjunction with the serving of food may be issued to any hotel,
restaurant or club which has facilities for serving at least thirty (30) guests at one time, and which has an on-sale license.
E. Off-Sale Intoxicating Liquor Licenses: Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for
consumption off the premises only.
F. On-Sale 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor Licenses: On-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses may be granted only to clubs, restaurants and hotels where food is
prepared and served for consumption on the premises, and golf courses. On-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses shall permit the sale for consumption
on the premises only.
G. Off-Sale 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor Licenses: Off-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses shall permit the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor at retail in the original
package for consumption off the premises only.
H. On-Sale Brewer Taproom License: A brewer taproom license may be issued to a brewer for on-sale consumption of the malt liquor manufactured at the
adjoining brewery pursuant to the requirements of Minnesota statutes 340A, but only to the extent permitted by this code and the zoning ordinance.
Council may authorize a taproom to conduct on-sale business on Sundays with no additional license needed.
I. Off-Sale Small Brewer License: An off-sale small brewer license may be issued to a brewer who has a license from the commissioner in accordance with
the requirements of Minnesota statutes 340A. Council may authorize a small brewer to conduct sales of growlers only at off-sale on Sundays with no
additional license needed.
J. Brewpub Off-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License: An off-sale brewpub license may be issued to a restaurant who has a license from the commissioner in
accordance with the requirements of Minnesota statutes 340A. Council may authorize a brewpub to conduct sales of growlers only at off-sale on
Sundays with no additional license needed.
K. Microdistillery Cocktail Room License: A microdistillery cocktail room license may be issued to a holder of a microdistillery license from the
commissioner in accordance with the requirements of Minnesota statutes 340A.
L. Public Premises Licenses: On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses for events taking place at a sports, convention or cultural facility owned by the city may be
granted as authorized by section 3-1-13 of this chapter.
M. Temporary On-Sale 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor Licenses: Temporary 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses may be granted to a club or charitable, religious, or
nonprofit organization as authorized by section 3-1-12 of this chapter.
N. Temporary On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor Licenses: Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be granted as authorized by section 3-1-12 of this
chapter.
O. Temporary Brewer On-Sale Licenses: Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be granted as authorized by section 3-1-12 of this chapter.
P. One Day Consumption And Display Permit: A one day permit for the consumption and display of intoxicating liquor may be granted as authorized by
section 3-1-12 of this chapter.
Q. Consumption And Display Permits: Consumption and display permits may be approved by council for issuance by the commissioner in accordance with
the provisions of Minnesota statutes, section 340A.414, for the consumption or display of intoxicating liquor or the serving of any liquid for the purpose
of mixing with intoxicating liquor. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-3-2: APPORTIONMENT OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR LICENSES:
A. Class B intoxicating liquor licenses will be issued within the total liquor license limits established in Minnesota statutes, section 340A.413, as amended.
B. Two (2) class A intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued within the city of Rosemount.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 14/324
C. There shall be no limit on the number of off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-4: LICENSE APPLICATIONS:
3-1-4-1: CONTENTS OF INITIAL APPLICATIONS:
A. General: In addition to the information which may be required by the forms of the commissioner, the application for any type of license to be issued
under this chapter shall contain information required by this section.
B. Nature Of Application: The application shall show whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, partnership or other firm or organization.
1. Natural Person: If the applicant is a natural person, the following information shall be required:
a. True name, place and date of birth, and street residence address of the applicant.
b. Whether the applicant has ever used or been known by a name other than his or her true name and, if so, what was such name or names, and
information concerning dates and places where used.
c. The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a designation, name or style other than the full individual name of the applicant; in such
case a copy of the certification, as required by Minnesota statutes, chapter 333, certified by the secretary of state, shall be attached to the
application.
d. Street addresses at which the applicant has lived during the preceding ten (10) years.
e. Kind, name and location of every business or occupation the applicant has been engaged in during the preceding ten (10) years.
f. Names and addresses of the applicant's employers and partners, if any, for the preceding ten (10) years.
g. Whether the applicant or his spouse, has ever been convicted of any crime or violation of any city ordinance, other than traffic. If so, the applicant
shall furnish information as to the time, place and offense for which convictions were had.
2. Partnership: If the applicant is a partnership, the following information shall be required:
a. The names and addresses of all partners and all information concerning each partner as is required of an individual applicant in subsection B1 of
this section. A managing partner or partners shall be designated. The interest of each partner in the business shall be disclosed.
b. A true copy of the partnership agreement.
c. If the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a trade name under the provisions of Minnesota statutes, chapter 333, a true copy of such
certificate certified by the secretary of state shall be attached to the application.
3. Corporation: If the applicant is a corporation or other association, the following information shall be required:
a. Name and, if incorporated, the state of incorporation.
b. A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of incorporation or association agreement and bylaws and, if a foreign corporation, a
certificate of authority, as described in Minnesota statutes.
c. The name of the manager or proprietor or other agent in charge of the premises to be licensed, giving all the information about said person as is
required of an individual applicant in subsection B1 of this section.
d. A list of all persons who, singly or together with their spouses, or a parent, brother, sister or child of either of them, own or control an interest in
said corporation or association in excess of ten percent (10%) or who are officers or directors of said corporation or association, together with all
information as is required of an individual applicant in subsection B1 of this section.
4. Club: If an application is submitted by a club, the following information shall be submitted in addition to that required by the commissioner of public
safety:
a. The name of the club and the purpose for which the club was originally organized and for which it is now existing.
b. The date and location that the club was first incorporated, and, where appropriate, the date that the establishment serving the club was
incorporated or otherwise established. True copies of the articles of incorporation, bylaws, or other similar governing documents shall be submitted
with the application.
c. The number of members.
d. The name of the manager, proprietor or other person who shall be in charge of the licensed premises together with all information concerning such
person as is required of an individual applicant in subsection B1 of this section.
e. A sworn statement by a responsible individual having personal knowledge of the facts shall be submitted with the application verifying that the club
meets all the requirements of Minnesota statutes, sections 340A.404 and 340A.101, subdivision 7. In the event that no person can make such a
statement, satisfactory documentary proof may be submitted in support of such facts.
C. Type: The application shall state the type of license the applicant seeks.
D. Description Of Premises:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 15/324
1. Legal Description: The exact legal description of the premises to be licensed together with a plot plan of the area showing dimensions, location of
buildings, street access, parking facilities and the locations of and distances to the nearest church buildings and school grounds.
2. Street Address: The street address where the sale of alcoholic beverages is to be conducted.
3. Plans Of Premises: A set of plans showing the design of the proposed compact and contiguous premises within which alcoholic beverages may be
dispensed and consumed. The plan shall show room dimensions and shall indicate the number of persons intended to be served in each of said
rooms.
E. Financial And Interest Criteria:
1. Financial Interest: The names and addresses of all persons, other than the applicant, who have any financial interest in the business, buildings,
premises, fixtures, furniture, stock in trade; the nature of such interest, amount thereof, terms for payment or other reimbursement. This shall include,
but not be limited to, any lessees, lessors, mortgagees, mortgagors, lenders, lienholders, trustees, trustors and persons who have cosigned notes or
have otherwise loaned, pledged or extended security for any indebtedness of the applicant.
2. Amount Of Investment: The amount of investment that the applicant has in the business, building, premises, fixtures and structures, exclusive of
land, on the premises proposed to be licensed.
F. References: The names, and addresses of three (3) persons, residents of the state, of good moral character, not related to the applicant or financially
interested in the premises or business, who may be referred to as to the applicant's character or, in the case where information is required of a
manager, the manager's character.
G. Taxes: Whether or not all real estate taxes, assessments, or other financial claim of the city, state or federal government for the business and premises
to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid, the years for which delinquent.
H. Description Of Proposed Business: A detailed narrative description of the proposed business for which the license is sought including, but not limited to:
type of clientele, type of entertainment (if any), type of food menu (if any), and fixtures.
I. Other Information Required: Such other information as the city council shall require. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-4-2: EXECUTION OF APPLICATION:
If the application is by a natural person, it shall be signed and sworn to by such person; if by a corporation, by an officer thereof; if by a partnership, by one
of the partners; if by an incorporated association, by the operating officer or managing officer thereof. If the applicant is a partnership, the application,
license and bond or insurance policy shall be made and issued in the name of all partners. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement in an
application. Applications shall be filed with the city clerk. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-4-3: RENEWAL APPLICATIONS:
A. Time Of Making Application: Applications for the renewal of an existing license shall be made at least sixty (60) days prior to the date of the expiration of
the license, and shall state that everything in the prior applications remains true and correct except as otherwise indicated. The city will mail application
forms to existing licensees approximately ninety (90) days prior to expiration of the licenses. If, in the judgment of the council, good and sufficient cause
is shown by any applicant for his failure to file for a renewal within the time period provided, the council may, if the other provisions of this chapter are
complied with, grant the application. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-4-4: AMENDMENT APPLICATION:
A. Purpose Of An Amendment: A licensee may request an amendment to the license during the calendar year term of the license for any of the following
purposes:
1. Change in ownership of ten percent (10%) or more of the stock of the corporation or change in ownership which results in any party acquiring an
interest which, together with that of a spouse, parent, brother, sister or child, exceeds ten percent (10%).
2. Change in the operating officer, manager, or agent of establishment.
3. Request to modify a condition(s) within the license.
4. Request to expand the permitted license area.
B. Material Required: The following application material shall be provided as part of the amendment application:
1. Change In Ownership Of Establishment: An amendment application shall be submitted with any changes to the original application. In addition,
applicant shall submit all information as is required of an individual applicant in subsection 3-1-4-1B1 of this chapter, for each party who acquires an
interest which, together with that of a spouse, parent, brother, sister or child, exceeds ten percent (10%).
2. Change In Corporate Officers, Operating Officer, Manager Or Agent Of Establishment: An amendment application shall be submitted with all
information as is required of an individual applicant in subsection B1 of this section.
3. Request To Modify A Condition(s) Within The License: The licensee shall provide in writing the condition that is requested to be modified, the
modification that is requested, and the factors that the city council should consider when determining the modification.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 16/324
4. Request To Expand The Licensed Premises: The licensee shall provide in writing the plans for the expansion including the necessary building permit
application, landscaping plans and all plans as requested by staff. A revised certificate of liability insurance must also be submitted showing liquor
liability coverage for the expanded area.
C. Submission Time Frame: Amendment applications shall be submitted on or before thirty (30) days prior to the effective dates of any changes. (Ord.
2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-5: LICENSE FEES:
A. Fees: The fees for licenses, amendments and permits shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the city council subject to limitations set
by Minnesota statutes 340A and this code.
B. Payment Of Fees: The license fee for a new license shall be paid in full before the application for the license is accepted, and at least ten (10) days
before the public hearing on the application. All fees shall be paid into the general fund of the city. Upon rejection of any application for a license or
upon withdrawal of an application before approval of the issuance by the council, the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant.
C. Term, Pro Rata Fee: Each license shall be issued for a period of one year except that if the application is made during the license year, a license may
be issued for the remainder of the year for a pro rata fee, with any unexpired fraction of a month being counted as one month. Every license shall
expire as provided in section 3-1-6 of this chapter.
D. Refunds: No refund of any fee shall be made except as authorized by Minnesota statutes, section 340A.408.
E. Investigation Fees: Investigation fees for other than temporary licenses shall be as follows:
1. For initial license investigations conducted within the state of Minnesota, the investigation fee shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) or the
maximum set by Minnesota statutes 340A.412.
2. For initial license investigations conducted outside of the state of Minnesota, the investigation fee shall be the actual cost of the investigation, but not
to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). At the time of the original application for a license, the applicant shall deposit one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) with the city for the investigation fee. Any fees due in excess of the one thousand five hundred dollar ($1,500.00) deposit
must be paid prior to the license hearing and before the city council considers the application. Any deposit amount in excess of the actual cost of the
investigation shall be returned to the applicant.
3. At any time an additional investigation is required due to one or more of the following, the city may charge an additional investigation fee up to five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or the maximum set by Minnesota statutes 340A.412:
a. Change In Ownership: A change in the ownership of any licensee or control of a corporate license within the meaning of section 3-1-4 of this
chapter,
b. Change In Operating Officer Or Agent: A change in the operating officer, proprietor, manager, or other agent in charge of the licensed premises.
c. Enlargement Or Substantial Alteration: An enlargement or substantial alteration of the premises already licensed which, in the city's opinion,
changes the character of the establishment,
d. Change Of Ownership, Exception: Where a new application is filed as a result of incorporation by an existing licensee and the ownership control
and interest in the license are unchanged, no additional investigation fee will be required.
4. If requested, the city will furnish the applicant verification of all costs in excess of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
5. Investigation fees for temporary license shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-6: GRANTING OF LICENSES:
A. Investigation: At the time of making application, the applicant shall, in writing, authorize the police department to investigate all facts set out in the
application and do a personal background and a criminal record check on the applicant. The applicant shall further authorize the police department to
release information received from such investigation to the city council. Should the city council deny the applicant the request for a license, due partially
or solely to the applicant's prior conviction of a crime, the city council shall notify the applicant in writing of the following information:
1. The grounds and reasons for the denial;
2. The applicable complaint and grievance procedure as set forth in Minnesota statutes, section 364.06;
3. The earliest date the applicant may reapply for a license; and
4. That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication.
B. Hearing Requirements:
1. Public Hearing Required: A public hearing shall be required for any new application or amendment application for the purpose of permanently
expanding the licensed premises.
2. Hearing On Renewal Applications And Amendment Applications Other Than Expansion Of Licensed Premises: The council may choose to hold a
public hearing prior to amendment or renewal of any license where opportunity may be given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of
a renewal license. Such hearing shall take place not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days after the date for submitting renewal
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 17/324
applications. Upon request of such hearing, the clerk shall cause to be published in the official newspaper ten (10) days in advance, a notice of
hearing to be held by the council, setting forth the day, time and place when the hearing will be held and the names of all renewal applicants.
3. Notice Of Hearing: Upon receipt of the written report and recommendation by the police department, and within twenty (20) days thereafter, the clerk
shall cause to be published in the official newspaper ten (10) days in advance, a notice of hearing to be held by the council, setting forth the day, time
and place when the hearing will be held; the name of the applicant; the premises where the business is to be conducted; the nature of the business
and such other information as the council may direct.
4. Conduct Of Hearing: At the hearing, opportunity shall be given for persons to be heard for or against the granting of the license.
5. Exception: The provisions of this section are not applicable to applications for temporary licenses.
C. Granting License: After such investigation and hearing, the council shall grant or refuse the application in its discretion.
D. Issuance:
1. License For Premises Described In Application: Each license shall be issued to the applicant only for the premises described in the application.
2. License Period, Expiration: Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses, except temporary
licenses, expire on June 30 of each year, and all intoxicating liquor licenses, except temporary licenses, expire on December 31 of each year.
Temporary licenses shall expire according to their terms.
3. Premises Under Construction: Where a license is granted for premises where the building is under construction or otherwise not ready for
occupancy, the clerk shall not issue the license until notified by the building inspector that the building is ready for occupancy.
E. Report To State: The clerk shall, within ten (10) days after the issuance of any license under this section, submit to the commissioner of public safety
the full name and address of each person granted a license, the true name, the effective license date, and the date of expiration of the license. He shall
also submit to the commissioner of public safety any change of address, transfer, cancellation or revocation of any license by the council during the
license period.
F. Transfer:
1. Each license shall be issued only for the licensee and premises described in the application. No license may be transferred to another person or to
another place without the approval of the council;
2. Licenses issued to corporations shall be valid only so long as there is no change in the officers or ownership interest of the corporation, within the
meaning of section 3-1-4 of this chapter unless such change is approved by the council via amendment.
3. Licenses issued to associations or partnerships shall be valid only so long as there is no change in the partnership or association agreement or in
the ownership of said partnership or association unless such change is approved by the council via amendment.
4. Any transfer of the license or a transfer of stock or interest in excess of ten percent (10%) or where a transfer results in any party acquiring an
interest which, together with that of a spouse, parent, brother, sister or child, exceeds ten percent (10%), without council approval is grounds for
revocation of the license. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-7: PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
A. State Law: No license shall be granted to or held by any person made ineligible for such a license by state law.
B. Manager Required: No license shall be granted to a corporation that does not have an operating officer who is eligible pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
C. Real Party In Interest: No license shall be granted to a person who is the spouse of a person ineligible for a license pursuant to the provisions of
subsection A of this section or who, in the judgment of the council, is not the real party in interest or beneficial owner of the business operated, or to be
operated, under the license.
D. Interest Defined: The term "interest" as used in this section includes any pecuniary interest in the ownership, operation, management or profits of a
retail intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor establishment, but does not include: bona fide loans; bona fide fixed sum rental agreements; bona
fide open accounts or other obligations held with or without security arising out of the ordinary and regular course of business or selling or leasing
merchandise, fixtures or supplies to such establishment; or an interest of five percent (5%) or less in any corporation holding a city liquor license. A
person who receives monies from time to time directly or indirectly from the licensee in the absence of a bona fide consideration therefor and excluding
bona fide gifts or donations, shall be deemed to have a pecuniary interest in such retail license. In determining bona fide, the reasonable value of the
goods or things received as consideration for the payment by the licensee and all other facts reasonably tending to prove or disprove the existence of
any purposeful scheme or arrangement to evade the prohibitions of this section shall be considered. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-8: PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
A. General Prohibition: No license shall be issued for any place or any business ineligible for such a license under state law.
B. License Refused Where Taxes Due: No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises on which real estate taxes, assessments or
other financial claims of the city or of the state are delinquent or unpaid. If an action has been commenced pursuant to the provisions of Minnesota
statutes, chapter 278, questioning the amount or validity of taxes, the council may, on application by the licensee, waive strict compliance with this
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 18/324
provision; no waiver may be granted, however, for taxes, or any portion thereof, which remain unpaid for a period exceeding one year after becoming
due unless such one year period is extended through no fault of the licensee.
C. Distance From School Or Church: No license shall be granted to any applicant whose place of business is within three hundred feet (300') of any school
or church. In applying this restriction the distance shall be measured from the main front entrance of the school or church and the liquor establishment
following the route of ordinary pedestrian travel.
D. Nudity And Sexual Conduct Prohibited: No license shall be held at any premises where nudity or sexual acts or conduct are permitted to occur.
1. For the purposes of this subsection "nudity" and "sexual conduct" are defined as follows:
NUDITY: The showing of the postpubertal human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering or the
showing of postpubertal female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below a point immediately above the top of the
areola, or the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. For the purposes of this definition, the female breast is considered
uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and the areola are covered.
SEXUAL CONDUCT: Acts or simulated acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, sadomasochistic
abuse, or any touching of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female, or the breasts of the female, whether alone or between
members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
2. The following acts or conduct in a premises which has been issued a license are contrary to the public welfare and, therefore, in order to preserve
order and protect the public welfare, no license issued under this chapter shall be held at any premises where such conduct or acts are permitted to
occur:
a. The licensee, owner or manager of any licensed establishment permitting or allowing any live nudity to occur on the licensed premises.
b. The licensee, owner or manager of any licensed establishment permitting or allowing any live sexual conduct to occur in the licensed
establishment.
3. The city council may suspend or revoke or refuse to issue a license for violation of this subsection D upon a finding that the licensee has failed to
comply with this subsection D. No suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing. (Ord.
2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-9: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. Conditions And Regulations: Every license is subject to the conditions of this chapter and of all other applicable ordinances, laws or regulations.
B. Licensee's Responsibility: Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of his place of business and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of
an employee on the licensed premises authorized to sell alcoholic beverages there is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee shall be
liable to all penalties provided by this chapter and the law equally with the employee. Every licensee shall also cooperate with the city in controlling
activity attributable to the business in surrounding areas.
C. Inspections: Any police officer, building inspector or any properly designated officer or employee of the city shall have the unqualified right to enter,
inspect and search the premises of any licensee hereunder during the business hours without a warrant.
D. Nonemployees On Premises: No person, other than the licensee and any employee, shall remain on the on-sale licensed premises more than thirty
(30) minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
E. Beverage Restriction: No alcoholic beverage shall be sold, furnished or delivered to any obviously intoxicated person, to any known habitual drunkard,
to any minor, or to any person to whom a sale is prohibited by state law.
F. Sales Prohibited: No person shall give, sell, procure or purchase intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor to or for any person to whom the sale
would be forbidden by law.
G. Employment Of Minors: No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall be employed in any rooms constituting the place in which alcoholic
beverages are sold at retail on-sale, except that persons under eighteen (18) years of age may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a
bus person or dishwashing services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel or other multipurpose building servicing food in which alcoholic
beverages are sold at retail on-sale.
H. Ownership Of Equipment: No equipment or fixture in any licensed place shall be owned in whole or in part by any manufacturer or distiller except such
as shall be expressly permitted by state law.
I. Prostitution: No licensee shall knowingly permit the licensed premises or any room in those premises or any adjoining building directly under his control
to be used by prostitutes.
J. Controlled Substances: No licensee shall knowingly permit the sale, possession or consumption of controlled substances on the licensed premises in
violation of Minnesota statutes, chapter 152.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 19/324
K. Certification: No class B on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall be renewed to a licensee that has failed to submit a statement signed by a certified
public accountant attesting that fifty one percent (51%) or more (or 25 percent in the case of restaurants operated in conjunction with bowling centers
or movie theaters) of total revenues of the establishment was derived from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages during the twelve (12) month
period preceding the licensee's application for renewal. The licensee shall provide access to its books and records during business hours on
reasonable notice by the chief of police or designee and shall provide such additional information as the chief may require to demonstrate that the
information on revenues derived from food and beverage sales is accurate. In the event the chief of police determines that an audit by an outside
auditor is appropriate, the expense of such audit shall be paid by the licensee.
Failure to comply with limitations on percentage of revenues derived from food and nonalcoholic beverage sales applicable to the relevant class of
license is grounds for revocation or for suspension and the imposition of such conditions as are deemed appropriate by the council.
L. Premises Limited: No license shall be effective beyond the compact and contiguous space named therein for which the same was granted. All licenses
granted hereunder shall set forth the exact location within the building structure where such sales may be made and no sales shall be permitted except
in that part of the premises defined in the license.
M. Leaving Premises: No on-sale licensee or an employee thereof shall allow a person to leave the licensed premises in possession of an alcoholic
beverage, except as allowed by Minnesota statutes 340A.404, subdivision 11.
N. Special Conditions: At the time a license renewal is issued, the city may attach additional conditions to the license to protect the welfare of the
community. Violation of any of the conditions shall be grounds for revocation of the license. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-10: RESTRICTIONS INVOLVING MINORS:
A. No Sale To Minors: No licensee, his agent or employee shall serve or dispense upon the licensed premises any intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt
liquors to a person under the legal drinking age; nor shall such licensee, or his agent or employee, permit any such person to be furnished or consume
any such liquors on the licensed premises; nor shall such licensee, his agent or employee, permit any such person to be delivered any such liquors.
B. Delivery To Minors: No person under the legal drinking age shall receive delivery of intoxicating or 3.2 percent malt liquor.
C. Misrepresenting Age: No minor shall misrepresent his age for the purpose of obtaining intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor, nor shall he enter
any premises licensed for the retail sale of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor for the purpose of purchasing or having served or delivered to
him for consuming any such intoxicating liquor or beer, nor shall any such person purchase, attempt to purchase, consume or have another person
purchase for him any intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor.
D. Identification Required: Any person shall, upon demand of the licensee, his employee or agent, produce and permit to be examined a current driver's
license or photo identification issued by the state department of public safety. In the case of a foreign national, a valid passport may be used as an
alternative to the foregoing methods of identification.
E. Compliance Checks: From time to time, the city shall conduct compliance checks. Such checks may involve, but are not limited to, engaging underage
persons to enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase alcohol products. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-11: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
All applicants for any type of intoxicating liquor, 3.2 percent malt liquor or wine license to be issued or renewed must, as a condition to the issuance of the
license, demonstrate proof of financial responsibility as defined in Minnesota statutes 340A.409 and with regard to liability imposed by Minnesota statutes,
section 340A.801, to the city. Proof of financial responsibility may be given by filing one of the following:
A. A certificate that there is in effect for the period of the license an insurance policy or pool providing the following minimum coverages:
1. One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) because of bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence and, subject to the limit for one
person, in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) because of bodily injury to two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence,
and in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one occurrence;
2. One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for loss of means of support of any one person in any one occurrence, and, subject to the limit of one
person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for loss of means of support of two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence; or
B. A bond or a surety company with the minimum coverages as provided in subsection A of this section; or
C. A certificate of the state treasurer that the licensee has deposited with him three hundred fifty thousand dollars ($350,000.00) in cash or securities
which may legally be purchased by savings banks or for trust funds having a market value of three hundred fifty thousand dollars ($350,000.00).
D. In lieu of the above insurance requirements an applicant for a temporary 3.2 percent malt liquor license may provide proof of financial responsibility by
filing a certificate that there is in effect for the license period an insurance policy or pool providing at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) of
coverage because of bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) because of bodily injury to
two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence, ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one
occurrence, fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for loss of means of support of any one person in any one occurrence, and one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) for loss of means of support of two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 20/324
3-1-12: TEMPORARY LICENSES:
A. Temporary 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor License: The city council may issue a temporary on-sale license for the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor to a club,
charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization. The temporary licenses shall be subject to such terms and conditions as the council shall subscribe.
Except where specifically excluded, applicants for temporary licenses shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Temporary Intoxicating Liquor License: The city council may issue to a club or charitable, religious or nonprofit organization in existence for at least
three (3) years, a political committee registered under Minnesota statutes, section 10A.14, or a state university, a temporary license for the on-sale of
intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the city sponsored by the licensee. The license may authorize the on-sale of intoxicating
liquor for not more than four (4) consecutive days, and may authorize on-sales on premises other than premises the licensee owns or permanently
occupies. The license may provide that the licensee may contract for intoxicating liquor catering services with the holder of a full year on-sale liquor
license issued by a municipality. The licenses are subject to the terms, including the license fee, normally imposed by the city. The licenses issued
under this section are subject to all laws and ordinances governing the sale of intoxicating liquor except Minnesota statutes, section 340A.409, dealing
with liability insurance. Temporary licenses must first be approved by the commissioner of public safety before they become valid.
C. Temporary Brewer On-Sale License: The city council may issue to a brewer who meets the qualifications in Minnesota statutes 340A.404, subdivision
10, paragraph (c), a temporary license for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the municipality sponsored by the
brewer. The terms and conditions specified for temporary intoxicating liquor licenses under subsection B of this section shall apply to a license issued
under this paragraph.
D. One Day Consumption And Display Permit: A one day permit for the consumption and display of intoxicating liquor may be issued to a nonprofit
organization subject to conditions set forth in Minnesota statutes 340A.414, subdivision 9. The permit must be approved by the public safety
commissioner and is valid only for the day indicated on the permit. The fee for the permit shall be set by council but may not exceed amount allowed in
Minnesota statutes 340A.414, subdivision 9. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-13: ON-SALE LICENSE ON PUBLIC PREMISES:
A. Sports, Convention Or Cultural Facility: The city council may issue to the holder of an on-sale intoxicating liquor license issued by the city or a
municipality adjacent to the city, a license to allow the dispensing of intoxicating liquor at any convention, banquet, conference, meeting or social affair
conducted on the premises of a sports, convention or cultural facility owned by the city. The licensee must be engaged to dispense intoxicating liquor at
an event held by a person or organization permitted to use the premises and may dispense intoxicating liquor only to persons attending the event. The
licensee may not dispense intoxicating liquor to any person attending or participating in an amateur athletic event held on the premises.
B. Community Festivals: The city council may issue to the holder of an on-sale intoxicating liquor license issued by the city, a license to allow the
dispensing of intoxicating liquor off premises at a community festival held within the municipality. The authorization shall specify the area in which the
intoxicating liquor must be dispensed and consumed, and shall not be issued unless the licensee demonstrates that it has liability insurance.
C. Application Process: Applicants for public premises licenses set forth in this section, shall be subject to the following process:
1. Annual Application: Applicants for a public premises license shall annually apply to the city for such license. The application shall set forth the
applicant's desire for such license, the nature and duration of its existing on-sale intoxicating liquor license and contain the license fee set forth in
subsection 3-1-5A of this chapter.
2. Hearing Not Required: No public hearing as set forth in subsection 3-1-6B of this chapter shall be required for the granting of an on-sale license on
public premises.
3. Application Approval: The city council shall approve the application if it determines the applicant has a duly issued on-sale intoxicating liquor license
issued by the city or an adjacent municipality and if it further determines that the applicant is in good standing with regard to the applicant's on-sale
intoxicating liquor license.
4. Duration: The license granted under this section shall remain in effect from its issuance until December 31 of the year in which it is issued. Licenses
issued under this section are subject to annual renewal.
D. Other Conditions: In addition to the requirements otherwise set forth in this section, public premises licensees shall be subject to the following
conditions:
1. Event Fees: In addition to the annual license fee set forth in subsection 3-1-5A of this chapter, a licensee shall pay a per event fee. Such fee shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the city council.
2. Minnesota Products: If a licensee under this section is selling beer for on premises consumption, the licensee shall make provision for the sale of at
least one Minnesota produced beer at each station on the premises where beer is being sold.
3. Events; Special Conditions: Whenever the city council determines that a specific event for which the licensee will be providing on-sale intoxicating
liquor requires special or unique conditions, the city council may impose same and the licensee shall abide by all such conditions. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-
7-2015)
3-1-14: OUTDOOR PATIOS AND DECKS:
A. Conditions Under Which Permitted: Service and consumption of alcohol on outdoor patios and decks in conjunction with an intoxicating liquor "on-sale"
license, an "on-sale" wine license, a special club license, a special license for Sunday sales or a 3.2 percent malt liquor license may be permitted by
the city council under the following conditions:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 21/324
1. The patio or deck area must be compact and contiguous to the licensed premises and shall be enclosed with a wrought iron railing that meets
standards set forth in this code and final inspection by the chief building official.
2. Appropriate receptacles for rubbish, garbage, cigarette paraphernalia, etc., must be provided.
3. Lighting must be sufficient to promote public safety, directed downward, and compatible with the surrounding area.
4. A buffer zone should be provided between the patio or deck area and adjacent parking lot. The area surrounding a patio or deck area must be
fenced so as to not allow entrance from outside the fenced area onto the patio or deck area.
5. Smoking may be allowed on the patio or deck area, provided it is in compliance with the Minnesota "freedom to breathe act of 2007".
6. Music, televisions, bands, amplified sound or any activity that would disturb the peace of the surrounding area is prohibited on the outdoor patio or
deck area. Background music that does not disturb the peace of the surrounding area is permitted during hours when service of alcoholic beverages
is permitted.
7. The patio or deck area shall be controlled and monitored continuously during the hours of operation and unruly patrons shall be removed
immediately.
8. The hours and days of sale of alcoholic beverages shall be in accordance with this code.
9. Patrons shall not leave the premises with a drink nor can drinks be taken onto a public sidewalk.
10. The amendment to the licensee's licenses for the outdoor patio or deck area shall be approved on a provisional basis. The council may revoke,
suspend or decline to renew the license for the patio or deck area portion of the licensed premises on the grounds of failure to comply with the
conditions outlined in the resolution or undue annoyance or burden on nearby residents.
11. The outdoor patio or deck area must be included in the required liquor liability insurance for the premises.
12. The city council may impose any additional conditions it deems necessary in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare at the time of initial
approval or any renewal of the license for a patio or deck. The conditions set forth allowing the patio or deck shall be reviewed during the yearly
renewal period. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-15: LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION; CIVIL PENALTY:
A. Violation: The council shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days, revoke a license, impose a civil fine not to exceed two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or impose any combination of these sanctions for each violation on a finding that the licensee has committed a violation of
any of the following:
1. False or misleading statements made on a license application or renewal, or failure to abide by the commitments, promises or representations made
to the city council.
2. Violation of any special conditions under which the license was granted.
3. Violation of any provision of this chapter or other applicable ordinances.
4. Creation of a nuisance on the premises or in the surrounding area.
5. Violation of any state or federal law or regulation controlling the sale of intoxicating liquor or controlled substances.
6. Lapse of proof of financial responsibility.
B. Civil Penalties: The following is the minimum schedule of presumptive civil penalties which must be imposed in addition to any suspension unless the
license is revoked:
1. For the first violation within any three (3) year period, five hundred dollars ($500.00).
2. For the second violation within any three (3) year period, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
3. For the third and subsequent violations within any three (3) year period, two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
C. Inactive License: The city council may revoke the intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor license of any establishment granted a license that is not
under construction and exhibiting satisfactory progress toward completion within six (6) months from its issuance, or any establishment that ceases
operation for a period of six (6) months. A hearing shall be held to determine what progress has been made toward opening or reopening the
establishment and, if satisfactory progress is not demonstrated, the council may revoke the license.
D. Hearing Notice: Except in cases of lapse of proof of financial responsibility or liability insurance, revocation or suspension of a license shall be preceded
by a public hearing conducted in accordance with Minnesota statutes, chapter 14. The city council may appoint a hearing examiner or may conduct a
hearing itself. The city shall give the licensee notice of the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall include notice of the time
and place of the hearing, and shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee.
E. Lapse Of Proof Of Financial Responsibility: Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall affect an immediate suspension of any license issued
pursuant to this chapter or state law without further action of the council. Notice of cancellation or lapse of a current liquor liability policy shall also
constitute notice to the licensee of the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a license who has received notice of lapse of required
insurance or of suspension or revocation of a license may request a hearing thereon and, if a request is made in writing to the clerk, a hearing before
the council shall be granted within ten (10) days. Any suspension under this subsection shall continue until the council determines that the financial
responsibility requirements of state law and this chapter have again been met.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 22/324
F. Revocation; Fine: In the event of a revocation of a license, the licensee must reapply for a license and meet the requirements for a license under this
chapter. In the event that a fine imposed pursuant to this section is not paid within fifteen (15) days of its imposition by the council, the license shall be
suspended until the fine is paid. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-16: CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES:
A. Open Container In Parking Areas: No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor or have in his possession any bottle or
receptacle containing intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor which is open while in the parking area of any shopping center or other commercial
establishment.
B. Liquor In Public Parks: Possession and/or consumption in city parks shall be allowed or prohibited according to section 4-3-10 of this code, as
amended, except as permitted by public premises licenses issued in accordance with section 3-1-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
Chapter 2
ENTERTAINMENTS, SERVICES
ARTICLE A. SHOOTING RANGES1
3-2A-1: LICENSING PROVISIONS, FEES:
A. Required, Fee: All owners of rifle ranges, trap ranges and target ranges at any place within the city shall, from and after the enactment of this article, be
required to pay a license fee to the city in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) for a permit to operate such ranges.
B. Operation: Such ranges shall be operated so as to result in maximum safety to the residents and property of the city and the owners and operators of
such ranges shall comply with all regulations for such ranges that the city may hereafter enact.
C. Insurance: As a condition of said license, liability insurance on said operation may be required. (Ord. XIV.6, 10-4-1977)
3-2A-2: VIOLATION, REVOCATION:
A. Violation of any of the terms of such regulations shall constitute a violation of this article and be cause for revocation of the license granted under the
terms of this article. (Ord. XIV.6, 10-4-1977)
B. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as described in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
ARTICLE B. MASSAGE THERAPY
3-2B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The city council deems it necessary to provide for the regulation and licensing
of persons who administer massages. (Ord. XVI.52, 11-3-2003)
3-2B-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the terms defined in this section shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:
MASSAGE: The rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping or rolling of the body of another with the hands or objects.
MASSAGE PRACTITIONER: A person who practices or administers a massage. (Ord. XVI.52, 11-3-2003)
3-2B-3: LICENSE PROVISIONS AND FEES:
A. License Required: No person shall engage in or hold himself or herself out as being engaged in the practice of massage nor shall any person
administer or practice massage commercially or for hire, or for the exchange of any valuable consideration without first having obtained a license as
herein provided.
B. Contents Of The Application:
1. Forms: Application shall be made on forms provided by the city clerk.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 23/324
2. Application: The application shall contain the following information together with any other information that the city administrator or designee may
require:
a. Evidence of the applicant's certification by the national certification board for therapeutic massage and bodywork or comparable national or
regional organization or evidence of applicant's practical qualifications to practice massage.
b. Evidence that the applicant is of good moral character.
c. The names and addresses of two (2) persons not related to the applicant who are residents of Dakota County and who can attest to the applicant's
character.
d. Statement disclosing whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime or offense and, if so, information as to the time, place and nature of
such crime or offense.
e. Evidence that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
f. The street address at which massages will be performed.
C. License And Investigation Fees: The license and investigation fees shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. XVI.52, 11-3-2003)
3-2B-4: LICENSEE RESPONSIBILITY, CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. The license shall be displayed in the licensee's place of business. If massages are authorized off premises, the licensee shall carry the license and
display it upon the request of a police officer, code enforcement official or other city official authorized to enforce this article.
B. Persons administering massage shall remain fully clothed while administering massage.
C. Massage therapists shall not touch or massage the genitals of a client or the breasts of a female client or so massage the client as to cause sexual
arousal.
D. The licensee shall maintain the licensed premises in compliance with the applicable health, safety and building regulations of the city.
E. No licensee shall perform or offer to perform massage services within the city while the massage license is under suspension or revocation by the city
council. (Ord. XVI.52, 11-3-2003)
3-2B-5: GRANTING OR DENIAL OF LICENSES AND CERTIFICATES:
A. Application Review: License applications shall be reviewed by the police department and such other departments as the city administrator shall deem
necessary. At the time of the application, the applicant shall, in writing, authorize the police department to investigate the facts set out in theapplication
and conduct a criminal history check on the applicant. Licenses shall be issued by the city administrator or designee. If the city administrator refuses to
issue a license, the decision may be appealed to the city council.
B. Term Of License: A license permitting the holder thereof to practice or administer massage commercially is nonrenewable and nontransferable and
application must be made each year for a license permitting and allowing the holder thereof to administer or practice massage therapy for the
succeeding year. All licenses shall be issued for a term expiring on December 31 following its issuance. (Ord. XVI.52, 11-3-2003)
3-2B-6: CONDITIONS GOVERNING ISSUANCE OF A LICENSE:
A. Applicant: Licenses shall be issued only to persons of good moral character and repute.
B. Training And Certification: Licenses may be issued only to persons who have a diploma or certificate demonstrating that they have completed at least
five hundred (500) hours of training from either a school approved by the American Massage Therapy Association or similar reputable massage
association, or from a school that is either accredited by a recognized education accrediting association or agency, or is licensed by the state or
government agency having jurisdiction over the school, or a certificate from the national certification board for therapeutic massage and bodywork.
C. Prior Offenses: Licenses may be issued only to persons who are free from convictions or offenses that involve moral turpitude or that relate directly to
the person's ability, capacity or fitness to perform the duties and discharge the responsibilities of the occupation, or who otherwise have shown
evidence of rehabilitation in accordance with Minnesota statutes, chapter 363.
D. Prior Revocation: Licenses may not be issued to persons who, within one year prior to the date of application, have been denied licensing or who have
had their license revoked or suspended by any community, political entity or by the state of Minnesota.
E. Cooperation Of Applicant: Licenses may be issued only to persons who have fully and truthfully answered all of the information requested in the
application and have paid the full license fee and investigation fee.
F. Age: Licenses may be issued only to persons eighteen (18) years of age or older. (Ord. XVI.52, 11-3-2003)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 24/324
3-2B-7: REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR NONRENEWAL OF LICENSE:
The license may be revoked, suspended or not renewed by the cityadministrator if the licensee has engaged in any of the following conduct:
A. Fraud, deception or misrepresentation in connection with the securing of the license.
B. Habitual drunkenness or intemperance in the use of drugs, including, but not limited to, the use of drugs defined in either 26 USC section 4731 or
Minnesota statutes, section 152.02, barbiturates, hallucinogenic drugs, amphetamines, benzedrine, dexedrine, or other sedatives, depressants,
stimulants or tranquilizers.
C. Conduct involving moral turpitude or permitting or allowing others within their employ or agency to engage in conduct involving moral turpitude or failing
to prevent agents, officers or employees from engaging in conduct involving moral turpitude.
D. Conviction of an offense involving moral turpitude by any court of competent jurisdiction.
E. Conduct that would constitute grounds for refusal to issue a license herein.
F. Violating any provision of this article. (Ord. XVI.52, 11-3-2003)
3-2B-8: EXCEPTIONS:
This article does not apply to:
A. A person practicing massage at a hospital, nursing home or other institution for the hospitalization or care of human beings licensed under the
provisions of Minnesota statutes, sections 144.50 through 144.69.
B. A licensed nurse, licensed medical doctor, licensed podiatrist, licensed chiropractor or other healthcare professional licensed by the state, or someone
employed by such an individual and working under his or her supervision.
C. A person who administers massage when the person is in training under the guidance of an instructor and the instructor is licensed.
D. Barbers and cosmetologists who do not give, or hold themselves out to give, massages as defined herein, other than is customarily given in the course
of their duties for the purpose of beautification. (Ord. XVI.52, 11-3-2003)
3-2B-9: LOCATION OF MASSAGE:
It is unlawful for a licensed massage practitioner to perform a massage except at the location(s) in the city stated on thelicense application. A massage
practitioner licensed to perform massage at a location or locations in the city is entitled to perform on site massage at any business, office, public
gathering, or private residence on an outcall basis in addition to the business location(s) listed on the license application. (Ord. XVI.52, 11-3-2003)
ARTICLE C. CONVERSATION PARLORS
3-2C-1: DEFINITIONS:
ADEQUATE OR APPROVED: Acceptable to the city health officer or his agents following his determination as to conformance with public health practices
and standards.
CONVERSATION PARLOR: An establishment advertising, offering or selling the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion
between an employee of the establishment and a customer, regardless of whether other goods or services are also simultaneously advertised, offered or
sold, regardless of whether those other goods or services are also required to be licensed.
The term "conversation parlor" does not include bona fide legal, medical, psychiatric, psychological or counseling services by a person appropriately
licensed; or bona fide educational institutions, or panels, seminars or other similar services offered by such institutions; or churches or synagogues.
SANITARY: Free from the vegetative cells of pathogenic microorganisms. (Ord. XVI.10, 7-20-1976)
3-2C-2: LICENSE PROVISIONS, FEES:
A. Required: No person shall engage in the business of operating a conversation parlor in the City without a license.
B. Application: The initial application for a license shall be made at the office of the City Clerk by filing the annual license fee and by completing an
application form. The application shall contain the following information:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 25/324
1. A description and location of the premises to be licensed. If the premises is not constructed and furnished at the time the application is completed,
the detailed plans of the premises and furnishings shall be attached to the application.
2. Names and addresses of the property owner, the business owner,the lessee, the manager or operator and if a corporation, all the names and
addresses of the officers of such corporation.
3. A description of any crime or other offense including the time, place, date and disposition for which any of the persons named in subsection 3-2C-
2B2 above have been arrested or convicted.
4. A description of the services offered.
The license application shall thereafter be reviewed by the City Building Department, Police Department, Fire Department and such other
departments as shall be deemed necessary. Such departments will thereafter submit their reports and recommendations to the City Council. The
license shall be granted or denied by the City Council following a public hearing.
5. Whether the applicant is a natural person, a corporation, a partnership or other form of organization.
6. If the applicant is a natural person:
a. The true name, place and date of birth, and street residence address and phone number of the applicant.
b. Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States.
c. Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name other than his true name; and if so, what was such name or names and
information concerning dates and places where used.
d. The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a designation, name or style other than the full individual name of the applicant.
e. The street addresses at which applicant has lived during the preceding five (5) years.
f. The kind, name and location of every business or occupation the applicant has been engaged in during the preceding five (5) years.
g. The names and addresses of applicant's employer(s) and partner(s), if any, for the preceding five (5) years.
h. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any felony, crime or violation of any ordinance other than traffic ordinances. If so, the applicant
shall furnish information as to the time, place and offense for which convictions were had.
i. The physical description of the applicant.
7. If the applicant is a partnership:
a. The name of the managing partner(s) and the interest of eachpartner in the business.
b. A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the application.
8. If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
a. The name; and if incorporated, the state of incorporation.
b. A true copy of the certification of incorporation, articles of incorporation or association agreement, and bylaws shall be attached to the application.
c. The name of the manager or proprietor or other agent in charge of the business to be licensed and all information concerning said person(s) as is
required in subsection 3-2A-2B6 above.
9. Whether the applicant is licensed in other communities; and if so, where.
10. The names of those individuals to be licensed and working for the applicant who may work in the City.
11. Whether the applicant has previously been denied a conversation parlor license.
12. The names, residences and business addresses of three (3) residents of the county in which the applicant resides, of good moral character, not
related to the applicant or financially interested in the premises or business, who may be referred to as to the applicant's and/or manager's character.
13. The licensee shall keep a daily business register and require all customers to sign said register, giving their complete legal name and current
correct residence address. This register shall be on public display at all times in the licensed premises and shall be available to any City authority or
other police authority having responsibility for supervision of the licensed premises.
14. All conversation parlors shall appoint a full-time manager. The manager shall be a resident of the City.
15. Such other information as the City Council may require.
C. Fee: The annual license fee is one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
D. Term, Display: A separate license shall be obtained for each place of business. The licensee shall display the license in a prominent place on the
licensed premises at all times. A license, unless revoked, is for the calendar year, or part thereof, for which it has been issued.
3-2C-3: LICENSEE RESPONSIBILITY, CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. General Provisions: The licensee is absolutely responsible for the misconduct, crimes and offenses of his employees, and his license may be revoked
for his own or his employees' misconduct, crimes and offenses committed on or in connection with the licensed establishment.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 26/324
B. Rules and Regulations:
1. Licenses may be granted only in the appropriate zone to be determined pursuant to the applicable laws and ordinances of the City.
2. Licenses shall be granted only to establishments which can meet the safety and sanitary requirements of the applicable building, housing, health and
safety code regulations of the City and the State.
3. It shall be grounds for denial to the license applicant if there is any fraud or deception involved in the license application.
4. It shall be grounds for denial of the application if the applicant or persons in his employ are not complying with or have a history of violations of the
laws and ordinances that relate to health, safety or moral turpitude.
5. A license shall not be granted to a person of bad repute or to a partnership or corporation who has in its employ or is owned by any persons of bad
repute, such that the health or safety of customers or members of the public would be endangered.
6. Such establishments shall provide adequate refuse receptacles which shall be emptied as required.
7. It shall be grounds for rescinding a license granted to any person, partnership or corporation under this Article if they fail to comply with any of the
ordinances of the City or Statutes of the State.
8. It shall be grounds for rescinding a license granted to any person, partnership or corporation under this Article if the owner, manager, lessee or any
of the employees are found to be in control or possession of any alcoholic beverages, or of narcotic drugs and controlled substances on the
premises, possession of which is illegal as defined by State Statutes1 or City ordinances.
9. It shall be grounds for the rescinding of a license if the owner, manager, lessee or any of the employees are convicted of any ordinance or State
Statute violations arising within the business establishment to which the license was granted under this Article.
10. It shall be grounds for rescinding any license granted under this Article if the premises do not comply with the health, safety and building regulations
of the City and State; including any applicable illumination requirements in the State Building Code or State Fire Code.2
11. An application may be denied or a license may be rescinded if the operation of such an establishment is found to be a danger to the health, welfare
or safety of the citizens of the City.
12. A license may be rescinded upon evidence of a material variance in the actual plan and design of the premises from the plans submitted with the
application for the license or from the original design of the premises when initially licensed without prior approval of the City.
13. All employees and customers of the establishment shall have at all times, their breasts, buttocks, genitals and anus covered by a nontransparent
material.
14. No bed shall be brought or permitted to remain on the licensed premises.
15. An application may be denied or a license may be rescinded where the impact of the licensed establishment on adjoining property will result in any
of the following:
a. Loud, boisterous and disturbing noise levels.
b. Hazardous traffic conditions.
c. Offensive, obnoxious and disturbing odors.
d. Excessive litter.
e. Excessive artificial lighting.
f. Substantial decrease in adjoining property values.
C. Construction And Maintenance:
1. All restrooms used in connection with conversation parlors shall be provided with mechanical ventilation with two (2) cfm per square foot of floor
area, a minimum of fifteen (15) foot-candles of illumination, a hand washing sink equipped with hot and cold running water under pressure, sanitary
towels and a soap dispenser.
2. Each conversation parlor establishment shall have a janitor's closet which shall be provided for the storage of cleaning supplies. Such a closet shall
have mechanical ventilation with two (2) cfm per square foot of floor area and a minimum of ten(10) foot-candles of illumination. Such closet shall
include a mop sink.
3. Floors, walls and equipment in rooms, restrooms and in bathrooms used in connection therewith must be kept in a state of good repair and sanitary
at all times. Linens and other materials shall be stored at least six inches (6") off the floor. Sanitary towels, washcloths, cleaning agents and toilet
tissue must be made available for each customer.
4. All doors on parlor rooms shall be constructed of clear glass and shall not be locked or be capable of being locked.
D. Plans And Specifications For Changes: All persons who hereafter construct, extensively remodel or convert buildings or facilities for use as a
conversation parlor shall conform and comply in their construction, erection or alteration with the requirements of this article. Plans and specifications
for such layout, arrangement and plumbing and construction materials of the parlor room areas, and locations, size and type of equipment and facilities
shall be filed by the owner in the office of the city clerk. A building permit shall not be issued for any such construction, remodeling or alteration until
such permit shall have the approval of the city council.
E. Inspection Requirement: During business hours, all conversation parlors shall be open to inspection by city health, fire, building and license inspectors
and police officers. Upon demand by any police officer, any person engaged in providing services in any licensed premises shall identify himself, giving
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 27/324
his true legal name and his correct address.
F. Hours Of Operation: No customers or patrons shall be allowed to enter the licensed premises after one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and before eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. daily. No customers or patrons shall be allowed to remain upon the licensed premises after one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and before eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. daily. (Ord. XVI.10, 7-20-1976)
3-2C-4: PERSONAL SERVICE LICENSE:
All the information required under subsections 3-2C-2B5, B6, B9, B12 and B15 of this article shall be required of applicants for a personal service license.
A. All persons engaging in such work shall submit, before the granting of a license, to being fingerprinted and photographed. Fingerprints and photographs
shall be kept on file at the police department.
B. Any falsification of information on the license application shall result in the denial of said license. (Ord. XVI.10, 7-20-1976)
3-2C-5: VIOLATIONS, PENALTY:
Every person who commits or attempts to commit, conspires to commit, or aids or abets in the commission of, any act constituting a violation of this article,
whether individually or in connection with one or more other persons or as principal agent, or accessory, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and every
person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or wilfully induces, causes, coerces, requires, permits or directs another to violate any of the provisions of this
article is likewise guilty of a misdemeanor; and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-
2004)
ARTICLE D. ARCADE PARLORS, BILLIARD HALLS, AND DANCE CLUBS
3-2D-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The city council deems it necessary to provide for the regulation and licensing
of persons who own and manage arcade parlors, billiard halls, or dance clubs. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the terms defined in this section shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:
ARCADE PARLOR1: Commercial premises that are open to the public and that have as their principal use the provision of electric or electronic machines
(e.g., pinball, video games) that provide amusement, enjoyment, or entertainment and that may be operated upon the insertion of a coin or token. This
term shall not include jukeboxes, children's mechanical rides (e.g., horses, rocket ships), or machines that sell merchandise.
BILLIARD HALL2: Commercial premises that are open to the public and have five (5) or more pool tables or billiard tables, or combination thereof,
regardless of size, and whether activated manually or by the insertion of a coin, token, or other mechanical device.
DANCE CLUB3: Commercial premises that are open to the public and a primary function of which is to offer patrons an opportunity to engage in social
activities such as dancing, or the enjoyment of live or prerecorded music, or the enjoyment of entertainment provided by dancers or other performers. As
an incidental function, a dance club may sell and serve food and beverages (excluding alcoholic beverages) or provide other forms of entertainment such
as billiard tables, dartboards, or arcade games to its patrons.
MANAGER: Manager shall include any employee who is in charge and responsible for the conduct of the business activity at any given time.
OWNER: A natural person, partnership, or corporation (including all partners in a partnership and all stockholders in a corporation) or other firm or
organization that owns the arcade parlor, billiard hall, or dance club.
PREMISES: Any place where an arcade parlor, billiard hall, or dance club is operated or maintained, including all hallways, bathrooms, parking areas and
other adjacent portions of the premises that are accessible to the public during operating hours. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-3: LICENSES REQUIRED:
No owner or manager shall operate an arcade parlor, billiard hall, or dance club within the city of Rosemount without first obtaining a license from the city
as provided in this article. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-4: LICENSE APPLICATION:
3-2D-4-1: CONTENTS OF INITIAL APPLICATION:
A. General: The application for any type of license to be issued under this article shall contain information required by this section.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 28/324
B. Nature Of Application: The application shall show whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, partnership or other firm or organization. The
applicant shall be the owner of the business.
1. Natural Person: If the applicant is a natural person, the following information shall be required:
a. True name, place and date of birth, and street residence address of the applicant.
b. Whether the applicant has ever used or been known by a name other than his true name and, if so, what was such name or names, and
information concerning dates and places where used.
c. The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a designation, name or style other than the full individual name of the applicant; in such
case a copy of the certification, as required by Minnesota statutes, chapter 333, certified by the secretary of state, shall be attached to the
application.
d. Street addresses at which the applicant and present spouse have lived during the preceding ten (10) years.
e. Kind, name and location of every business or occupation the applicant or present spouse has been engaged in during the preceding ten (10)
years.
f. Names and addresses of the applicant's and spouse's employers and partners, if any, for the preceding ten (10) years.
g. Whether the applicant or spouse, or any other member of the immediate household has ever been convicted of any crime or violation of any city
ordinance, other than traffic. If so, the applicant shall furnish information as to the time, place and offense for which convictions were had.
h. Whether the applicant or his spouse, or a parent, brother, sister or child of either of them has ever been engaged as an employee or in operating
an arcade parlor, billiard hall, dance club, saloon, hotel, restaurant, cafe, tavern or other business of similar nature. If so, the applicant shall furnish
information as to the time, place and length of time of such employment or operation.
2. Partnership: If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners and all information concerning each partner as is required of a
single applicant in subsection B1 of this section. A managing partner or partners shall be designated. The interest of each partner in the business
shall be disclosed. If the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a trade name under the provisions of Minnesota statutes, chapter 333, a true
copy of such certificate certified by the secretary of state shall be attached to the application.
3. Corporation: If the applicant is a corporation or other association, the following information shall be required:
a. Name and, if incorporated, the state of incorporation.
b. A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of incorporation or association agreement and bylaws and, if a foreign corporation, a
certificate of authority, as described in Minnesota statutes.
c. The name of the manager or proprietor or other agent in charge of the premises to be licensed, giving all the information about said person as is
required of a single applicant in subsection B1 of this section.
d. A list of all persons who, singly or together with their spouses, or a parent, brother, sister or child of either of them, own or control an interest in
said corporation or association in excess of five percent (5%) or who are officers or directors of said corporation or association, together with their
addresses and all information as is required of a single applicant in subsection B1 of this section.
4. Club: If an application is submitted by a club, the following information shall be submitted in addition to that required by the prior subsections hereof:
a. The purpose for which the club was originally organized and for which it is now existing.
b. The date that the club was first organized and the place of such organization.
c. The number of members.
d. The name of the manager, proprietor or other person who shall be in charge of the licensed premises together with the same information
concerning such person as is required of a single applicant for an on-sale license as set forth in subsection B1 of this section.
C. Description Of Premises:
1. Legal Description: The exact legal description of the premises to be licensed together with a plot plan of the area showing dimensions, location of
buildings, street access, parking facilities and the locations of and distances to the nearest church buildings and school grounds.
2. Street Address: The street address of the premises to be licensed. An applicant for a license shall submit a floor plan of the facilities. The plan shall
show room dimensions and shall indicate the number of persons intended to be served in each of said rooms.
D. Financial And Interest Criteria:
1. Financial Interest: The names and addresses of all persons, other than the applicant, who have any financial interest in the business, buildings,
premises, fixtures, furniture, stock in trade; the nature of such interest, amount thereof, terms for payment or other reimbursement. This shall include,
but not be limited to, any lessees, lessors, mortgagees, mortgagors, lenders, lien holders, trustees, trustors and persons who have cosigned notes or
have otherwise loaned, pledged or extended security for any indebtedness of the applicant.
2. Amount Of Investment: The amount of investment that the applicant has in the business, building, premises, fixtures and structures, exclusive of
land, on the premises proposed to be licensed.
E. References: The names, residences and business addresses of three (3) persons, residents of the state, of good moral character, not related to the
applicant or financially interested in the premises or business, who may be referred to as to the applicant's character or, in the case where information
is required of a manager, the manager's character.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 29/324
F. Plans Of Premises: Whenever the application for an arcade parlor, billiard hall, or dance club license, or for a transfer thereof is for premises either
planned or under construction or undergoing substantial alteration, the application shall be accompanied by a set of preliminary plans showing the
interior design of the proposed premises to be licensed.
G. Business Protocol And Security Plan: A written statement setting forth all measures to ensure adequate traffic control, crowd protection and security
throughout the entire premises will be maintained, and the protocol to monitor the age of the patrons admitted.
H. Taxes: Whether or not all real estate taxes, assessments, or other financial claim of the city, state or federal government for the business and premises
to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid, the years for which delinquent.
I. Description Of Proposed Business: A detailed narrative description of the proposed business for which the license is sought including, but not limited to:
type of clientele, type of entertainment (if any), type of food menu (if any), and fixtures.
J. Other Information Required: Such other information as the city council shall require. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-4-2: RENEWAL APPLICATIONS:
A. License Period, Expiration: Each license or renewal license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All licenses expire on December 31 of
each year.
B. Time Of Making Application: Application for the renewal of an existing license shall be made at least sixty (60) days prior to the date of the expiration of
the license, and shall state that everything in the prior application remains true and correct except as otherwise indicated. If, in the judgment of the
council, good and sufficient cause is shown by any applicant for his failure to file for a renewal within the time period provided, the council may, if the
other provisions of this article are complied with, grant the application. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-4-3: AMENDMENT APPLICATION:
A. Purpose: A licensee may request an amendment to the license during the calendar year term of the license for any of the following purposes:
1. Change in ownership or management of the establishment.
2. Request to modify a condition(s) within the permit.
3. Appeal the administrative decision regarding special events.
B. Application: The following application material shall be provided as an amendment application:
1. Change In Ownership Or Management: A license application shall be submitted with the information requested in subsections 3-2D-4-1B through E,
H, and J of this article.
2. Condition Modification Or Appeal Of Administrative Decision: The licensee shall provide in writing the condition or administrative decision that is
requested to be modified, the modification that is requested, and the factors that the city council should consider when determining the modification.
C. Fee: The amendment fees for licenses shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. In the case of the change in principal
ownership or management, an initial investigation fee shall be paid by the applicant. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-4-4: EXECUTION OF APPLICATION:
If the application is by a natural person, it shall be signed and sworn to by such person; if by a corporation, by an officer thereof; if by a partnership, by one
of the partners; if by an incorporated association, by the operating officer or managing officer thereof. If the applicant is a partnership, the application,
license and bond or insurance policy shall be made and issued in the name of all partners. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement in an
application. Applications shall be filed with the city clerk. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-4-5: CORPORATIONS, PARTNERSHIPS OR ASSOCIATIONS:
A. Licenses issued to corporations shall be valid only so long as there is no change in the officers or ownership interest of the corporation, unless such
change is approved by the director of community development, in which event said license shall be continued in force until the end of the then current
license year.
B. Licenses issued to associations or partnerships shall be valid only so long as there is no change in the partnership or association agreement or in the
ownership of said partnership or association, unless such change is approved by the director of community development, in which event said license
shall continue in force until the end of the then current license year.
C. Corporations, partnerships or associations holding licenses shall submit written notice to the clerk of any such changes described herein on or before
thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of any such change. The licensee shall notify the clerk when a person not listed in the application acquires an
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 30/324
interest which, together with that of a spouse, parent, brother, sister or child, exceeds five percent (5%) and shall give all information about said person
as is required of a person pursuant to the provisions of this article.
D. Corporations holding licenses shall submit written notice to the clerk of any change in operating officers at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective
date of such change. The written notice shall designate the new operating officer and shall contain all of the information about said person as is
required of a single applicant in section 3-2D-4-1 of this article. The new operating officer shall be subject to the investigation required by subsection 3-
2D-6A of this article.
E. The designation of a new operating officer shall not cause the corporation's license to become invalid before a decision is rendered by the director of
community development, provided proper notice and application are made pursuant to subsection D of this section. A proposed new operating officer
shall be referred to as the interim operating officer. In the event an interim operating officer is rejected by the director of community development, the
corporation shall designate another interim operating officer and make the required application pursuant to section 3-2D-4-1 of this article within fifteen
(15) calendar days of the director of community development's decision. In any event, a corporation shall be limited to two (2) successive interim
operating officers. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-5: LICENSE FEES:
A. Fees: The fees for licenses and permits shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the city council.
B. Payment Of Fees: The license fee for a new license shall be paid in full before the application for the license is accepted, and at least ten (10) days
before the public hearing on the application. All fees shall be paid into the general fund of the city. Upon rejection of any application for a license or
upon withdrawal of an application before approval of the issuance by the council, the license fee shall be refunded, minus the cost of staff time up to
the date of the withdrawal, to the applicant except where rejection is for a wilful misstatement in the license application in which case all the fees shall
be retained by the city.
C. Term, Pro Rata Fee: Each license shall be issued for a period of one year except that if the application is made during the license year, a license may
be issued for the remainder of the year for a pro rata fee, with any fraction of a month being counted as one month. Every license shall expire as
provided in subsection 3-2D-4-2A of this article.
D. Refunds: No refund of any fee shall be made except as provided in subsection B of this section.
E. Change Of Ownership, Exception: Where a new application is filed as a result of incorporation by an existing licensee and the ownership control and
interest in the license are unchanged, no additional investigation fee will be required. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-6: GRANTING OF LICENSES:
A. Investigation: At the time of making application, the applicant shall, in writing, authorize the police department to investigate all facts set out in the
application and do a personal background and a criminal record check on the applicant. The applicant shall further authorize the police department to
release information received from such investigation to the city council. Should the city council deny the applicant the request for a license, due partially
or solely to the applicant's prior conviction of a crime, the city council shall notify the applicant in writing of the following information:
1. The grounds and reasons for the denial;
2. The applicable complaint and grievance procedure as set forth in Minnesota statutes, section 364.06;
3. The earliest date the applicant may reapply for a license; and
4. That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication.
B. Granting License: After such investigation and hearing, the council shall grant or refuse the application in its discretion. The city council shall not grant
the license unless it is satisfied that the applicant and premises meet all of the requirements of this article and the applicant has agreed to comply with
the conditions of the license. If the city council denies a license application, the city council shall notify the applicant in writing of the grounds and
reasons for denial. If the license is denied solely or in part due to the applicant's prior conviction of a crime, the city council shall also notify the
applicant in writing of the following information:
1. The applicable complaint and grievance procedure as set forth in Minnesota statutes, section 364.06;
2. The earliest date the applicant may reapply for a license; and
3. That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication.
C. Issuance; Transfer; Buildings Under Construction:
1. Issuance: Each license shall be issued to the applicant only.
2. Transfer: Each license shall be issued only for the premises described in the application. No license may be transferred to another person or to
another place without the approval of the council and without a new application having been filed. Any transfer of the license and a transfer of stock
without council approval is a ground for revocation of the license.
3. Premises Under Construction: Where a license is granted for premises where the building is under construction or otherwise not ready for
occupancy, the clerk shall not issue the license until notified by the building inspector that the building is ready for occupancy. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-
2009)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 31/324
3-2D-7: PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
A. Manager Required: No license shall be granted to a corporation that does not have an operating officer who is eligible pursuant to the provisions of this
article.
B. Interest Defined: The term "interest" as used in this section includes any pecuniary interest in the ownership, operation, management or profits of an
establishment licensed under this article, but does not include: bona fide loans; bona fide fixed sum rental agreements; bona fide open accounts or
other obligations held with or without security arising out of the ordinary and regular course of business or selling or leasing merchandise, fixtures or
supplies to such establishment; or an interest of five percent (5%) or less in any corporation holding a license. A person who receives monies from time
to time directly or indirectly from licensee in the absence of a bona fide consideration therefor and excluding bona fide gifts or donations, shall be
deemed to have a pecuniary interest in such license. In determining the bona fide reasonable value of the goods or things received as consideration for
the payment by the licensee and all other facts reasonably tending to prove or disapprove the existence of any purposeful scheme or arrangement to
evade the prohibitions of this article shall be considered.
C. Moral Character: No license shall be granted to a person who is not of good moral character and repute. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-8: PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
A. License Refused Where Taxes Due: No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises on which real estate taxes, assessments or
other financial claims of the city or of the state are due, delinquent, or unpaid. If an action has been commenced pursuant to the provisions of
Minnesota statutes, chapter 278, questioning the amount or validity of taxes, the council may, on application by the licensee, waive strict compliance
with this provision; no waiver may be granted, however, for taxes, or any portion thereof, that remain unpaid for a period exceeding one year after
becoming due unless such one year period is extended through no fault of the licensee.
B. Distance From School Or Church: No license shall be granted to any applicant whose place of business is within three hundred feet (300') of any school
or within three hundred feet (300') of any church. In applying this restriction the distance shall be measured from the main front entrance following the
route of ordinary pedestrian travel.
C. Nudity And Sexual Conduct Prohibited: No license shall be held at any premises where nudity or sexual acts or conduct are permitted to occur.
1. For the purposes of this subsection C "nudity" and "sexual conduct" are defined as follows:
NUDITY: The showing of the postpubertal human male or female genitals pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering or the
showing of postpubertal female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below a point immediately above the top of the
areola, or the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. For the purposes of this definition, the female breast is considered
uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and the areola are covered.
SEXUAL CONDUCT: Acts or simulated acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, sadomasochistic
abuse, or any touching of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female, or the breasts of the female, whether alone or between
members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
2. The following acts or conduct in a premises that has been issued a license are contrary to the public welfare and, therefore, in order to preserve
order and protect the public welfare, no license issued under this article shall be held at any premises where such conduct or acts are permitted to
occur:
a. The licensee, owner or manager of any licensed establishment permitting or allowing any live nudity to occur on the licensed premises.
b. The licensee, owner or manager of any licensed establishment permitting or allowing any live sexual conduct to occur in the licensed
establishment.
3. The city council may suspend or revoke or refuse to issue a license for violation of this subsection C upon a finding that the licensee has failed to
comply with this subsection C. No suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing. (Ord.
XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-9: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. Conditions And Regulations: Every license is subject to the conditions in the following subsections and all other provisions of this article and of other
applicable ordinances, state law or regulations:
1. Inspections: Any police officer, building inspector or any properly designated officer or employee of the city shall have the unqualified right to enter,
inspect and search the premises of any licensee hereunder during the business hours without a warrant.
2. Security And Surveillance Plan: The security and surveillance plan, including security staff and surveillance system, shall be reviewed, modified, and
approved by the city council as necessary to protect the health, safety, or public welfare.
3. Security System Access: The owner or manager of the establishment shall provide access and copies of their security system data in a timely
manner to assist the city's police department in any investigation of activities that may have occurred on the premises of the establishment upon
request of the police department.
4. Hours Of Operation:
a. Arcade Parlors: An arcade parlor shall be operated only between ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
b. Billiard Halls: A billiard hall shall be operated only between two o'clock (2:00) P.M. and two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 32/324
c. Dance Clubs: A dance club shall be operated only between six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
5. Occupancy: The occupancy of an arcade parlor, billiard hall, or dance club shall be limited by the lesser of the two (2) following methods:
a. The occupancy of the establishment shall be limited to three (3) occupants per one off street parking space provided for the building housing the
establishment or such off street parking spaces within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the entrance of the establishment that the owner has written
permission to use.
b. The occupancy of an establishment shall be limited to that determined by the building code, fire code, and other applicable city codes.
6. Age Restrictions:
a. Arcade parlors: Persons under twelve (12) years of age shall not be permitted to enter or remain on the premises unless accompanied by a parent
or legal guardian.
b. Billiard halls: Persons under sixteen (16) years of age shall not be permitted to enter or remain on the premises unless accompanied by a parent
or legal guardian.
c. Dance clubs: Persons of the following ages shall not be permitted to enter or remain on the premises:
(1) Under sixteen (16) years of age.
(2) Twenty one (21) years of age or older except for bona fide employees or entertainers hired by the licensee to work at the dance club, city
employees as described in subsection A1 of this section, or the temporary admittance of parents or legal guardians to retrieve their children.
7. Identification Required:
a. Arcade parlors: The licensee, or the licensee's employee or agent, shall require prospective patrons to produce and permit to be examined a
school identification, current driver's license or nonqualification certificate issued by the state department of public safety before the patrons shall
participate in any activities on the premises. In the case of a foreign national, a valid passport may be used as an alternative to the foregoing
methods of identification.
b. Billiard halls and dance clubs: The licensee, or the licensee's employee or agent, shall require prospective patrons to produce and permit to be
examined a current driver's license or nonqualification certificate issued by the state department of public safety before the patrons shall
participate in any activities on the premises. In the case of a foreign national, a valid passport may be used as an alternative to the foregoing
methods of identification.
8. Misrepresenting Age: No person shall misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of entering an arcade parlor, billiard hall, or dance club. No person
prohibited by subsection A6 of this section shall enter any premises licensed for an arcade parlor, billiard hall, or dance club.
9. Adequate Lighting: It shall be the obligation of the licensee to provide proper and adequate illumination of all portions of the building interior that are
available for public use. Such illumination shall be not less than one foot-candle at floor level at all times when the premises are open to the public or
when any member of the public is permitted to enter and remain on the premises.
10. Nonemployees On Premises: The licensee shall not allow nonemployees or nonowners, except those individuals listed in subsection A1 of this
section, within the building outside of the hours of operation or on the premises outside of thirty (30) minutes before or after the hours of operation.
11. Ownership Of Equipment And Equipment Advertising: No equipment or fixture in any licensed place shall be owned in whole or in part by any
manufacturer or distiller of alcoholic or tobacco products, nor shall any equipment or fixture advertise any alcoholic or tobacco product.
12. Alcohol And Controlled Substances: No licensee shall knowingly permit the sale, possession or consumption of alcohol or controlled substances on
the licensed premises in violation of Minnesota statutes, chapters 340A and 152.
13. Persons Suspected To Be Under The Influence: It shall be the obligation of the licensee and/or manager to remove, or have removed, from the
premises any person who is, or appears to be, under the influence of, or affected by the use of, alcohol or drugs, or whose conduct poses a physical
danger to the safety of others present.
14. Prostitution: No licensee shall knowingly permit the licensed premises or any room in those premises or any adjoining building directly under the
licensee's control to be used by prostitutes.
15. Loitering: It shall be the obligation of the licensee to prevent loitering, and/or the creation of public nuisances or disturbances of the peace by any
patrons of the dance club on the premises or in the immediate vicinity. "Loitering" shall not include walking between the building and a patron's
vehicle, nor shall it include the act of waiting in line to gain admission to the establishment.
16. Litter, Refuse, And Garbage: It shall be the obligation of the licensee to clean up all litter, refuse, and garbage resulting from establishment
operations. The cleanup shall occur within four (4) hours after the end of each day's operation.
17. Employee Background Checks: The licensee shall perform background checks on all employees as required within the Minnesota child protection
background check act, Minnesota statutes, 299C.60 through 299C.64.
B. Special Events: Modifications to the conditions of the license for special events may be considered but not necessarily granted at the discretion of the
director of community development and the police chief. Review of the special event request will be based upon general adherence to the conditions of
the license, relationship to the principal use of the premises, potential impact upon the surrounding area, or other information deemed relevant to the
staff. The applicant or owner will apply for a special event license no less than seven (7) working days before the event. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-10: SPECIAL CONDITIONS:
At the time a license renewal is issued, the city may attach special conditions to the license to protect the welfare of the community. Violation of any of the
conditions shall be grounds for revocation of the license. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 33/324
3-2D-11: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
All applicants for an arcade parlor, billiard hall, or dance club license to be issued or renewed must, as a condition to the issuance of the license,
demonstrate proof of financial responsibility with regard to liability to the city. Proof of financial responsibility may be given by filing one of the following:
A. A certificate that there is in effect for the period of the license an insurance policy or pool providing the following minimum coverages:
1. One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) because of bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence and, subject to the limit for one
person, in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) because of bodily injury to two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence,
and in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one occurrence;
2. One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for loss of means of support of any one person in any one occurrence, and, subject to the limit of one
person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for loss of means of support of two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence; or
B. A bond or a surety company with the minimum coverages as provided in subsection A of this section. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-12: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
3-2D-12-1: GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION:
The council shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days or revoke a license for each violation on a finding that the licensee has
committed a violation of any of the following:
A. False or misleading statements made on a license application or renewal, or failure to abide by the commitments, promises or representations made to
the city council.
B. Violation of any conditions under which the license was granted.
C. Violation of any provision of this article.
D. Creation of a nuisance on the premises or in the surrounding area.
E. Violation of any state or federal law regulating the sale, possession, or consumption of intoxicating liquor or controlled substances.
In the event of a revocation of a license, the licensee must reapply for a license and meet the requirements for a license under this article. No
application for the same or substantially same license shall be made within six (6) months of the date of denial. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-12-2: DISPROPORTIONATE USE OF PUBLIC SAFETY RESOURCES:
The city council may review the license and consider license modifications or revocation as provided within section 3-2D-12-1 of this article if there is a
disproportionate use of public safety resources including, but not limited to, three (3) or more police calls to the licensed establishment concerning crimes
against person, disturbances, possession of a dangerous weapon, possession of drug paraphernalia, controlled substances violations, or alcohol
violations within any twelve (12) month period that result in a complete investigative report. Upon the third occurrence, the city council will be notified by
the police chief of the substance of the reports. In consultation with the police chief, the city council will determine whether formal review of the license is
warranted. The applicant will be notified of the disposition of the decision. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-12-3: INACTIVE LICENSE:
The city council may revoke the license of any establishment granted a license that is not under construction and exhibiting satisfactory progress toward
completion within six (6) months from its issuance, or any establishment that ceases operation for a period of six (6) months. A hearing shall be held to
determine what progress has been made toward opening or reopening the establishment and, if satisfactory progress is not demonstrated, the council may
revoke the license. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-12-4: HEARING NOTICE:
Revocation or suspension of a license by the council shall be preceded by a hearing. The city council may appoint a hearing examiner or may conduct a
hearing itself. The hearing notice shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, include notice of the time and place of the hearing, and shall
state the nature of the charges against the licensee. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
Footnote 1: The terms "arcade parlor", "billiard hall", or "dance club" do not include the following: any premises that serve alcoholic beverages as defined
by state and local laws; theaters where the patrons sit in parallel rows of fixed seats; full service restaurants where the only entertainment consists of
background music that is incidental to the primary function of serving food; outdoor performances; a banquet, party or celebration conducted for invited
guests that is not open to the public; dances or events sponsored and operated by a governmental entity, an educational institution, or nonprofit religious,
charitable, benevolent or fraternal organization.
Footnote 2: The terms "arcade parlor", "billiard hall", or "dance club" do not include the following: any premises that serve alcoholic beverages as defined
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 34/324
by state and local laws; theaters where the patrons sit in parallel rows of fixed seats; full service restaurants where the only entertainment consists of
background music that is incidental to the primary function of serving food; outdoor performances; a banquet, party or celebration conducted for invited
guests that is not open to the public; dances or events sponsored and operated by a governmental entity, an educational institution, or nonprofit religious,
charitable, benevolent or fraternal organization.
Footnote 3: The terms "arcade parlor", "billiard hall", or "dance club" do not include the following: any premises that serve alcoholic beverages as defined
by state and local laws; theaters where the patrons sit in parallel rows of fixed seats; full service restaurants where the only entertainment consists of
background music that is incidental to the primary function of serving food; outdoor performances; a banquet, party or celebration conducted for invited
guests that is not open to the public; dances or events sponsored and operated by a governmental entity, an educational institution, or nonprofit religious,
charitable, benevolent or fraternal organization.
Chapter 3
RETAIL BUSINESSES
ARTICLE A. CIGARETTES
(Rep. by Ord. XVI.48, 6-4-2002)
Chapter 4
LICENSING CERTAIN TRADES
(Rep. by Ord. XVI.36, 11-5-1996)
Chapter 5
LICENSING OF PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
3-5-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is not intended to hinder, delay or interfere in any way with legitimate business or organizational activities. The city council finds, however,
that solicitors have used public streets and their direct contact with residents of the city for the illegitimate solicitation practices of harassment, nuisance,
theft, deceit or menacing, troublesome or unlawful activities. This chapter is intended to identify and control: a) businesses and organizations using
solicitation as a means of concealing unlawful activities; and b) businesses and organizations that, though their activities be lawful or even commendable,
use such illegitimate practices in solicitation; and c) individual natural persons who, though they represent lawful businesses and organizations, use such
illegitimate solicitation practices; and d) the operation of open sales lots in the city to ensure that they are safely operated in a manner that will not impede
public rights of way or the safety of pedestrians or vehicles passing or participating in activities at outdoor sales lots. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms defined herein shall have the following meanings:
PEDDLER: Any person or persons who goes from house to house, from place to place or from street to street, conveying or transporting goods, wares or
merchandise or offering or exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers.
SALES LOT: An outdoor area, not enclosed within a building that may include allowed temporary structures used for temporary display of merchandise for
sale which is not the principal use of the property but is in compliance with the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. Examples of such
use include seasonal display and sale of Christmas trees, gardening or nursery products, consumer fireworks, or other similar goods.
SOLICITOR: Any person who goes from house to house, from place to place or from street to street, soliciting or taking or attempting to take orders for
sale of goods, wares or merchandise, including magazines, books, periodicals or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for
service to be performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such order or whether
he/she is collecting advance payments on such orders. Such definition includes any person, who for himself/herself, or another person, firm or corporation,
hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, motor vehicle, structure or other place within the city for the primary purpose of exhibiting samples and taking
orders for future delivery.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person, individual, copartnership, or corporation, either as principal or agent, who engages in, does or transacts any
temporary and transient business in this state, either in one locality or in traveling from place to place in this state, selling goods, wares and merchandise;
and who for the purpose of carrying on such business, hires, leases, occupies or uses a building, structure, vehicle, trailer, tent or other portable shelter, or
vacant lot for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise. The term "transient merchant" does not include a seller or exhibitor in a
firearms collector show involving two (2) or more sellers or exhibitors. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, transient merchant or operator of any temporary sales lot to engage in any such business within the city without first
having obtained a license or permit from the city clerk and any license or permit required by Dakota County or the state of Minnesota in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter, the zoning ordinance, county ordinances or state statutes except those specifically excluded by section 3-5-4 of this chapter.
A. The license is nontransferable to either another person or another location.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 35/324
B. The applicant must be at least eighteen (18) years of age.
C. The premises are subject to inspection by city employees during normal business hours or by emergency personnel asnecessary. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-
2005)
3-5-4: EXCLUSIONS:
Except as provided in subsection G of this section, no person shall be required to obtain a license in the following instances:
A. A solicitor doing business by appointment.
B. A solicitor taking orders for the future door to door delivery of newspapers.
C. Salespeople selling goods to retail or wholesale stores or to professional or industrial establishments.
D. The conduct of "garage sales" or "rummage sales".
E. No license shall be required for vendors as a preliminary step to the establishment of a regular route service for the sale and delivery of such
commodities or the providing of such services to regular customers.
F. School aged children selling items for fundraisers.
G. Any canvassing, soliciting or fundraising for the purpose of charitable organizations if such an organization is registered with the state department of
commerce pursuant to the provisions of Minnesota statutes, sections 309.515, 309.52, and 309.53 as a charitable organization or exempted pursuant
to the provisions of Minnesota statutes 309.515, provided documentation is filed with the city clerk giving the following information:
1. Name and address of the organization;
2. Name, address and physical description of the person seeking to register on behalf of the organization;
3. Names and addresses of all of the officers and no more than four (4) directors of the organization;
4. Period during which canvassing, solicitation or fundraising is to be carried on;
5. Purpose of the cause for which registration is sought; and
6. Evidence of registration with the department of commerce or exemption from registration pursuant to Minnesota statutes 309.515.
Upon receipt of the statements required in this subsection and receipt of evidence that such organization is a charitable organization, the city clerk
shall issue a license without a license fee. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-5: APPLICATION:
In addition to such information as the city clerk may require, the application shall also include:
A. The full legal name, business and home address, and phone number of the applicant and all other names under which the applicant conducts business.
B. A physical description of the applicant including, hair color, eye color, height, weight, date of birth, and distinguishing marks and features.
C. The full name, address, phone number, physical descriptive information and date of birth of all persons associated with the applicant who will be
conducting the applicant's business within the city.
D. A written description of the nature of the business, the goods to be sold and the applicant's method of operation.
E. If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship.
F. The exact dates the applicant intends to do business in the city.
G. The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or order taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or
products are located at the time said application is filed and the proposed method of delivery.
H. A statement as to whether the applicant or the agent managing the business has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any
municipal or county ordinance or state statute involving activities licensed under this chapter, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty
assessed therefor.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 36/324
I. If a vehicle or vehicles will be used, a description of the same together with the license number of the vehicle or vehicles to be used.
J. A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by the applicant, the invoice value and
quality of such goods, wares and merchandise, whether the same are proposed to be sold from stock in possession or by sample, at auction, by direct
sales or by taking orders for future delivery.
K. The driver's license number, state identification card number, or military identification card number from a currently valid form of these identifications
obtained from the applicant and all persons who will be conducting business within the city under the license if issued.
L. Credentials from the person, for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such representative.
M. In the case of transient merchants and sales lots the place where the business is to be carried on and a copy of the lease for such place or a letter
signed by the owner thereof authorizing the use. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-6: INVESTIGATION AND LICENSE ISSUANCE:
A. There will be a fourteen (14) day waiting period between the application and issuance of the license during which period of time the chief of police shall
make such investigation of the applicant's business moral character as the chief of police shall deem necessary for the protection of the public good.
The license may be issued by the city clerk when the foregoing investigation is completed.
B. The issuance of the license shall be denied for the following causes:
1. Failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having obtained any required county or state license or registration;
2. Failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the failure to sign the
application, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time of application, or the failure to provide the required liability insurance information;
3. The conviction of the applicant within the past five (5) years from the date of application for any violation of any federal or state statute or regulation,
or any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the person's ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an honest and
legal manner. Violations shall include, but not be limited to, burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and any form of
actual or threatened physical harm against another person;
4. The revocation within the past five (5) years of any license issued to the applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or
transient merchant;
5. The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of a bad business reputation shall include, but not be limited to, the existence of
more than three (3) complaints against the applicant with the Better Business Bureau, the attorney general's office, or other similar business or
consumer rights office or agency, within the preceding twelve (12) months, or six (6) complaints filed against the applicant within the preceding five
(5) years. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-7: DURATION OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire at midnight of December 31 in the year when issued. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-8: LICENSE FEES:
Fees shall be set from time to time by city council resolution. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-9: USE OF STREETS AND SITE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Use Of Streets: No peddler or solicitor shall have any exclusive rights to any location in the public streets, nor shall any be permitted a stationary
location thereon, nor shall any be permitted to operate in a congested area where such operation might impede or inconvenience the public use of
such streets. For the purpose of this chapter, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the
area is congested and the public impeded or inconvenienced.
B. Site Requirements:
1. Sales lots:
a. Adequate off street parking, with a surface in compliance with subsection 8-2-2I of this code, shall be provided for both the principal and interim
use ensuring that no obstruction or interference occurs with existing traffic patterns.
b. Lighting shall be provided as is necessary for security, safety and traffic circulation.
c. The sales lot must be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from the property line; or, the parking setback required by the particular zoning district
within which the sales lot is to be located, whichever provides the greater setback. No portion of the site shall be located within one hundred feet
(100') of any developed residential property.
d. Licenses for sales lots on residentially zoned property are not permitted.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 37/324
e. Signage, exclusive of the posting of the required license, shall require and comply with temporary sign permit requirements.
f. The application shall include a detailed site plan of the premises and the area proposed for the lot including temporary shelter structures if any. On
site structures must conform to all applicable codes and ordinances.
g. Proof of adequate liability insurance issued by a company licensed to do business in the state of Minnesota showing that the insurance will be in
effect for the entire time the licensee's business will be conducted in the city, and providing for prior notification to the city of Rosemount should the
insurance be cancelled, shall be provided to the city.
h. The site shall be kept in a neat and orderly manner and the display of items shall not cover more than ten percent (10%) of the total lot area of the
principal use or approved PUD so as to not interfere with pedestrian safety, vehicular movement, emergency access and existing business
activities.
i. The sales lot site shall be completely surfaced with concrete, blacktop, or brick pavers to control dust and erosion. The surface shall be properly
maintained to prevent deterioration. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-10: EXHIBITION OF LICENSE AND IDENTIFICATION:
All licenses issued under this chapter, including those issued to individual company representatives, shall be carried by the licensee upon their person at
all times while conducting business within the city; or in the case of a transient merchant, conspicuously posted in such merchant's place of business. The
state driver's license, state identification card, or military identification card provided at the time of application for licensing shall also be carried at all times
by the licensee while conducting business within the city. Such license and identification shall be shown at the request of any citizen, police officer, city
inspector or other city employee designated or charged with enforcing the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-11: PROHIBITED PRACTICES:
No person under the provisions of this chapter shall:
A. Sell or solicit before the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M., unless a previous appointment has been made.
B. Enter or conduct business upon any premises where a sign or plaque is conspicuously posted stating in effect that no peddlers or solicitors are allowed.
Such signs shall have letters a minimum of one-half inch (1/2") high.
C. Occupy for the purpose of advertising and/or conducting business any area within a sight triangle, at any road intersection.
D. Occupy as a transient merchant, solicitor or peddler, any public right of way for the purpose of advertising and/orconducting business.
E. Occupy as a transient merchant, solicitor or peddler public property for the purpose of advertising and/or conducting business unless approved by the
city council.
F. Remain on the property of another when requested to leave, or otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene,
threatening, intimidating or abusive.
Upon violation of these prohibited practices the city may immediately suspend the license until a hearing can be held. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-12: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the city council after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement contained in the application for license.
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement made in the course of carrying on business as a solicitor, canvasser, peddler, transient merchant,
itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor.
C. Any violation of this chapter.
D. Conviction of a crime or misdemeanor.
E. Conducting the business of peddler, canvasser, solicitor, transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor, as the case may be, in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of peace or to constitute a menace to health, safety or general welfare of the public.
F. Emergency situations. If, in the discretion of the chief of police, fire marshal, or building official, imminent harm to the health or safety of the public may
occur because of the actions of a person, or the condition of the sales site or structure licensed under this chapter, the city may immediately suspend
the license and provide notice of the right to hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in this chapter.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 38/324
G. Suspension or revocation of any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct business on behalf of the licensee shall serve
as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person's authority to conduct business on behalf of the licensee whose license is suspended or
revoked.
Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be givenby the city clerk in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and
place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for
hearing, or shall be delivered by a police officer in the same manner as a summons at least three (3) days prior to the date set for hearing.
Exception: Section 3-5-11, "Prohibited Practices", of this chapter, and emergency situation clause, subsection F of this section, allow for suspension of
a license by the city in certain situations with notice of hearing and revocation to follow. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-13: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police or the city clerk in the denial of a license as provided in section 3-5-6 of this chapter may appeal
to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city council within fourteen (14) days after notice of action complained of, a written
statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The city council shall set a time and place for a hearing in the same manner as provided in section
3-5-12 of this chapter for notice of hearing on revocation. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-14: REAPPLICATION:
No licensee whose license has been revoked shall make further application until at least twelve (12) months have elapsed since the last revocation. (Ord.
XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-15: PENALTY:
Any person(s) who shall violate the terms or provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as
described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
Chapter 6
PAWNSHOPS AND PAWNBROKERS
3-6-1: PURPOSE:
The City Council finds that pawnbrokers potentially provide an opportunity for the commission of crimes and their concealment because businesses have
the ability to receive and transfer stolen property easily and quickly. The City Council also finds that consumer protection regulation is warranted in
transactions involving pawnbrokers. The purpose of this Chapter is therefore to prevent pawnbroking businesses from being used as facilities for
commission of crimes and to assure that such businesses comply with basic consumer protection standards, thereby protecting the public health, safety,
and general welfare of the citizens of the City. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms when used in this Chapter shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ISSUING AUTHORITY: The City of Rosemount.
MINOR: Any natural person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
PAWNBROKER: A person who loans money in deposit or pledge of personal property or other valuable thing; who deals in the purchasing of personal
property or other valuable thing on condition of selling that same back again at a stipulated price; or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage or on
personal property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so mortgaged. To the extent that a pawnbrokerbusiness includes buying personal
property previously used, rented, or leased, the provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable. Any bank, savings and loan association, or credit union shall
not be deemed a pawnbroker for purposes of this Chapter.
PERSON: Any one or more natural persons; a partnership, including a limited partnership; a corporation, including a foreign, domestic, or nonprofit
corporation; a trust; a political subdivision of the State; or any other business organization. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall exercise, carry-on, or be engaged in the trade or business of pawnbroker within the City unless such person is currently licensed under
this Chapter. Persons engaged in the business of pawnbroker on the effective date of this Chapter must receive a license within sixty (60) days or cease
doing business. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-4: APPLICATION CONTENT:
In addition to any information that may be required by the County pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 471.924, every applicant for a license under this Chapter
shall be made on a form supplied by the City and shall contain the following information:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 39/324
A. If the applicant is a natural person:
1. The name, place, and date of birth, street resident address, and telephone number of the applicant;
2. Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or a resident alien;
3. Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name other than the applicant's name, and if so, the name used and information
concerning dates and places where used;
4. The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a designation, name, or style other than the name of the applicant and a certified copy of the
certificate as required by Minnesota Statutes 333.01;
5. The street address at which the applicant has lived during the preceding five (5) years;
6. The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding five (5) years and the
name(s) and address(es) of the applicant's employer(s) and partner(s), if any, for the preceding five (5) years;
7. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic ordinance. If so, the applicant shall
furnish information as to the time, place, and offense for which convictions were had;
8. The physical description of the applicant;
9. If the applicant is married:
a. The name, place, and date of birth, and street address of the applicant's current spouse;
b. The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in which the applicant's current spouse has been engaged during the preceding five
(5) years;
c. The names and addresses of the employers or partners of the applicant's current spouse for the preceding five (5) years;
d. Whether the applicant's current spouse has even been convicted of any felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic ordinance. If
so, the applicant shall furnish information as to the time, place, and offense for which convictions were had.
B. If the applicant is a partnership:
1. The name(s) and address(es) of all general and limited partners and all information concerning each limited partner required in subsection A of this
Section;
2. The name(s) of managing partner(s) and the interest of each partner in the pawnbroker business;
3. A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the application. If the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a trade name
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 333.01, a certified copy of such certificate shall be attached to the application.
C. If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
1. The name of the corporation or business form, and if incorporated, the state of incorporation;
2. A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of incorporation, or association agreement, and by-laws shall be attached to the application. If
the applicant is a foreign corporation, a certificate of authority as required by Minnesota Statutes 303.06, shall be attached;
3. A list of all persons who control or own an interest in excess of five percent (5%) in such organization or business form or who are officers of the
corporation or business form and all information concerning said persons required insubsection A above.
D. For all applicants:
1. Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker license from any other governmental unit and whether the applicant is licensed under Minnesota
Statutes 471.924.
2. Whether the applicant has previously been denied a pawnbroker license from any other governmental unit;
3. The names, street resident addresses, and business addresses of three (3) residents of Hennepin, Ramsey, Anoka, Carver, Dakota, Washington,
Scott, Goodhue, or Rice County, who are of good moral character and who are not related to the applicant or not holding any ownership in the
premises or business, who may be referred to as to the applicant's and or manager's character;
4. The location of the business premises;
5. The legal description of the premises to be licensed;
6. Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due and payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid, the
years and amounts that are unpaid.
7. Whether the application is for premises either planned or under construction of undergoing substantial alteration, the application shall be
accompanied by a set of preliminary plans showing the design of the proposed premises to be licensed. If the plans or design are in file with the City
Building/Inspections Department, no plans need be submitted with the issuing authority;
8. Such other information as the City Council or issuing authority may require. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-5: APPLICATION EXECUTION:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 40/324
A. All applications for a license under this Chapter shall be signed and sworn to. If the application is that of a natural person, it shall be signed and sworn
to by such person; if that of a corporation, by an officer thereof; it that of a partnership, by one of the general partners; and if that of an unincorporated
association, by the manager or managing officer thereof.
B. Any falsification on a license application shall result in the denial or revocation of a license. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-6: APPLICATION VERIFICATION:
All applicants shall be referred to the Police Department forverification and investigation of the facts set forth in the application. The Police Department
shall make a written report and recommendation to the City Council as to issuance or nonissuance of the license. The City Council may order and conduct
such additional investigation as it deems necessary. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-7: APPLICATION CONSIDERATION:
A. The City Council shall conduct a hearing on the license application within a reasonable period following receipt of the Police Department's report and
recommendation regarding the application. At least ten (10) days in advance of the City Council hearing on an application, the issuing authority shall
cause notice of the hearing to be published in the official newspaper of the City, setting forth the day, time, and place of the hearing; the name of the
applicant; the premises where the business is to be conducted; and the type of license which is sought. At the hearing, opportunity shall be given to
any person to be heard for or against the granting of the license. Additional hearings on the application may be held if the City Council deems
additional hearings necessary. After the hearing or hearings on the application, the City Council, may, in its discretion, grant or deny the application.
B. If an application is granted for a location where a building is under construction or not ready for occupancy, the license shall not be delivered to the
licensee until a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the licensed premises. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-8: RENEWAL APPLICATION:
A. All licenses issued under this Chapter shall be effective for one year from the date of approval by the City Council. An application for the renewal of an
existing license shall be made prior to the expiration date of the license and shall be made in such form as the issuing authority requires. If, in the
judgement of the City Council, good and sufficient cause is shown by the applicant for the applicant's failure to submit a renewal application before the
expiration of the existing license, the City Council may, if the other provisions of this Section are complied with, grant the renewal application.
B. A license under this Section may not be renewed:
1. If the City Council determines that the licensee has failed to comply with the provisions of this Chapter in preceding license years;
2. If the licensee or, if the licensee does not manage the establishment, the manager of the licensed premises is not a resident of Anoka, Carver,
Dakota, Hennepin, Ramsey, Scott,Washington, Goodhue, or Rice Counties on the date of renewal takes effect;
3. If in the case of a partnership, the managing partner or other person who manages the establishment is not a resident of Anoka, Carver, Dakota,
Hennepin, Ramsey, Scott, Washington, Goodhue, or Rice Counties on the date the renewal takes effect;
4. If in the case of a corporation, or other organization, the manager, a proprietor, or agent in charge of the establishment is not a resident of Anoka,
Carver, Dakota, Hennepin, Ramsey, Scott, Washington, Goodhue, or Rice Counties on the date the renewal takes effect;
5. The time for establishing residence in the above named Counties may for good cause be extended by the City Council. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-9: FEES:
A. Investigation Fee: At the time of each original application for a license, the applicant shall deposit one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) with
the City for the investigation fee. The investigation fee shall be three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). Provided, for investigations conducted outside the
State, the City shall be paid the investigation costs in excess of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00), but not to exceed ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00). Any fees due in excess of the one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) deposit must be paid prior to the license hearing and before
the City Council considers the application. The remainder of the deposit shall be returned to the applicant.
B. License Fee:
1. The license fee shall be paid annually, to be determined from the date of issuance of the license.
2. The annual license fee shall be set by City Council resolution. The application fee shall be credited to the first annual fee, if the application is
approved. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-10: PERSONS AND LOCATIONS INELIGIBLE FOR A LICENSE:
A. No license under this Chapter shall be issued to an applicant who is a natural person if such applicant:
1. Is a minor at the time the application is filed;
2. Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes364.03, subdivision 2, and has not
shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a pawnbroker as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 41/324
364.03, subdivision 3;
3. Is not of good moral character or repute; or
4. Holds an intoxicating liquor license within the City.
B. No license under this Chapter shall be issued to an applicant that is a partnership if such applicant has any general partner or managing partner;
1. Who is a minor at the time that application is filed;
2. Who has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes 364.03, subdivision 2, and who
has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a pawnbroker as prescribed by Minnesota
Statutes 364.03, subdivision 3;
3. Who is not of good moral character or repute; or
4. Who holds an intoxicating liquor license within the City.
C. No license under this Chapter shall be issued to an applicant that is a corporation or other organization if such applicant has any manager, proprietor, or
agent in charge of the business to be licensed:
1. Who is a minor at the time the application is filed;
2. Who has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes 364.03, subdivision 2, and who
has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a pawnbroker as prescribed by Minnesota
Statutes 364.03, subdivision 3;
3. Who is not of good moral character or repute; or
4. Who holds an intoxicating liquor license within the City. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-11: GENERAL LICENSE RESTRICTIONS:
A. Recordkeeping: At the time of a receipt, sale, or redemption of an item of property, the pawnbroker shall immediately record, using the English
language, in an indelible ink, the following information:
1. An accurate description of the item of property including, but not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number,
brand name, or other identifyingmark of such item;
2. The date, time and place the item of property was received by the pawnbroker;
3. The amount of money loaned upon or pledged therefor;
4. The full name, residence address, residence telephone number, date of birth, and reasonably accurate description of person from whom the item of
property was received, including; sex, height, race, color of eyes, and color of hair;
5. The identification number from one of the following forms of identification of the person from whom the item was received;
a. A valid Minnesota driver's license;
b. A valid Minnesota identification card;
c. A valid photo identification issued by the state of residency of the person from whom the item was received and one other form of identification;
6. The signature of the person pledging or selling the item;
7. The pawnbroker will also take a color photograph of frontal view of this person, cross-referenced to the properties. The Police Department may
approve a video in lieu of color photograph if the video produces the same quality picture; and
8. A color photograph of any precious metals involved in a transaction. The Police Department may approve a video in lieu of a color photograph if the
video produces the same quality picture.
B. Inspection of Records: The pawnbroker shall provide to the Police Department the information required in subsection A of this Section by leaving
complete and correct copy of records with the Police Department every business day, before the hour of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon. When possible,
records left with the Police Department should be contained on computer disk for retrieval of information by the Police Department's computer system.
The information required in subsection A of this Section shall be retained by the pawnbroker for at least four (4) years. The license must display a sign,
in a conspicuous place in the premises and of a sufficient size, which informs all patrons that all transactions are reported to the Police Department.
C. Police Order to Hold Property: Whenever the Police Department, upon reasonable suspicion that an item received by the pawnbroker may have been
stolen, notifies the pawnbroker not to sell an item, the item shall not be sold or removed from the licensed premises until authorized to be released by
the Police Department or a period of thirty (30) days,whichever is the lesser. Oral notification to hold property shall be confirmed in writing by the Police
Department.
D. Receipt: The pawnbroker shall provide a receipt to the seller or pledger of any item of property received, which shall include:
1. The name, address, and telephone number of the pawnbroker business;
2. The date on which the item was received by the pawnbroker;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 42/324
3. A description of the item received and amount paid to the pledger or seller in exchange for the item pawned or sold;
4. The signature of the pawnbroker or agent;
5. The last regular business day by which the item must be redeemed by the pledger without risk that the item will be sold and the amount necessary to
redeem the pawned item on that date.
6. The annual rate of interest charged on pawned items received;
7. The name and address of the seller or pledger.
E. Hours of Operation: No pawnbroker shall keep the pawnbroker business open for the transaction of business on any day of the week before eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
F. Minors: The pawnbroker shall not purchase or receive personal property of any nature or pledge from any minor.
G. Inspection of Items: The pawnbroker shall at all times during the term of the license, allow the Police Department and other law enforcement authorities
associated with the Police Department to enter the premises where the pawnbroker business is located during normal business hours except in an
emergency, for the purpose of inspecting such premises and inspecting the items, ware, and merchandise and records therein for the purpose of
locating items suspected or alleged to have been stolen or otherwise improperly disposed of.
H. License Display: A license issued under this Chapter must be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises for which it is used. The license issued is
only effective for the compact and contiguous space specified in the approved license application.
I. Maintenance Order: A license under this Chapter shall be responsible for the conduct of the business being operated and shall maintain conditions of
order.
J. Gambling: No license under this Chapter may keep, possess,or operate, or permit the keeping, possession, or operation on the licensed premises of
dice, slot machines, roulette wheels, punchboards, blackjack tables, or pinball machines which return coins or slugs, chips, or tokens of any kind, which
are redeemable in merchandise or cash. No gambling equipment authorized under Minnesota Statutes chapter 349, may be kept or operated and no
raffles may be conducted on the licensed premises and/or adjoining rooms. The purchase of lottery tickets may take place in the licensed premises as
authorized by the director of the lottery pursuant to Minnesota Statutes chapter 349A.
K. Prohibited Goods: No license under this Chapter shall accept any item of property which contains altered or obliterated serial numbers of "operation
identification" number or any item of property whose serial number has been removed.
L. Proper Identification: A licensee under this Chapter shall not accept items of property unless the seller or pledger provides one of the following forms of
identification:
1. A valid drivers license;
2. A Minnesota identification card; or
3. A photo identification issued by the state of residency of the person from whom the item was received;
4. Military identification; or
5. Passports.
No other forms of identification shall be accepted.
M. Redemption Period: Any person pledging, pawning or depositing an article for security shall have a minimum of thirty (30) days from the date when the
loan or pledge becomes due and payable to redeem the article before the article becomes forfeitable. The date by which an item of property that has
been pawned must be redeemed by the pledger without risk that the item will be sold must be a day on which the pawnbroker is open for regular
business.
N. Payment by Check: When a pawnbroker accepts an item for purchase or as security for a loan, payment for any article deposited, left, pledged or
pawned shall be made only by a check, draft, or other nonnegotiable instrument or order of withdrawal which is drawn against funds held by a financial
institution. This policy must be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises.
O. Restrictions on Sale: A pawnbroker shall suspend for one year, any business transaction with any person who has sold and/or forfeited on six (6)
previous occasions articles for which the person received twenty five dollars ($25.00) or moreper transaction within a single six (6) month period.
P. Premises: All property deposited, left, pledged, pawned, or held for sale must be stored in an enclosed facility and may not be stored outside of the
premises. The City may, however, permit the licensee to designate one off-premises locked and secured facility in which the licensee may store only
cars, boats, and other motorized vehicle. The licensee shall permit immediate inspection of the facility at any time during business hours by the City. All
provisions in this Section regarding recordkeeping and reporting shall apply to oversized items. All property shall be stored in compliance with zoning
and/or fire regulations and in an orderly manner subject to inspection by the Fire Department. The premises shall also be equipped with an operational
security alarm. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-12: RESTRICTIONS REGARDING LICENSE TRANSFER:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 43/324
Each license under this Chapter shall be issued to the applicant only and shall not be transferable to any other person. No license shall loan, sell, give, or
assign a license to another person. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-13: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. The City Council may suspend or revoke a license issued under this Chapter upon a finding of a violation of:
1. Any of the provisions of this Chapter;
2. Any State statute regulating pawnbrokers; or
3. Any State or local law relating to moral character and repute.
B. A revocation or suspension by the City Council shall be preceded by written notice to the licensee and a public hearing. The written notice shall give at
least eight (8) days, notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state the nature of the charges against the pawnbroker. The notice may be
served upon the pawnbroker personally or by United States mail addressed to the most recent address in license application. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-14: PROHIBITED ACTS:
No pawnbroker licensed under this Chapter shall:
A. Lend money on a pledge at a rate of interest above that allowed by law;
B. Knowingly possess stolen goods;
C. Sell pledged goods before the time to redeem has expired;
D. Refuse to disclose to the City, after having sold pledged goods, the name of the purchaser or the price for which the item sold; or
E. Make a loan on a pledge to a minor. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
Chapter 7
CHARITABLE GAMBLING
3-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control gambling activities and to prohibit the commercialization of these activities. (Ord. XVI.31, 7-5-1995)
3-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
The terms used herein have the meanings set forth in Minnesota statutes, sections 349.11 through 349.22, and in the rules adopted pursuant to the
authority contained in the statutes. (Ord. XVI.31, 7-5-1995)
3-7-3: LAWFUL GAMBLING:
There shall be no gambling in the city except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of Minnesota statutes, sections 349.11
through 349.22, inclusive, and rules adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. XVI.31, 7-5-1995)
3-7-4: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
In addition to the requirements of Minnesota statutes, sections 349.11 through 349.22, inclusive, and rules adopted pursuant thereto, the following
regulations must be complied with:
A. Commencing on January 1, 1996, an organization permitted to conduct lawful gambling within the city shall expend eighty percent (80%) annually of its
lawful purpose expenditures on lawful purposes conducted or located within the city's trade area, which shall include only the city of Rosemount and
any city with a boundary contiguous to Rosemount. Each such organization shall submit an annual report to the city clerk, on forms provided by the
city, and shall provide a copy of the organization's annual audit, schedule C, and such additional reports, records, and information as the clerk shall
deem necessary to demonstrate compliance with this subsection. Such report and supplementary information shall be provided at thetime of
submission of an application for city approval of the applicant's premises permit.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 44/324
B. No establishment shall allow more than one organization to conduct lawful gambling at one time on its premises or lease to more than one licensed
organization.
C. An applicant for an initial premises permit or a renewal premises permit shall pay to the city an investigation fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord.
XVI.31, 7-5-1995)
3-7-5: CONSIDERATION OF LOCAL ORGANIZATIONS:
Owners of establishments at which lawful gambling is conducted shall maintain a file of qualified organizations which have their place of business in the
city and which have expressed written interest to the owner of the establishment in operating lawful gambling activities on the premises. Such file shall be
available for inspection by the city clerk or the clerk's designee during normal business hours. No lease to conduct lawful gambling on the premises shall
be executed, renewed or extended by the owner without first notifying all such organizations in writing that the lease will expire or has expired and giving
such organization an opportunity to discuss conducting lawful gambling on the premises. No premises permit will be approved by the council without
adequate proof of compliance with this section. (Ord. XVI.31, 7-5-1995)
3-7-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as described in title 1, chapter
4 of this code. Prior violations of this chapter shall also be grounds, in the discretion of the council, for refusal to approve a premises permit. Additionally,
violation of this chapter shall be reported to the Minnesota charitable gambling board and a recommendation shall be made for suspension, revocation or
cancellation of an organization's license. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
Chapter 8
ADULT USE ESTABLISHMENTS
3-8-1: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
Studies conducted by the American Planning Association, the Minnesota attorney general's office and the governments of St. Paul, Minneapolis, and
Ramsey, Minnesota; St. Croix County, Wisconsin; Denver and Adams Counties, Colorado; Chicago, Illinois; Phoenix, Arizona; Los Angeles, California;
Rochester - Olmsted County, Minnesota; Indianapolis, Indiana; Seattle, Washington; and the Texas City Attorneys' Association have investigated the
impacts that adult establishments have in their communities. These studies have concluded that adult establishments have negative secondary impacts on
surrounding neighborhoods. Those impacts included increased crime rates, lower property values, increased transiency, neighborhood blight and potential
health risks. The Rosemount city council is relying on the studies, many of which were conducted in larger cities, recognizing that the same or similar
adverse impacts could occur in a smaller city. Based on these studies and findings, the city council concludes:
A. Minnesota statutes, section 462.357, allows the city to adopt regulations to promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
B. The public health, safety, morals and general welfare will be promoted by the city adopting regulations governing adult establishments.
C. Adult establishments have adverse secondary impacts of the type found in the studies referenced in this section.
D. The adverse impacts caused by adult establishments tend to diminish if adult establishments are governed by location requirements, licensing
requirements and health requirements.
E. It is not the intent to prohibit adult establishments from having a reasonable opportunity to locate in the city.
F. A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the
adult establishment. A licensing procedure will place an incentive on the operators to see that the adult establishment is run in a manner consistent
with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances
that the licensee is the actual operator of the adult establishment fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein.
G. The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been convicted of a certain crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage
in that conduct in contravention of this chapter.
H. Smaller cities experience many of the same adverse impacts of adult establishments present in larger communities. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms when used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless the context indicates otherwise:
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT: Any business that:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 45/324
A. Devotes a substantial or significant portion of its inventory, stock in trade, or publicly displayed merchandise, or devotes a substantial or significant
portion of its floor area (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any portion of the business not open to the public) to, or
derives a substantial or significant portion of its gross revenues from items, merchandise, devices or other materials distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on material depicting, exposing, simulating, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
B. Engages in any "adult use" as defined in this section.
ADULT USE: An adult use is any of the activities and businesses described below:
Adult Body Painting Studio: An establishment or business which provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or
nontransparent, to the body of a patron when such person is nude.
Adult Bookstore Or Video Store: An establishment or business used for barter, rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter (including books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter), pictures, slides, records, audiotape, videotape, compact discs, digital video discs, motion picture film,
or other visual representations if a substantial or significant portion of such business or establishment is devoted to material distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Cabaret: A business or establishment that provides dancing or other live entertainment to patrons if the dancing and live entertainment is
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction of matter that seeks to evoke, arouse or excite the patron's
sexual or erotic feelings or desire.
Adult Companionship Establishment: A business or establishment that provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or
discussion between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Conversation/Rap Parlor: A business or establishment that provides the services of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion,
if such service is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Health/Sport Club: A health/sport club that is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
Adult Hotel Or Motel: A hotel or motel where material is presented which is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Massage Parlor: A massage parlor that provides the services of massage, if such service is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis
on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater: A business or establishment with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material if such
material is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
Adult Modeling Studio: A business or establishment that provides customers figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual
stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in "specified sexual activities" or "display specified anatomical areas" while
being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculpted, photographed, or otherwise, depicted by such customers.
Adult Motion Picture Arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited where coin or slug operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture machines, projectors of other image producing device are maintained to show images to
five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on
depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Motion Picture Theater: A motion picture theater with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting material distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Novelty Business: A business which has, as a principal activity, the sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or devices which are
designed for sexual stimulation.
Adult Sauna: A sauna that provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation or reducing, utilizing steam or hot
air as a cleaning, relaxing, or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility: A building or portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose
of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning agent if the service provided by the steam/bathhouse facility is
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
NUDE OR SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or anus with less than a fully
opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; the exposure of any device, costume, or
covering that gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum anal region or pubic hair region; or the exposure of any
device worn as a cover over the nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or
areola; or
B. Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct
physical stimulation or unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a
sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 46/324
necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, asppism, zooerasty; or
B. Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or
C. Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or
D. Fondling, touching nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast(s); or
E. Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in
activities involving the flagellation, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any such persons; or
F. Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or
G. Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.
SUBSTANTIAL OR SIGNIFICANT: For purposes of this chapter, the phrase "substantial or significant" means twenty five percent (25%). (Ord. 2013-03, 5-
21-2013)
3-8-3: LOCATION:
Licenses for adult use establishments may be granted only for operation on sites where such uses are allowed under sections 11-4-16 and 11-7-5 of this
code. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-4: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No "adult establishment" as defined in this chapter may remain open at any time between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. on weekdays and Saturdays, and one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. on Sundays. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-5: LICENSING:
No person shall own or operate an adult establishment without first having secured a license as provided for in this section. The application for an adult
establishment license shall be submitted on a form provided by the city and shall include:
A. If the applicant is an individual, the name, residence, phone number, and birth date of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the name,
residence, phone number, and birth date of each general and limited partner. If the applicant is a corporation, the names, residences, phone numbers,
and birth dates of all those persons who are officers, directors and stockholders holding more than five percent (5%) of the issued and outstanding
stock of the corporation.
B. The name, address, phone number, and birth date of the operator and manager of such operation, if different from the owners.
C. The address and legal description of the premises where the adult establishment is to be located.
D. A statement detailing any gross misdemeanor or felony conviction relating to sex offenses, obscenity or the operation of an adult establishment or adult
business by the applicant, operator or manager and whether or not the applicant, operator or manager has ever applied for or held a license to operate
a similar type of business in other communities. In the case of a corporation or partnership, a statement detailing any felony convictions of the owners,
partners, officers, directors or stockholders holding more than five percent (5%) of the issued and outstanding stock of the business, and whether or not
those individuals have ever applied for or held a license to operate a similar type of business in other communities.
E. The activities and types of business to be conducted.
F. The hours of operation.
G. The provisions made to restrict access by minors.
H. A building plan of the premises detailing all internal operations and activities.
I. Whether the applicant has previously been denied a license of this type by any other government unit.
J. Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due and payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid, the years
and amounts that are unpaid. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 47/324
3-8-6: LICENSE FEE:
A. The annual license fee is set forth by city council resolution.
B. Each application for a license shall be submitted to the city clerk and payment made to the city. Each application for a license shall be accompanied by
payment in full of the required license fee. Upon rejection of any application for a license, the city shall refund the license fee.
C. All licenses shall expire on the last day of December in each year. Each license shall be issued for a period of one year, except that if a portion of the
license year has elapsed when the application is made, a license may be issued for the remainder of the year for a prorated fee. In computing such fee,
any unexpired fraction of a month shall be counted as one month.
D. No part of the fee paid by any licensee shall be refunded, except that a prorated portion of the fee shall be refunded in the event of the complete
closure of the business and cessation of business activities for any of the following reasons and upon application to the city clerk within thirty (30) days
from the happening of the event, provided that such event occurs more than thirty (30) days before the expiration of the license:
1. Destruction or damage of the licensed premises by fire or other catastrophe.
2. The licensee's illness.
3. The licensee's death.
4. A change in the legal status making it unlawful for licensed business to continue.
E. Each application shall contain a provision on the application indicating that any withholding of information or the providing of false or misleading
information will be grounds for denial or revocation of a license. Any changes in the information provided on the application or provided during the
investigation shall be brought to the attention of the city clerk by the applicant or licensee. If said changes take place during the investigation, said data
shall be provided to the police chief or the city clerk in writing. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-7: INVESTIGATION FEE:
At the time of original application for a license, the applicant shall deposit an investigation fee with the city. The amount of the investigation fee will be set
by the city council. Any fees that become due after the original deposit must be paid before the city council considers the application. Any unexpended
portion of the deposit shall be returned to the applicant. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-8: GRANTING OF LICENSE:
A. The city clerk and police chief, or such persons as they shall designate, shall complete their investigation within thirty (30) days after the city clerk
receives a complete application and all license and investigation fees.
B. If, after such investigation it appears that the applicant and the place proposed for the business are eligible for a license under the criteria set forth in
this chapter, then the license shall be issued by the city council within thirty (30) days after the investigation is completed. Otherwise, the license shall
be denied. If the application is for renewal, the applicant may continue in business until the city council decides to either renew or not renew the
license.
C. Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall not be transferable to another holder. Each license shall be issued only for the premises
described in the application. No license may be transferred to another premises without the approval of the city council. If the licensee is a partnership
or a corporation, a change in the identity of any of the general or limited partners, officers, directors or shareholders holding more than five percent
(5%) of the issued and outstanding stock of the business shall be deemed a transfer of the license. All adult establishments, including those in
operation before the effective date of the amendments to this chapter and those who begin operating after the effective date of the amendments to this
chapter, are required to obtain a license.
D. If the license application is denied by the city council, the applicant may, within fifteen (15) days after denial, commence an action in state or federal
court for the purpose of determining whether the city council acted properly in denying the application. The adult establishment may continue in
business until the court action is completed. Otherwise, the applicant may not commence doing business until the judicial action has been finally
resolved. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-9: PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
No license shall be issued or held by any person:
A. Under the age of twenty one (21).
B. Who is overdue or whose spouse is overdue in his or her payment to the city, county or state of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against them or
imposed upon them.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 48/324
C. Who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of a gross misdemeanor or felony or of violating any law of this state or local ordinance
relating to: sex, obscenity, or prostitution offenses; adult establishments; sexual and labor trafficking crimes; controlled substance offenses; or crimes
against the person (including, but not limited to, assault, robbery and kidnapping).
D. Who is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license is issued.
E. Who has been denied a license by the city or any other Minnesota municipal corporation to operate an adult establishment, or whose license to operate
an adult establishment has been suspended or revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months, or who is residing with any such person.
F. Who has not paid the license and investigation fees required by this chapter. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-10: PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
A. No license shall be granted for adult establishments on any premises where the applicant or any of its officers, agents or employees has been convicted
of a violation of this chapter, or where any license hereunder has been revoked for cause, until one year has elapsed after such conviction or
revocation.
B. No license shall be granted for any adult establishment which is not in full compliance with this code, the city's zoning ordinance, the building code, the
fire code, the city's health regulations, this chapter and all provisions of state and federal law.
C. Establishments holding any type of liquor license are ineligible for a license. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-11: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. Every license shall be granted subject to the following conditions and all other provisions of this chapter, and of any applicable sections of this code, the
city's zoning ordinance, the building code, the fire code, the city's health regulations and all provisions of state and federal law.
B. All licensed premises shall have the license posted in a conspicuous place at all times.
C. No minor shall be permitted on the licensed premises.
D. Any designated officer of the city shall have the right to enter and inspect the premises of a licensee during business hours.
E. Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of his or her place of business and shall maintain conditions of order.
F. No adult goods, materials, or services shall be offered, sold, transferred, conveyed, given, displayed, or bartered to any minor.
G. An adult establishment shall not sell or dispense nonintoxicating or intoxicating liquors nor shall it be located in a building that contains a business that
sells or dispenses nonintoxicating or intoxicating liquors. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-11-1: ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS FOR ADULT CABARETS:
In addition to all other conditions set forth in this chapter, the following conditions apply to adult cabarets:
A. No owner, operator or manager of an adult cabaret shall permit or allow any dancer or other live entertainer to perform nude.
B. No dancer, live entertainer, patron or any other person may be nude in an adult cabaret.
C. No dancer, live entertainer or performer shall be under eighteen (18) years old.
D. All dancing or live entertainment shall occur on a platform that is intended for that purpose and that is raised at least two feet (2') from the level of the
floor.
E. No dancer or performer shall fondle, touch, or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle, touch, or caress any dancer or performer.
F. No patron shall pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or performer.
G. No dancer or performer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 49/324
H. A licensee under this chapter shall not allow any partition between a subdivision, portion, or part of the licensed premises having any aperture that is
designed or constructed to facilitate sexual intercourse, sodomy, or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair,
buttocks, or female breast between persons on either side of the partition.
I. A licensee under this chapter shall not allow or have on the licensed premises or adjoining areas any booths, stalls, or partitions used for the viewing of
motion pictures or other forms of entertainment, including, but not limited to, live entertainment that have doors, curtains, or portal partitions, unless
such booths, stalls, or partitions have at least one side open to an adjacent public room so that the area inside is visible to persons in the adjacent
public room. Such areas shall be lighted in a manner that the persons in the area used for viewing motion pictures or other forms of entertainment are
visible from the adjacent public rooms. No reclining surfaces inside any booths, stalls, or partitions used for the viewing of motion pictures or other
forms of entertainment including, but not limited to, live entertainment shall be permitted. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-12: PENALTY:
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished not more than the maximum penalty
for a misdemeanor as prescribed by law.
B. Any violation of this chapter shall be a basis for the suspension or revocation of any license granted hereunder. The basis for suspending or revoking a
license may include, but is not limited to, the following:
1. The licensee has knowingly given false information in the license application;
2. The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the adult
establishment;
3. The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed prostitution on the premises of the adult establishment;
4. The licensee knowingly or recklessly operated the business during a period of time when the license was finally suspended or revoked;
5. The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed criminal activity on the premises of the adult establishment;
6. The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed minors on the premises of an adult establishment; or
7. The licensee violates any other provision of this chapter.
The city clerk shall notify the licensee in writing of the basis for a proposed revocation or suspension. The licensee shall have ten (10) days after
delivery of the written notice to submit a written request for a hearing on the proposed suspension or revocation. If the licensee does not request a
hearing within ten (10) days, the proposed suspension or revocation is final. If the licensee requests a hearing, the city clerk will notify the licensee of
the date, time, and place of the hearing. The council shall hold a hearing for the purpose of determining whether to revoke or suspend the license,
which hearing shall be within thirty (30) days of the request for a hearing. A decision shall be made by the city council within thirty (30) days after the
close of the hearing.
C. A suspension or revocation shall not be effective until fifteen (15) days after notification of the council's decision to the licensee. If, within that fifteen
(15) days the licensee commences an action in state or federal court for the purpose of determining whether the city acted properly, the licensee may
continue in business until the conclusion of the action.
D. If the licensee does not commence an action in court within the fifteen (15) day period, the suspension or revocation is effective. A suspension shall be
effective for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. A revocation shall be effective for a period not to exceed one year. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-13: HINDRANCE:
Any person hindering the efforts of city officials to investigate possible violations of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-
2013)
3-8-14: CONFLICT OF CHAPTER:
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code in the
city, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any case
where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the city existing on the effective date of this
chapter which established a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the property, the provision of this chapter shall be
deemed to prevail. The determination of the applicability of this chapter in light of the above rules of interpretation shall be made by the city and its
determination shall be final. The provisions of this chapter supplement, but do not supersede the provision of chapter 2, articles B and C of this title. (Ord.
2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-15: OPT OUT OF STATE LAW:
Minnesota statutes, section 617.242 does not apply in the city. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-16: SEVERABILITY:
Every section, paragraph or part of this chapter is declared severable from every other section, paragraph or part thereof to the extent that if any section,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 50/324
paragraph or part is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction it shall not invalidate any other section, paragraph or part thereof. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-
2013)
Chapter 9
TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES
3-9-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of eighteen (18) years purchase or otherwise obtain, possess and use tobacco, tobacco
products, tobacco related devices, and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices, and the sales, possession, and use are violations of both state and federal
laws; and because studies, which the city hereby accepts and adopts, have shown that most smokers begin smoking before they have reached the age of
eighteen (18) years and that those persons who reach the age of eighteen (18) years without having started smoking are significantly less likely to begin
smoking; and because smoking has been shown to be the cause of several serious health problems which subsequently place a financial burden on all
levels of government; this chapter shall be intended to regulate the sale, possession and use of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, and
nicotine or lobelia delivery devices for the purpose of enforcing and furthering existing laws, to protect minors against the serious effects associated with
the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices, and to further the official public policy of the
state in regard to preventing young people from starting to smoke as stated in Minnesota statutes section 144.391, as it may be amended from time to
time. (Ord. 2015-08, 11-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COMPLIANCE CHECKS: The system the city uses to investigate and ensure that those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related
devices, and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices are following and complying with the requirements of this chapter. Compliance checks may involve the use
of minors as authorized by this chapter. Compliance checks shall also mean the use of minors who attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products,
tobacco related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices for educational, research and training purposes as authorized by state and federal laws.
Compliance checks may also be conducted by other units of government for the purpose of enforcing appropriate federal, state or local laws and
regulations relating to tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices.
INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED: The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco product wrapped individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and
tobacco products shall include, but not be limited to, single cigarette packs, single bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or other
packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing more than a single pack or other container as described in this definition
shall not be considered individually packaged.
INDOOR AREA: All space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded by walls, doorways, or windows, whether open or closed, covering more than fifty
percent (50%) of the combined surface area of the vertical planes constituting the perimeter of the area. A wall includes any retractable divider, garage
door, or other physical barrier, whether temporary or permanent.
LOOSIES: The common term used to refer to a cigarette or any other tobacco product that has been removed from its packaging and sold individually. The
term "loosies" does not include individual cigars with a retail price, before any sales taxes, of more than two dollars ($2.00) per cigar.
MINOR: Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of eighteen (18) years.
MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS: Any form of business operated out of a truck, van, automobile or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and
not a fixed address storefront or other permanent type of structure authorized for sales transactions.
NICOTINE OR LOBELIA DELIVERY DEVICES: Any product containing or delivering nicotine or lobelia intended for human consumption, or any part of
such a product, that is not tobacco as defined in this section, not including any product that has been approved or otherwise certified for legal sale by the
United States food and drug administration for tobacco use cessation, harm reduction, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold
solely for that approved purpose.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT: Any place of business where tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices are
available for sale to the general public. The phrase shall include, but not be limited to, grocery stores, convenience stores, restaurants, and drugstores.
SALE: Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other consideration.
SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING: Open displays of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices in any
manner where any person shall have access to the tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices, without the
assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee's employee. The assistance or intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of the
tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device between the customer and the licensee or employee. Self-service
sales are interpreted as being any sale where there is not an actual physical exchange of the product between the clerk and the customer.
SMOKING: Inhaling or exhaling smoke or vapor from any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product.
Smoking also includes carrying a lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product.
TOBACCO OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Tobacco and tobacco products includes cigarettes and any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco
that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, or any
component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product; cigars; cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking
tobacco; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and
sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco. Tobacco excludes any tobacco product that has been approved by the United States food
and drug administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed
and sold solely for such an approved purpose.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS SHOP: A retail establishment with an entrance door opening directly to the outside that derives more than ninety percent (90%) of
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 51/324
its gross revenue from sale of tobacco related products or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental.
"Tobacco products shop" does not include a tobacco department or section of any individual business establishment with any type of food, liquor, or
restaurant license.
TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES: Includes any tobacco product as well as a pipe, rolling papers, ashtray, or other device intentionally designed or intended
to be used in a manner which enables the chewing, sniffing or smoking of tobacco or tobacco products.
VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type of device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related
devices upon the insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco
product or tobacco related device. (Ord. 2015-08, 11-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-9-3: LICENSE:
A. License Required: No person or establishment shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related device, or nicotine or lobelia
delivery device without first having obtained a license to do so from the city.
B. Application: An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices shall be made
on a form provided by the city. The application shall contain the full name of the applicant, the applicant's residential and business addresses and
telephone numbers, the name of the business for which the license is sought, and any additional information the city deems necessary. Upon receipt of
a completed application, the city council shall take action on the license application at a regularly scheduled city council meeting. If the city clerk shall
determine that an application is incomplete, he or she shall return the application to the applicant with notice of the information necessary to make the
application complete.
C. Investigation: For all new and renewal applicants, a background investigation may be conducted on any business owner, manager, and other individual
or enterprise listed on the application. For applicants who are applying for a license for more than one location, only one background investigation and
background investigation fee shall be required.
D. Action: The city council may either approve or deny the license, or it may delay action for a reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any
investigation of the application or the applicant it deems necessary. If the city council shall approve the license, the city clerk shall issue the license to
the applicant. If the city council denies the license, notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the applicant's right to appeal
the city council's decision.
E. Term: All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of odd numbered years. License fees shall be prorated on a quarterly basis as
provided in this chapter.
F. Revocation Or Suspension: Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended as provided in this chapter.
G. Transfers: All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid only on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to whom
the license was issued. No transfer of any license to another location or person shall be valid without the prior approval of the city council.
H. Moveable Place Of Business: No license shall be issued to a moveable place of business, including, but not limited to, motorized vehicles, mobile sales
kiosks, or trailers. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be licensed under this chapter.
I. Display: All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of the general public on the licensed premises.
J. Renewals: The renewal of a license issued under this chapter shall be handled in the same manner as the original application. The request for a
renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days but no more than sixty (60) days before the expiration of the current license.
K. Issuance As Privilege And Not A Right: The issuance of a license issued under this chapter shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute right of
the applicant and shall not entitle the holder to an automatic renewal of the license.
L. Smoking: Smoking shall not be permitted and no person shall smoke within the indoor area of any establishment with a retail tobacco license. Smoking
for the purposes of sampling tobacco or tobacco related products is prohibited.
M. Instructional Program: No person shall be issued a license or renewal license to sell tobacco related products unless an applicant or license holder has
a program for instructing all employees regarding the legal requirements pertaining to the sale of tobacco related products at the business premises for
which the license was issued. The instructional program shall include, but is not limited to, reviewing the law on the sale of tobacco related products
and requiring employees to request identification from every customer who is under twenty seven (27) years of age. The training shall include
information that the sale of tobacco related products to minors is illegal, explanation of what proof of age is legally acceptable, and that a sale to a
minor can subject the applicant or license holder and their employees to criminal and/or civil liability. (Ord. 2015-08, 11-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-9-4: FEES:
No license shall be issued under this chapter until the appropriate license fee and investigation fee is paid in full. The fees for an investigation and license
under this chapter shall be established in the city's schedule of fees, as it may be amended from time to time. License fees shall be prorated on a quarterly
basis. The license fee shall be used to process applications and by the police department for training and enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-08, 11-2-
2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 52/324
3-9-5: BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
A. Grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license under this chapter include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years.
2. The applicant has been convicted within the past five (5) years of any violation of a federal, state, or local law, ordinance provision, or other
regulation relating to tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices.
3. The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices revoked within the
preceding twelve (12) months of the date of application.
4. The applicant fails to provide any information required on the application, or provides false or misleading information.
5. The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other local law, ordinance, or other regulation from holding a license.
B. However, except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of any particular ground for denial does not mean that the city must deny the
license.
C. If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it may be revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the license under this
chapter. (Ord. 2015-08, 11-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-9-6: PROHIBITED SALES:
A. Violation Of Chapter: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, or
nicotine or lobelia delivery device:
1. To any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
2. By means of any type of vending machine.
3. By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need to a make a verbal or written request to an employee of the licensed
premises in order to receive the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device and whereby there is not a
physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device between the licensee, or the
licensee's employee, and the customer.
4. By means of "loosies" as defined in section 3-9-2 of this chapter.
5. Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, belladonna, strychnos, cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic or controlled
substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process. It is not
the intention of this provision to ban the sale of lawfully manufactured cigarettes or other tobacco products.
6. By any other means, to any other person, or in any other manner or form prohibited by federal, state or other local law, ordinance provision, or other
regulation.
B. Exception: A license holder who operates a tobacco products shop that sells only tobacco related products is exempt from the self-service
merchandising provision if the license holder prohibits anyone under eighteen (18) years of age from entering the establishment at all times, and the
license holder conspicuously displays a notice prohibiting persons under eighteen (18) years of age from entering the establishment. (Ord. 2015-08,
11-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-9-7: TOBACCO PRODUCTS SHOP:
The following requirements shall apply:
A. The maximum square footage of the entire licensed premises shall not exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet.
B. The inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted tobacco or plant product in a tobacco products
shop is prohibited.
C. A tobacco products shop shall prohibit anyone under eighteen (18) years of age from entering the establishment at any time, and shall conspicuously
display a notice prohibiting persons under eighteen (18) years of age from entering the establishment. (Ord. 2015-08, 11-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-9-8: RESPONSIBILITY:
All licensees under this chapter shall be responsible for the actions of their employees in regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related
devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices on the licensed premises, and the sale of an item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the license
holder. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the city from also subjecting the employee to whatever penalties are appropriate under this
chapter, state or federal law, or other applicable law or regulation. (Ord. 2015-08, 11-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-9-9: COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 53/324
All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the police department or other delegated law enforcement officers or agencies during regular business
hours. From time to time, but at least once per year, the city shall conduct compliance checks by engaging, with the written consent of their parents or
guardians, minors over the age of fifteen (15) years but less than eighteen (18) years to enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase tobacco,
tobacco products, tobacco related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices. Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be supervised
by city designated law enforcement officers or other designated city personnel. Minors used for compliance checks shall not be guilty of unlawful
possession of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices when those items are obtained as a part of the
compliance check. No minor used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting the minor's age, and all minors lawfully
engaged in a compliance check shall answer all questions about the minor's age asked by the licensee or his or her employee and shall produce any
identification, if any exists, for which he or she is asked. Nothing in this section shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by state or federal laws for
educational, research, or training purposes, or required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal law. (Ord. 2015-08, 11-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-9-10: OTHER ILLEGAL ACTS:
Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of this chapter:
A. Illegal Sales: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, or
nicotine or lobelia delivery device to any minor.
B. Illegal Possession: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to have in his or her possession any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related
device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device. This subsection shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check.
C. Illegal Use: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to smoke, chew, sniff or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related
device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device.
D. Illegal Procurement: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco, tobacco
product, tobacco related device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device, and it shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to purchase or otherwise
obtain those items on behalf of a minor. It shall further be a violation for any person to coerce or attempt to coerce a minor to illegally purchase or
otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device. This subsection shall not apply to
minors lawfully involved in a compliance check.
E. Use Of False Identification: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to attempt to disguise his or her true age by the use of a false form of
identification, whether the identification is that of another person or one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to
represent an age older than the actual age of the person. (Ord. 2015-08, 11-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-9-11: EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES:
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the providing of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices to a minor
as part of a lawfully recognized religious, spiritual, or cultural ceremony. It shall be an affirmative defense to the violation of this chapter for a person to
have reasonably relied on proof of age as described by state law. (Ord. 2015-08, 11-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-9-12: SEVERABILITY:
If any section or provision of this chapter is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other sections or provisions which can be given force and effect
without the invalidated section or provision. (Ord. 2015-08, 11-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-9-13: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY:
A. Misdemeanor Prosecution: Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of this
chapter. It is not necessary that criminal charges be brought in order to support a determination of a license violation nor does the dismissal or acquittal
of such a criminal charge operate as a bar to adverse license actions under this section.
B. Violations:
1. Notice: A person violating this chapter may be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the alleged violation and that informs the
alleged violator of his or her right to a hearing on the matter.
2. Hearings:
a. Upon issuance of a citation, a person accused of violating this chapter may request in writing a hearing on the matter. Hearing requests must be
made within ten (10) business days of the issuance of the citation and delivered to the city clerk or other designated city officer. Failure to request
a hearing within ten (10) business days of the issuance of the citation will terminate the person's right to a hearing.
b. The city clerk or other designated city officer shall set the time and place for the hearing. Written notice of the hearing time and place shall be
mailed or delivered to the accused violator at least ten (10) business days prior to the hearing. Such hearing shall be open to the public.
3. Hearing Officer: A city official designated by the city council shall serve as the hearing officer. The hearing officer must be an impartial employee of
the city or an impartial person retained by the city to conduct the hearing.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 54/324
4. Decision:
a. Hearing Officer Decision: A decision shall be issued by the hearing officer within ten (10) business days. If the hearing officer determines that a
violation of this chapter did occur, that decision, along with the hearing officer's reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed under
subsection C of this section, shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the city and the accused violator by in person
delivery or mail as soon as practicable. Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any
penalty, those findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to the city and the acquitted accused violator by in person delivery or mail as soon
as practicable.
b. Costs: If the citation is upheld by the hearing officer, the city's actual expenses in holding the hearing up to a maximum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) shall be paid by the person requesting the hearing.
c. Decision Final: The decision of the hearing officer is final.
5. Appeals: Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer in accordance with state law.
6. Continued Violation: Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Administrative Penalties:
1. Licensees: Any licensee found to have violated this chapter, or whose employee shall have violated this chapter, shall be charged a minimum
administrative fine of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for a first violation of this chapter; two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second offense at the same
licensed premises within a twenty four (24) month period; and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a third or subsequent offense at the same
location within a twenty four (24) month period. In addition, after the second or subsequent offenses, the license shall be suspended for a length of
time determined by city council; not less than one day for the second offense and not less than seven (7) consecutive days for the third and
subsequent offenses within a twenty four (24) month period.
2. Other Individuals: Other individuals, other than minors regulated by subsection C3 of this section, found to be in violation of this chapter shall be
charged an administrative fine of fifty dollars ($50.00).
3. Minors: Minors found in unlawful possession of or who unlawfully purchases or attempts to purchase, tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related
devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices, shall be subject to an administrative fine, or may be subject to tobacco related education classes,
diversion programs, community services, or another penalty that the city believes will be appropriate and effective. The administrative fine or other
penalty shall be established by city council resolution upon the city council's consultation with interested parties of the courts, educators, parents and
children to determine an appropriate penalty for minors in the city. This administrative fine or other penalty may also be established by the schedule
of fees, as it may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 2015-08, 11-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
Title 4
STREETS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
Chapter 1
WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS
ARTICLE A. SYSTEM REGULATION AND USE
4-1A-1: UTILITY ESTABLISHED, ADMINISTRATION:
A. Operation And Administration: The Municipal water and sewer systems shall be operated as a public utility and convenience from which revenue will be
derived, subject to the provisions of this Article.
The general operation and administration of the water and sewer systems shall be under the direction and control of the Utilities Commission1.
B. Liability And Responsibility:
1. City Liability Limited: The City shall not be held liable at any time for any deficiency or failure in the supply of water or to provide sewer service to the
customer whether the same be occasioned by shutting off the water for repairs or connections or any cause whatever.
2. User Liability Established: After the initial connection has been made, the applicant, owner, occupant or user of such premises shall be liable for all
repairs (including frozen water lines) required to any water line from the curb stop to the premises or sewer line from the main to the premises. It
shall be the responsibility of the applicant, owner, occupant or user to maintain the stop box at such height as will ensure that it remains above the
finished grade of the land or property.
C. Implied Consent To Regulations: Every person applying for water or sewer service, every owner of property of which any such application is made,
every person accepting water or sewer service and every owner of property where such service is accepted subsequent to the passage of this Article
shall be deemed, upon making such application or accepting such service, to consent to all rules, regulations and rates as established by this Article
and as may hereafter be set forth and adopted by the Council by resolution or ordinance.
D. Right Of Entry: The City shall, by any authorized employee or agent, have the right to enter and be admitted to any lands and property in the City for the
purpose of inspection of materials, plumbing work and fixtures of all kinds used by or in connection with the water and sewer system. (Ord. XI.19, 11-
19-1996)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 55/324
4-1A-2: BILLING REGULATIONS:
The Utilities Commission shall have the authority to prescribe by resolution the date of billing and such further rules and regulations relative to the use and
operation of such system as it may deem necessary from time to time.
A. The Utilities Commission may provide a system of water meter reading by postcard, meter man, or any other method deemed suitable to the purpose
by the Commission. The Commission may also establish billing areas or districts and provide for the reading of meters and billing charges by calendar
quarters or monthly quarters or such periodic intervals as the Commission shall determine suitable and necessary from time to time.
B. In the event a water or sewer bill, whether incurred prior or subsequent to the passage of this Article, is unpaid at the end of the calendar quarter or the
billing period under which the billing is sent out, the bill shall be considered delinquent and the service may be discontinued as previously provided or
the City Council may cause the charges noted in such billing to become a lien against the property served by certifying to the county auditor the
amount of said delinquent bill in accordance with the statutes of the state2. (Ord. XI.19, 11-19-1996)
4-1A-3: USE RESTRICTIONS:
A. Leak In Lines To Be Reported: Any owner, occupant or user of a premises who shall discover a leak in a water service line to the premises shall notify
the city within twenty four (24) hours. Any water wasted due to failure of such person to comply with this regulation shall be estimated by the city and
be charged for against the owner at such premises at the established rate. (Ord. XI.19, 11-19-1996)
B. Sprinkling And Other Limitations: In order to conserve the city's potable water supply, each water customer is required to comply with the following
restrictions between May 1 and August 31 in any calendar year:
1. Daily Schedule: On odd numbered days of the month, only odd numbered addresses shall water lawns or landscaping, and on even numbered days,
only even numbered addresses shall water lawns or landscaping.
2. Hours: No watering of lawns or landscaping is permitted between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on any day.
3. Exceptions:
a. The limitations of subsections B1 and B2 of this section do not apply to the watering of lawns or landscaping for the first thirty (30) days after
establishment or planting of such lawn or landscaping.
b. The limitation of subsection B1 of this section does not apply to the watering of lawns or landscaping of public parks and public property by the
city, provided the city waters no more frequently than every other day. (Ord. XI.28, 8-21-2007)
C. Water For Air Conditioning: All air conditioning systems which are connected directly or indirectly with the public water system must be equipped with
water conserving and water regulating devices as approved by the utilities commission. Permits shall be required for the installation of all new air
conditioning systems to the public water system. Said permit shall be on forms as provided by the city.
D. Use Confined To Premises: No person shall permit water from the water system to be used for any purpose except his own premises unless written
consent is obtained from the public works director. (Ord. XI.19, 11-19-1996)
4-1A-4: PRIVATE SYSTEMS RESTRICTED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to install a private water or sewer system in the city except in such cases as the public water or sewer system is not
accessible to the premises where such private systems are requested. To determine whether or not such public water system is accessible to the
premises, the property owner or his agent must first make application for connection to a public system. Upon determination by the public works
director that it is not feasible to connect the applicant's premises to the public water or sewer system, the applicant shall be granted a permit to install a
private water or sewer system, upon compliance with the conditions in subsection D of this section.
B. Whenever any premises with an existing private water system is connected to the municipal water system, there shall be maintained a complete
physical separation between the municipal water supply system and the private water supply system so that it is impossible to intentionally or
unintentionally allow any water produced by a private system to be introduced into the city system.
C. If the private well is not continued in use at the time a municipal water connection is made, the following shall be completed:
1. The well pump and tank shall be disconnected from all internal house piping.
2. The well casing shall be filled, plugged and cut off according to the most recent rules and specifications of the Minnesota department of health, the
Dakota County environmental department and the building code.
D. All private sewer systems shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of title 9 chapter 6 of this code. (Ord. XI.19, 11-19-1996)
4-1A-5: WASTE RESTRICTIONS:
A. Prohibited Wastes: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to discharge any of the following described waters or wastes into the municipal
sanitary sewer system:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 56/324
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150F).
2. Any water or waste containing more than one hundred (100) parts per million by weight of fat, oil or grease.
3. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other inflammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
4. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
5. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, plastic, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or viscous substance
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage system.
6. Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process or
which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals or creates any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
7. Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such
materials at the sewer treatment plant.
8. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance.
9. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the building official, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any inflammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall
not be required for private dwelling units which discharge only normal wastes therefrom. Such grease and oil interceptors shall be of substantial
construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. All grease, oil and
sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.
B. Surface Water Discharge Prohibited: No person shall cause to be discharged into the municipal sewer system, either directly or indirectly, any roof,
storm, surface or ground water of any type or kind, or water discharged from any air conditioning unit or system.
C. Industrial Waste Restricted3: It shall be unlawful to discharge into the municipal sanitary sewer system any industrial wastes unless the prior approval of
the utilities commission is obtained. (Ord. XI.19, 11-19-1996)
4-1A-6: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
A. Discontinuance Of Service: Water service may be shut off at any stop box connection whenever:
1. The owner or occupant of the premises, or any person working on any pipes or requirement thereon has violated or threatens toviolate any of the
provisions of this article.
2. Any charge for water or sewer service or any other financial obligations imposed on the present or former owner or occupant of the premises served
is unpaid.
3. Fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or occupant of the premises served in connection with any application for service. (Ord. XI.19, 11-19-1996)
B. Penalty: Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished
as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
C. Additional Penalties; Appeal: In addition to any other penalty or sanction provided for in this article, the city council may, by resolution, set penalties for
violations of this article. Such penalties shall be billed to the customer and collected as a part of the water bill. A customer may appeal the imposition of
such a penalty to the public utilities commission by serving a written notice of appeal on the city administrator or city clerk within ten (10) days of receipt
of notice from the city that it is imposing a penalty. Such notice shall be in writing and shall state the grounds or basis for objecting to the imposition of
the charge or penalty. No penalty that has been appealed will be levied or collected until the customer has been given an opportunity for a hearing
before the commission. (Ord. XI.24, 2-3-2004)
ARTICLE B. CONNECTIONS
4-1B-1: INSTALLATION AND PIPING REQUIREMENTS:
A. All connections to the water or sewer systems shall be performed by a plumber licensed by the state. All water and sewer piping and appurtenances
installed in the city shall meet the requirements of the most recent adopted provisions of the Minnesota state plumbing code, unless otherwise specified
in this article.
B. All applications for water, sewer and storm sewer service installations shall be made by the owner or agent of the property to be served and shall state
the size and location of service connection required, and the applicant shall, at the time of making application, pay to the city the amount of fees,
assessments or deposits required. All installations shall meet the requirements of the most recently adopted provisions of the Minnesota state plumbing
code, the standard utilities specifications of the City Engineers Association of Minnesota and the city of Rosemount standard specifications.
C. The municipal water system shall be fully and continuously protected from contamination or possible water backflow in accordance with the most
recently adopted provisions of the Minnesota state plumbing code in all private or public buildings.
D. All water service pipes connected to the municipal system shall be a minimum of one inch (1") inside diameter in accordance with the most recently
adopted specifications of the Minnesota state plumbing code. (Ord. XI.19, 11-19-1996)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 57/324
4-1B-2: WATER METERS:
Before any water conveyed through the city water system shall be used or utilized on the land or premises of any person, there shall first be installed a
water meter that will accuratelymeasure the water consumed on the premises.
A. All meters for any use shall be furnished by the city. The city shall charge the cost of the meter and automatic meter reading equipment to the applicant
on the building permit. This cost shall be set and amended by city council resolution as is deemed necessary by the council.
B. Said meters shall be repaired from time to time as is necessary to ensure accurate measuring of the flow of water; except that whenever a meter has
been damaged due to negligence on the part of persons other than the employees of the city, the owner, occupant or user of the premises or such
other persons desiring the use of the water shall reimburse the city for expense of repairing any such meter. Upon failure to reimburse the city within a
reasonable time and upon demand therefor, the expenses incurred and billed will be placed on the property taxes during the semiannual delinquent
water bill certification.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, alter, bypass, or in any manner whatsoever interfere with the proper use and functioning of water
meters within the city.
D. All water meters shall be and remain the property of the city.
E. Installation of the horn, raising the curb box to finished grade, and flushing of the lines shall be the responsibility of a plumber duly licensed and
registered according to the Minnesota state plumbing code rules. Plumber shall set the meter as follows:
1. Location: Meter settings shall be located in the utility, laundry or furnace room and in every case shall be located no more than eight feet (8') from the
nearest floor drain on the same floor level.
2. Installation: The setting shall be installed to provide that the meter be between six inches (6") and twelve inches (12") from a wall and between
eighteen inches (18") and thirty six inches (36") from the finished floor, and shall be rigidly supported with a permanent support. The water meter
shall be readily accessible with a minimum clear space of two feet (2') in all other directions. This water meter shall be a sensus ECR and measure in
one thousand (1,000) gallons.
3. Valves: Each meter setting shall be provided with an approved valve on the street side and the house side of the meter. Such valves shall be well
protected from freezing.
4. Meter Horns: Meter setting devices (meter horns) shall be used for installation of one inch (1") or smaller meters.
5. Vertical Piping: All vertical piping extending from the water meter up to the horizontal run shall be no smaller than one inch (1").
6. Meter Transceiver Units (MXU): Meter transceiver units shall be securely installed, by the plumber, on the water pipe or wall at least five feet (5')
above the floor. All wires shall be secured by use of wire ties or clips.
7. Effective Date: This subsection E shall apply to all plumbing or building permits applied for on or after May 1, 2001, and all replacement or relocation
of water meters.
F. If a meter fails to register or accurately measure the water, the charge for water consumed shall be paid for at the established rate based upon past
average billings as determined by the city. (Ord. XI.22, 4-17-2001)
4-1B-3: TAPPING OF MAINS PROHIBITED:
No person except persons employed by the city shall tap any distributing main or pipe of the water supply or insert stopcocks or ferrules therein, unless
otherwise authorized by the city. (Ord. XI.19, 11-19-1996)
4-1B-4: SUPPLY FROM ONE SERVICE:
No more than one housing unit or building shall be supplied from one service connection except by special permission of the utilities commission. (Ord.
XI.19, 11-19-1996)
4-1B-5: WATER STOP BOX LOCATION:
Water curb stop boxes will be installed at a point on the property line most suitable to the property and shall be left in an accurate vertical position when
backfilling is completed. A minimum eight inch (8") concrete block shall be placed under each curb stop.
Before any grading or excavation is started, the water shutoff box shall be located and checked for damage by the contractor. If available, location ties will
be furnished by the public works department at time connection permit is issued. If the shutoff box cannot be located or is found bent or in a damaged
condition, the public works director is to be called at once. The contractor assumes all responsibility for damage to the curb box. (Ord. XI.19, 11-19-1996)
4-1B-6: WATER TURN ON:
No person, except an authorized city employee, shall turn on or off any water supply at a curb stop, gate valve or fire hydrant without permission from the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 58/324
public works director. (Ord. XI.19, 11-19-1996)
4-1B-7: ABANDONED SERVICES:
All service installations that have been abandoned or have not been used for three (3) years shall be disconnected at the main by the city and all pipe and
appurtenances removed shall become the property of the city, and any expenses of the city shall be charged to the property. When new buildings are
erected on the site of old ones, and it is desired to increase or change the old water or sewer service, no connections with the mains shall be made until all
the old services shall have been removed and the main plugged by the city, and any expense of the city shall be charged to the property. (Ord. XI.19, 11-
19-1996)
4-1B-8: FIRE HYDRANTS:
All fire hydrants shall be inspected periodically by the public works department whether on private or public property to ensure that they are in good
working order. The owners of privately owned hydrants that require repair shall be notified immediately and shall repair the hydrants within five (5) working
days. (Ord. XI.19, 11-19-1996)
4-1B-9: WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES:
The council may impose, by resolution, just and equitable charges for connection with sewer and water facilities. Such charges may be fixed by reference
to the portion of the cost of connection that has been paid by assessment of the premises to be connected, in comparison with other premises, as well as
the cost of making or supervising the connection. (Ord. XI.26, 5-2-2006)
4-1B-10: CONNECTION TO MUNICIPAL SYSTEM REQUIRED:
All buildings used for human habitation must connect to the municipal sewer and water system within ten (10) years from the time the municipal system is
accessible to the property upon which the building is located, or when the city determines that the private system servicing the property has failed,
whichever is earlier. (Ord. XI.27, 7-11-2006)
ARTICLE C. INDUSTRIAL WASTE CHARGE
4-1C-1: CHARGE ESTABLISHED:
A. State Law Applied: The Metropolitan Waste Control Commission, a metropolitan commission organized and existing under the laws of the State of
Minnesota (the "Commission"), in order to receive and retain grants in compliance with the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972
and regulations thereunder (the "Act"), has determined to impose an industrial user sewer strength charge upon users of the Metropolitan Disposal
System (as defined in Minnesota Statutes, section 473.121, subsection 24) to recover operation and maintenance costs of treatment works attributable
to the strength of the discharge of industrial waste, such sewer strength charge being in addition to the charge based upon the volume of discharge. In
order for the City to pay such costs based upon strength of industrial discharge and allocated to it each year by the Commission, it is hereby found,
determined and declared to be necessary to establish sewer strength charges and a formula for the computation thereof for all industrial users
receiving waste treatment services within or served by the City. Furthermore, Minnesota Statutes, section 444.075, subsection 3, empowers the City to
make such sewer charge a charge against the owner, lessee, occupant or all of them and certify unpaid charges to the County Auditor as a tax lien
against the property served.
B. Strength Charge Established: For the purpose of paying the costs allocated to the City each year by the Commission that are based upon the strength
of discharge of all industrial users receiving waste treatment services within or served by the City, there is hereby approved, adopted and established,
in addition to the sewer charge based upon the volume of discharge, a sewer charge upon each person receiving waste treatment services within or
served by the City, based upon strength of industrial waste discharged into the sewer system of the City (the "Strength Charge").
4-1C-2: STRENGTH CHARGE FORMULA:
For the purpose of computation of the strength charge established by subsection 4-1C-1B hereof, there is hereby established, approved and adopted in
compliance with the Act the same strengthcharge formula designated herein by the governing body of the Commission on June 15, 1976, such formula
being based upon pollution qualities and difficulty of disposal of the sewage produced through an evaluation of pollution qualities and quantities in excess
of an annual average base and the proportionate costs of operation and maintenance of waste treatment services provided by the Commission: (Ord. XI.9,
4-18-78)
A. The Metropolitan Waste Control Commission strength charge system as recommended by the Hearing Officer and determined annually by application
of (a) plant unit process evaluations, (b) current quality control data, and (c) current budgeted operation and maintenance costs for the treatment
facilities.
B. The basic strength charge system formula is as follows:
1. Strength Charge Formula:
SCF = SR [Rss (SS-SSo) + Rcod (COD-CODo)]
SSo CODo
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 59/324
Where:
SCF = Strength Charge Factor
SR =Strength Phase Ratio (strength costs to system costs for administrative and O & M of treatment works)
Rss = Suspended Solids Cost Ratio
Rcod = Chemical Oxygen Demand Cost Ratio
SS = Suspended Solids Concentration of Discharge (SS>SSo)
SSo = Suspended Solids Concentration of Base
COD =Chemical Oxygen Demand Concentration of Discharge (COD>CODo)
CODo = Chemical Oxygen Demand Concentration of Base
2. Strength Charge:
SC = (SCF)(V)(TW)
Where:
SC = Strength Charge
SCF = Strength Charge Factor
V = Volume of Discharge
TW = Treatment Works Unit Cost
(Res. 76-172, 6-15-76)
4-1C-3: STRENGTH CHARGE PAYMENT:
It is hereby approved, adopted and established that the strength charge established by subsection 4-1C-1B hereof shall be paid by each industrial user
receiving waste treatment services and subject thereto before the twentieth day next succeeding the date of billing thereof to such user by or on behalf of
the City, and such payment thereof shall be deemed to be delinquent if not so paid to the billing entity before such date. Furthermore, it is hereby
established, approved and adopted that if such payment is not paid before such date, an industrial user shall pay interest compounded monthly at the rate
of two-thirds of one percent (2/3%) per month on the unpaid balance due.
4-1C-4: TAX LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT:
As provided by Minnesota Statutes, section 444.075, subsection 3, it is hereby approved, adopted and established that if payment of the strength charge
established by subsection 4-1C-1B hereof is not paid before the sixtieth day next succeeding the date of billing thereof to the industrial user by or on behalf
of the City, said delinquent sewer strength charge, plus accrued interest established pursuant to Section 4-1C-3 hereof, shall be deemed to be a charge
against the owner, lessee and occupant of the property served, and the City or its agent shall certify such unpaid delinquent balance to the County Auditor
with taxes against the property served for collection as other taxes are collected; provided, however, that such certification shall not preclude the City or its
agents from recovery of such delinquent sewer strength charge and interest thereon under any other available remedy. (Ord. XI.9, 4-18-78)
Chapter 2
RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
4-2-1: FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND INTENT:
To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, and to ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-way, the City
strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances.
Accordingly, the City hereby enacts this chapter relating to right-of-way permits and administration. This chapter imposes reasonable regulation on the
placement and maintenance of facilities and equipment currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future time. It is intended to
complement the regulatory roles of State and Federal agencies. Under this chapter, persons excavating and obstructing the rights-of-way will bear
financial responsibility for their work. Finally, this chapter provides for recovery of out of pocket and projected costs from persons using the public rights-ofway.
This chapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 Session Laws, chapter 123, substantially codified in Minnesota Statutes, sections 237.16, 237.162,
237.163, 237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the "Act") and 2017 Session Laws, chapter 94 amending the Act and the other laws governing applicable rights of
the City and users of the right-of-way. This chapter shall also be interpreted consistent with Minnesota Rules 7819.0050 through 7819.9950 where
possible. To the extent any provision of this chapter cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minnesota Rules, that interpretation most consistent with
the Act and other applicable statutory and case law is intended. This chapter shall not be interpreted to limit the regulatory and police powers of the City to
adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-2: ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 60/324
Pursuant to the authority granted to the City under State and Federal statutory, administrative and common law, the City hereby elects, pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes 237.163, subdivision 2(b), to manage rights-of-way within its jurisdiction. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions apply in this chapter. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this chapter.
Defined terms remain defined terms, whether or not capitalized.
ABANDONED FACILITY: A facility no longer in service or physically disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other facility, that is in
use or still carries service. A facility is not abandoned unless declared so by the right-of-way user.
APPLICANT: Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way.
CITY: The City of Rosemount, Minnesota. For purposes of section 4-2-27 of this chapter, "City" means its elected officials, officers, employees and agents.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an
existing wireless support structure or utility pole that is owned privately, or by the City or other governmental unit.
COMMISSION: The State Public Utilities Commission.
CONGESTED RIGHT-OF-WAY: A crowded condition in the subsurface of the public right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between
existing underground facilities does not allow for construction of new underground facilities in conformance with Minnesota Statutes, section 216D.04,
subdivision 3, over a continuous length in excess of five hundred feet (500') without using hand digging to expose the existing lateral facilities.
CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND: Any of the following forms of security provided at permittee's option:
A. Individual project bond;
B. Cash deposit;
C. Security of a form listed or approved under Minnesota Statutes, section 15.73, subdivision 3;
D. Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the City;
E. Self-bond, in a form acceptable to the City;
F. A blanket bond for projects within the City, or other form of construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to the City.
G. A permittee may submit a single bond covering all projects done by that company.
DEGRADATION: A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation or disturbance did not occur.
DEGRADATION COST: Subject to Minnesota Rules 7819.1100, means the cost to achieve a level of restoration, as determined by the City at the time the
permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to 13, set forth in Minnesota Rules parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.
DEGRADATION FEE: The estimated fee established at the time of permitting by the City to recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful life of
the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation cost.
DELAY PENALTY: The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as established
by permit.
DEPARTMENT: The Department of Public Works of the City.
DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR: Any person authorized by the City to carry out inspections related to the provisions of this chapter.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Department of Public Works of the City, or her or his designee.
EMERGENCY: A condition that: a) poses a danger to life or health or of a significant loss of property; or b) requires immediate repair or replacement of
facilities in order to restore service to a customer.
EQUIPMENT: Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain facilities in any right-of-way.
EXCAVATE: To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or penetrate any part of a right-of-way.
EXCAVATION PERMIT: The permit that, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An excavation permit
allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit.
EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE: Money paid to the City by an applicant to cover the costs as provided in section 4-2-11 of this chapter.
FACILITY OR FACILITIES: Any tangible asset in the right-of-way required to provide utility service.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 61/324
FIVE YEAR PROJECT PLAN: Shows projects adopted by the City for construction within the next five (5) years.
HIGH DENSITY CORRIDOR: A designated portion of the public right-of-way within which telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and
competing facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a common conduit system or other common structure.
HOLE: An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length less than the width of the pavement.
LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE: A local person or persons, or designee of such person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make
decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this chapter.
MANAGEMENT COSTS: The actual costs the City incurs in managing its rights-of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with
registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way or small wireless facility permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration
projects; maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during right-of-way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration;
restoring work inadequately performed after providing notice and the opportunity to correct the work; and revoking right-of-way or small wireless facility
permits. Management costs do not include payment by a telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the right-of-way; unreasonable fees of a
third-party contractor used by the City including fees tied to or based on customer counts, access lines, or revenues generated by the right-of-way or for
the City; the fees and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation of Minnesota Session Laws 1997, chapter 123, Minnesota Statutes, section 237.162 or
237.163, or any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the City fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to section 4-2-29 of this chapter.
OBSTRUCT: To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
OBSTRUCTION PERMIT: The permit that, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that right-of-way, for the duration specified therein.
OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE: Money paid to the City by a permittee to cover the costs as provided in section 4-2-11 of this chapter.
PATCH OR PATCHING: A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in nature. A patch consists of: a) the compaction of the subbase and
aggregate base, and b) the replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum of two feet (2') beyond the edges of the excavation in all
directions. A patch is considered full restoration only when the pavement is included in the City's five year project plan.
PAVEMENT: Any type of improved surface that is within the public right-of-way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete,
aggregate, or gravel.
PERMIT: Has the meaning given "right-of-way permit" in Minnesota Statutes, section 237.162.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way has been granted by the City under this chapter.
PERSON: An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this State, however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or foreign,
whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate, or political.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY OR RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane or public sidewalk in
which the City has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and utility easements of the City. A right-of-way does not include
the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other nonwire telecommunications or broadcast service.
REGISTRANT: Any person who: a) has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities located in any right-of-way, or b) in any way occupies or uses, or seeks
to occupy or use, the right-of-way or place its facilities or equipment in the right-of-way.
RESTORATION COST: The amount of money paid to the City by a permittee to achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of Minnesota
Public Utilities Commission Rules.
RESTORE OR RESTORATION: The process by which an excavated right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to
the same condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation.
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT: Either the excavation permit or the obstruction permit, or both, depending on the context, required by this chapter.
RIGHT-OF-WAY USER: A. A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by Minnesota Statutes, section 237.162, subdivision 4; or
B. A person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that is used or intended to be used for providing utility service, and who has a right under
law, franchise, or ordinance to use the public right-of-way.
SERVICE LATERAL: An underground facility that is used to transmit, distribute, or furnish gas, electricity, communications, or water from a common
source to an end use customer. A service lateral is also an underground facility that is used in the removal of wastewater from a customer's premises.
SERVICE OR UTILITY SERVICE: Includes: a) those services provided by a public utility as defined in Minnesota Statutes 216B.02, subdivisions 4 and 6;
b) services of a telecommunications right-of-way user, including transporting of voice or data information; c) services of a cable communications systems
as defined in Minnesota Statutes, chapter 238; d) natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications services provided by the City; e) services provided
by a cooperative electric association organized under Minnesota Statutes, chapter 308A; and f) water, and sewer, including service laterals, steam, cooling
or heating services.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications:
A. Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or could fit within such an enclosure; and
B. All other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility provided such equipment is, in aggregate, no more than twenty eight (28)
cubic feet in volume, not including electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems,
grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services,
and any equipment concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or concealment.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 62/324
SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION: An application made to excavate or obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had
already been issued.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY USER: A person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the
right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be used for providing wireless service, or transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information. For
purposes of this chapter, a cable communication system defined and regulated under Minnesota Statutes, chapter 238, and telecommunication activities
related to providing natural gas or electric energy services, a public utility as defined in Minnesota Statutes, section 216B.02, a municipality, a Municipal
gas or power agency organized under Minnesota Statutes, chapters 453 and 453A, or a cooperative electric association organized under Minnesota
Statutes, chapter 308A, are not telecommunications right-of-way users for purposes of this chapter except to the extent such entity is offering wireless
service.
TEMPORARY SURFACE: The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of pavement included in the City's two year plan, in which case it is considered full
restoration.
TRENCH: An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length equal to or greater than the width of the pavement.
TWO YEAR PROJECT PLAN: Shows projects adopted by the City for construction within the next two (2) years.
UTILITY POLE: A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate telecommunications or electric service.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision of wireless services between user equipment and a wireless service
network. Specific examples include equipment associated with wireless service, a radio transceiver, antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and
backup power supplies, and a small wireless facility, but not including wireless support structures, wireline backhaul facilities, or cables between utility
poles or wireless support structures, or not otherwise immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a specific antenna.
WIRELESS SERVICE: Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or by means of a
mobile device, that is provided using wireless facilities. Wireless service does not include services regulated under title VI of the Communications Act of
1934, as amended, including cable service.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A new or existing structure in a right-of-way designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities,
as reasonably determined by the City. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-4: ADMINISTRATION:
The City Engineer is the principal City official responsible for the administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances related
thereto. The City Engineer may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-5: REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY:
A. Registration: Each person who occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in or on the right-ofway,
including persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by lease, sublease or assignment, must register with the City. Registration will
consist of providing application information and paying a registration fee.
B. Registration Prior To Work: No person may construct, install, repair, remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or any part
thereof, in any right-of-way without first being registered with the City.
C. Exceptions: Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the provisions of a City ordinance permitting persons to plant or maintain boulevard
plantings or gardens in the area of the right-of-way between their property and the street curb. Persons planting or maintaining boulevard plantings or
gardens shall not be deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way, and shall not be required to obtain any permits or satisfy any other requirements for
planting or maintaining such boulevard plantings or gardens under this chapter. However, nothing herein relieves a person from complying with the
provisions of the Minnesota Statutes, chapter 216D, Gopher One Call Law or other provisions of this Code. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-6: REGISTRATION INFORMATION:
A. Information Required: The information provided to the City at the time of registration shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Each registrant's name, Gopher One Call registration certificate number, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers.
2. The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be available in person or by telephone at all times. Current information regarding how to contact the local representative in an
emergency shall be provided at the time of registration.
3. A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
a. Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Minnesota, or
a form of self-insurance acceptable to the City;
b. Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising out of the:
1) use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees, and 2) placement and use of facilities
and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees; including, but not limited to, protection against
liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground facilities and collapse of property;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 63/324
c. Naming the City as an additional insured as to whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be
provided as to all such coverages;
d. Requiring that the City be notified thirty (30) days in advance of cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term; and
e. Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability coverage, workers' compensation and umbrella coverage established by the City in
amounts sufficient to protect the City and the public and to carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter.
f. The City may require a copy of the actual insurance policies.
g. If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate is required to be filed under Minnesota Statutes as recorded and certified to by the Secretary
of State.
h. A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other authorization or approval
from the applicable State or Federal agency to lawfully operate, where the person is lawfully required to have such authorization or approval from
said commission or other State or Federal agency.
4. An updated and current plat or drawing showing the location of all existing underground utilities and appurtenances located within State highways,
County roads, City streets, alleys, public grounds and easements.
B. Notice Of Changes: The registrant shall keep all of the information listed above current at all times by providing to the City information as to changes
within fifteen (15) days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge of any change. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-7: REPORTING OBLIGATIONS:
A. Operations: Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by March 1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan for
underground facilities with the City. Such plan shall be submitted using a format designated by the City and shall contain the information determined by
the City to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way.
The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
1. The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (in this section, a "next
year project"); and
2. To the extent known, the tentative locations and estimated beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the five (5) years following
the next calendar year (in this section, a "5 year project").
The term "project" in this section shall include both next year projects and five (5) year projects.
By March 1 of each year, the City will have available for inspection in the City's office a composite list of all projects of which the City has been
informed of the annual plans. All registrants are responsible for keeping themselves informed of the current status of this list.
Thereafter, by March 1, each registrant may change any project in its list of next year projects, and must notify the City and all other registrants of all
such changes in said list. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a next year project of another registrant listed by the
other registrant.
B. Additional Next Year Projects: Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure to include a project
in a plan submitted to the City if the registrant has used commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-
2017)
4-2-8: PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
A. Permit Required: Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way, or install or place facilities in the
right-of-way, without first having obtained the appropriate right-of-way permit from the City to do so.
1. Excavation Permit: An excavation permit is required by a registrant to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to hinder
free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified
therein.
2. Obstruction Permit: An obstruction permit is required by a registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-of-way by
placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if a
person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project.
3. Small Wireless Facility Permit: A small wireless facility permit is required by a registrant to erect or install a wireless support structure, to collocate a
small wireless facility, or to otherwise install a small wireless facility in the specified portion of the right-of-way, to the extent specified therein,
provided that such permit shall remain in effect for the length of time the facility is in use, unless lawfully revoked.
B. Permit Extensions: No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless: 1) such person makes
a supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit, and 2) a new permit or permit extension is
granted.
C. Delay Penalty: In accordance with Minnesota Rule 7819.1000, subdivision 3 and notwithstanding subsection B of this section, the City shall establish
and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration. The delay penalty shall be
established from time to time by City Council resolution.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 64/324
D. Permit Display: Permits issued under this chapter shall be conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated work site and
shall be available for inspection by the City. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-9: PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
Application for a permit is made to the City. The City requires a digital image file (pdf, jpg, etc.) and three (3) hard copies of the plan for the permit. Rightof-
way permit applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon compliance with, the requirements of the following provisions:
A. Registration with the City pursuant to this chapter.
B. Submission of a completed permit application form, including all required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed facilities.
C. Payment of money due the City for:
1. Permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management costs;
2. Prior obstructions or excavations;
3. Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the City because of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way or any
emergency actions taken by the City;
4. Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.
D. Payment of disputed amounts due the City by posting security or depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least one hundred ten percent
(110%) of the amount disputed.
E. Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for additional facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to install additional
facilities and the City deems the existing construction performance bond inadequate under applicable standards. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-10: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS:
A. Permit Issuance: If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this chapter, the City shall issue a permit.
B. Conditions: The City may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the
health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use.
C. Small Wireless Facility Conditions: In addition to subsection B of this section, the erection or installation of a wireless support structure, the collocation
of a small wireless facility, or other installation of a small wireless facility in the right-of-way, shall be subject to the following conditions:
1. A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the particular wireless support structure, under those attachment specifications, and at the height
indicated in the applicable permit application.
2. No new wireless support structure installed within the right-of-way shall exceed fifty feet (50') in height without the City's written authorization,
provided that the City may impose a lower height limit in the applicable permit to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to protect the rightof-
way and its current use, and further provided that a registrant may replace an existing wireless support structure exceeding fifty feet (50') in height
with a structure of the same height subject to such conditions or requirements as may be imposed in the applicable permit.
3. No wireless facility may extend more than ten feet (10') above its wireless support structure.
4. No wireless facility may be installed on a traffic control signal.
5. Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support structure in the right-of-way, said structure may not be located closer than five
hundred feet (500') to an existing wireless support structure or other facilities in and around the right-of-way. A lesser distance may be approved by
the City upon demonstration of the need for an additional facility due to a coverage/capacity issue.
6. Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative wireless support structure, sign or other structure not intended to support small wireless
facilities, the City may impose reasonable requirements to accommodate the particular design, appearance or intended purpose of such structure.
7. Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support structure, the City may impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or relocation
requirements on the replacement of such structure.
D. Small Wireless Facility Agreement: A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on a small wireless support structure owned or controlled by the
City, or any other City asset in the right-of-way, after the applicant has executed a standard small wireless facility collocation agreement with the City.
The standard collocation agreement may require payment of the following:
1. Up to one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year for rent to collocate on the City structure;
2. Twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year for maintenance associated with the collocation;
3. A monthly fee for electrical service as follows:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 65/324
a. Seventy three dollars ($73.00) per radio node less than or equal to one hundred (100) maximum watts;
b. One hundred eighty two dollars ($182.00) per radio node over one hundred (100) maximum watts; or
c. The actual costs of electricity, if the actual costs exceed the foregoing.
The standard collocation agreement shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the required small wireless facility permit, provided, however, that the
applicant shall not be additionally required to obtain a license or franchise in order to collocate. Issuance of a small wireless facility permit does not
supersede, alter or affect any then-existing agreement between the City and applicant. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-10-1: ACTION ON SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
A. Deadline For Action: The City shall approve or deny a small wireless facility permit application within ninety (90) days after filing of such application. The
small wireless facility permit, and any associated building permit application, shall be deemed approved if the City fails to approve or deny the
application within the review periods established in this section.
B. Consolidated Applications: An applicant may file a consolidated small wireless facility permit application addressing the proposed collocation of up to
fifteen (15) small wireless facilities, or a greater number if agreed to by a local government unit, provided that all small wireless facilities in the
application:
1. Are located within a two-mile radius;
2. Consist of substantially similar equipment; and
3. Are to be placed on similar types of wireless support structures.
In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the City may approve some small wireless facilities and deny others, but may not use
denial of one or more permits as a basis to deny all small wireless facilities in the application.
C. Tolling Of Deadline: The 90-day deadline for action on a small wireless facility permit application may be tolled if:
1. The City receives applications from one or more applicants seeking approval of permits for more than thirty (30) small wireless facilities within a
seven-day period. In such case, the City may extend the deadline for all such applications by thirty (30) days by informing the affected applicants in
writing of such extension.
2. The applicant fails to submit all required documents or information and the City provides written notice of incompleteness to the applicant within thirty
(30) days of receipt of the application. Upon submission of additional documents or information, the City shall have ten (10) days to notify the
applicant in writing of any still-missing information.
3. The City and a small wireless facility applicant agree in writing to toll the review period. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-11: PERMIT FEES:
A. Excavation Permit Fee: The City shall impose an excavation permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
1. The City management costs;
2. Degradation costs, if applicable.
B. Obstruction Permit Fee: The City shall impose an obstruction permit fee and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the City management costs.
C. Small Wireless Facility Permit Fee: The City shall impose a small wireless facility permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover:
1. Management costs, and;
2. City engineering, make-ready, and construction costs associated with collocation of small wireless facilities.
D. Payment Of Permit Fees: No excavation permit or obstruction permit shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The City
may allow applicant to pay such fees within thirty (30) days of billing.
E. Nonrefundable: Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the City has revoked for a breach as stated in section 4-2-21 of this chapter are not
refundable.
F. Application To Franchises: Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise, management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the
franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.
G. Fee Resolution: Fees will be set from time to time by resolution by City Council. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-12: PATCHING AND RESTORATION:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 66/324
A. Timing: The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be completed
within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under section 4-2-15 of this chapter or if the permittee is granted a new permit
or extension.
B. Patch And Restoration: Permittee shall patch its own work. The City may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or to restore the
right-of-way itself.
1. City Restoration: If the City restores the right-of-way, permittee shall pay the costs thereof within thirty (30) days of billing. If, following such
restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee's improper backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the City, within thirty (30) days of billing, all costs
associated with correcting the defective work.
2. Permittee Restoration: If the permittee restores the right-of-way itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit post a construction
performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7819.3000.
3. Degradation Fee In Lieu Of Restoration: In lieu of right-of-way restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However, the rightof-
way user shall remain responsible for patching and the degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
C. Standards: The permittee shall perform excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration according to the standards and with the materials specified by
the City and shall comply with Minnesota Rule 7819.1100.
D. Duty To Correct Defects: The permittee shall correct defects in patching or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. The permittee upon
notification from the City, shall correct all restoration work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the City. Said work shall be completed
within five (5) working days of the receipt of the notice from the City (or such longer period as is specified by the City in the notice), not including days
during which work cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable under section 4-2-15 of this chapter.
E. Failure To Restore: If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the City, or fails to satisfactorily and
timely complete all restoration required by the City, the City at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to the City, within thirty
(30) days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If permittee fails to pay as required, the City may exercise its rights under the construction
performance bond. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-13: JOINT APPLICATIONS:
A. Joint Application: Registrants may jointly apply for permits to excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.
B. Shared Fees: Registrants who apply for permits for the same obstruction or excavation, which the City does not perform, may share in the payment of
the obstruction or excavation permit fee. In order to obtain a joint permit, registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay and
indicate the same on their applications.
C. With City Projects: Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction or excavation performed by the City, whether it is a joint application by two (2) or
more registrants or a single application, are not required to pay the excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee, but a permit is
still required. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-14: SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS:
A. Limitation On Area: A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside the
area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee that determines that an area greater than that specified in the permit must be
obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area: 1) make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required
thereby, and 2) be granted a new permit or permit extension.
B. Limitation On Dates: A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit start date
or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply for a
new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the
previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before the permit end date. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-15: OTHER OBLIGATIONS:
A. Compliance With Other Laws: Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and
authority and to pay all fees required by the City or other applicable rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of local, State
and Federal laws, including, but not limited to, Minnesota Statutes, section 216D.01 through .09 (Gopher One Call excavation notice system) and
Minnesota Rules chapter 7560. A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and
is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work.
B. Prohibited Work: Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the City, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally
prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 67/324
C. Interference With Right-Of-Way: A permittee shall not so obstruct a right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or
other waterways shall be interfered with. Private vehicles of those doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit area,
unless parked in conformance with City parking regulations. The loading or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area
unless specifically authorized by the permit.
D. Trenchless Excavation: As a condition of all applicable permits, permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including, but not limited to,
horizontal directional drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in Minnesota Statutes, chapter 216D and Minnesota Rules chapter 7560, and shall
require potholing or open cutting over existing underground utilities before excavating, as determined by the Director. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-16: DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. Reasons For Denial: The City may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and conditions of this chapter or if the City determines that the
denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use.
B. Procedural Requirements: The denial or revocation of a permit must be made in writing and must document the basis for the denial. The City must
notify the applicant or right-of-way user in writing within three (3) business days of the decision to deny or revoke a permit. If an application is denied,
the right-of-way user may address the reasons for denial identified by the City and resubmit its application. If the application is resubmitted within thirty
(30) days of receipt of the notice of denial, no additional application fee shall be imposed. The City must approve or deny the resubmitted application
within thirty (30) days after submission. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-17: INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS:
The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minnesota Rules
7819.1100 and 7819.5000 and other applicable local requirements, insofar as they are not inconsistent with the Minnesota Statutes, sections 237.162 and
237.163. Installation of service laterals shall be performed in accordance with Minnesota Rules chapter 7560 and this Code. Service lateral installation is
further subject to those requirements and conditions set forth by the City in the applicable permits and/or agreements referenced in subsection 4-2-22B of
this chapter. Utility companies must install dual mains in all new projects.
All traffic control will comply with the latest "Mn/DOT Field Traffic Control Manual". (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-18: INSPECTION:
A. Notice Of Completion: When the work under any permit hereunder is completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate to the City in
accordance with Minnesota Rule 7819.1300.
B. Site Inspection: Permittee shall make the work site available to the City and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times
during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
C. Authority Of Director:
1. At the time of inspection, the Director may order the immediate cessation of any work that poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety or wellbeing
of the public.
2. The Director may issue an order to the permittee for any work that does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten (10) days after
issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the Director that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented
within the required time, the Director may revoke the permit pursuant to section 4-2-21 of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-19: WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT:
A. Emergency Situations: Each registrant shall immediately notify the Director of any event regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency. The
registrant must take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. Excavators' notification to Gopher State One Call regarding an
emergency situation does not fulfill this requirement. Within two (2) business days after the occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for
the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this
chapter for the actions it took in response to the emergency. The permittee requirements shall not apply if the repair is caused by another permittee's
work in the right-of-way.
If the City becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's facilities, the City will attempt to contact the local representative of each registrant
affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the City may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency,
the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities occasioned the emergency.
B. Nonemergency Situations: Except in an emergency, any person who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a rightof-
way must subsequently obtain a permit and, as a penalty, pay double the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by this
Code, deposit with the City the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way, and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter. (Ord.
2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-20: SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 68/324
If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the City of the
accurate information as soon as this information is known. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-21: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
A. Substantial Breach: The City reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke any right-of-way permit without a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach
of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by permittee shall
include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
1. The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
2. An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon
the City or its citizens;
3. Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right-of-way permit;
4. The failure to complete the work in a timely manner, unless a permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons
beyond the permittee's control; or
5. The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to section 4-2-18 of this
chapter.
B. Written Notice Of Breach: If the City determines that the permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance,
rule, regulation or any condition of the permit, the City shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall
state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the City, at its discretion, to
place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the breach.
C. Response To Notice Of Breach: Within five (5) working days of receiving notification of the breach, permittee shall provide the City with a plan,
acceptable to the City, that will cure the breach. Permittee's failure to so contact the City, or permittee's failure to timely submit an acceptable plan, or
permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit.
D. Reimbursement Of City Costs: If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the City for the City's reasonable costs, including restoration
costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorney fees and other consultant fees incurred in connection with such revocation. (Ord. 2017-05,
11-21-2017)
4-2-22: MAPPING DATA:
A. Information Required: Each registrant and permittee shall provide mapping information required by the City in accordance with Minnesota Rules
7819.4000 and 7819.4100. Within one calendar year following completion of any work pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall provide the Director
accurate maps or drawings certifying the "as built" location of all equipment installed, owned and maintained by the permittee in both digital and hard
copy. As built drawings shall be submitted in the following forms:
1. Digital: CAD or GIS (dwg or shp).
2. Digital: Image file (pdf, jpg, etc.).
3. Hard copy.
Such maps or drawings shall include the horizontal and vertical location of all facilities and equipment and shall be provided consistent with the City's
electronic mapping system, when practical or as a condition imposed by the Director. Failure to provide maps or drawings pursuant to this subsection
shall be grounds for revoking the permit holder's registration.
B. Service Laterals: All permits issued for the installation or repair of service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minnesota Rules 7560.0150,
subpart 2, shall require the permittee's use of appropriate means of establishing the horizontal locations of installed service laterals, and the service
lateral vertical locations in those cases where the Director reasonably requires it. Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to the Director
evidence satisfactory to the Director of the installed service lateral locations. Compliance with this subsection and with applicable Gopher State One
Call Law and Minnesota Rules governing service laterals installed after December 31, 2005, shall be a condition of any City approval necessary for: 1)
payments to contractors working on a public improvement project including those under Minnesota Statutes, chapter 429, and 2) City approval of
performance under development agreements, or other subdivision or site plan approval under Minnesota Statutes, chapter 462. The Director shall
reasonably determine the appropriate method of providing such information to the City. Failure to provide prompt and accurate information on the
service laterals installed may result in the revocation of the permit issued for the work or for future permits to the offending permittee or its
subcontractors.
C. As Builts: As builts will be required in hard copy and electronically if the project permitted deviates two feet (2') or more from the original plans submitted
to the City. Failure to submit an as built will be a certification by the permittee that the project as constructed does not deviate two feet (2') or more from
the original plan submitted. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-23: LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES:
A. Compliance: Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must comply with the Act, with other applicable law, and with Minnesota Rules 7819.3100,
7819.5000 and 7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 69/324
B. Corridors: The City may assign a specific area within the right-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facility
that is or, pursuant to current technology, the City expects will someday be located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction, or other permits
issued by the City involving the installation or replacement of facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in a position at variance with the corridors established by the City shall, no later than at the time of
the next reconstruction or excavation of the area where the facilities are located, move the facilities to the assigned position within the right-of-way,
unless this requirement is waived in writing by the City for good cause shown, upon consideration of such factors as the remaining economic life of the
facilities, public safety, customer service needs and hardship to the registrant.
C. Nuisance: One year after the passage of this chapter, any unregistered facilities that are found in the right-of-way and that are required by this chapter
to be registered shall be deemed to be a nuisance. The City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to,
abating the nuisance or taking possession of the facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a usable condition.
D. Limitation Of Space: To protect health, safety, and welfare, or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the City shall have the
power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the City shall strive to the extent
possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest, the
public's needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the protection of
existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future City plans for public improvements and development projects that have been determined to be in the
public interest. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-24: PREEXCAVATION FACILITIES LOCATION:
In addition to complying with the requirements of Minnesota Statutes 216D.01 through .09 ("One Call excavation notice system") before the start date of
any right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has facilities or equipment in the area to be excavated shall mark the horizontal and the approximate
vertical placement (or assumed vertical placement if accurate data is not available) of all said facilities. Any registrant whose facilities are less than twenty
inches (20") below a concrete or asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with the excavation contractor to establish the exact location of its facilities
and the best procedure for excavation. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-25: DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES:
The provisions of Minnesota Statutes 216D shall apply to all situations involving damages to facilities during excavation operations. Each registrant shall
be responsible for the cost of repairing or the value of damage to any facilities in the right-of-way that it or its facilities damage. This provision includes
costs for damages to boulevard amenities, such as trees, landscaping, irrigation systems and invisible fences, placed by property owners. It is the
registrant's responsibility to provide immediate notice of such damages to the affected property owners. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of
repairing any damage to the facilities of another registrant caused during the City's response to an emergency occasioned by that registrant's facilities.
(Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-26: VACATION:
If the City vacates a right-of-way that contains the facilities of a registrant, the registrant's rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by Minnesota
Rules 7819.3200. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-27: INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY:
By registering with the City, or by accepting a permit under this chapter, a registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the City in accordance
with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7819.1250. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-28: ABANDONED AND UNUSED FACILITIES:
A. Discontinued Operations: A registrant who has determined to discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the City must provide information
satisfactory to the City that the registrant's obligations for its facilities in the right-of-way under this chapter have been lawfully assumed by another
registrant.
B. Removal: Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with other rightof-
way repair, excavation, or construction, unless this requirement is waived by the City. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-29: APPEAL:
A right-of-way user that: a) has been denied registration; b) has been denied a permit; c) has had a permit revoked; d) believes that the fees imposed are
not in conformity with Minnesota Statutes, section 237.163, subdivision 6; or e) disputes a determination of the Director regarding subsection 4-2-22B of
this chapter may have the denial, revocation, fee imposition, or decision reviewed, upon written request, by the City Council. The City Council shall act on
a timely written request within forty five (45) days of receipt, provided the right-of-way user has submitted its appeal with sufficient time to include the
appeal as a regular agenda item. A decision by the City Council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and supported by
written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-30: SEVERABILITY:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 70/324
If any portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. Nothing in this chapter precludes the City from
requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in addition to requirements set forth herein. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-31: WAIVER:
The City may waive any or all requirements of sections 4-2-5, 4-2-6, 4-2-7, 4-2-8, 4-2-9, 4-2-10, 4-2-11 and 4-2-22 of this chapter if compliance is not
deemed reasonably necessary in the discretion of the City Administrator or the Administrator's designee, to serve the purposes of this chapter. The
decision of the Administrator not to waive any such requirements is not subject to appeal to the City Council. Waiver of the provisions of sections 4-2-5, 4-
2-6, 4-2-7 and 4-2-22 of this chapter may be rescinded by the City Administrator at any time upon written notice to the person subject to the requirement.
(Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-32: FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
After May 27, 2005, no permits will be issued for installation of gas pipes and mains to entities that do not hold a current franchise from the City. This
prohibition does not apply to installation of gas transmission mains that are not designed, intended or used for local service or local distribution, or to
installation of gas pipes and mains to serve areas of the City to which existing gas franchisees cannot or will not extend service. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-
2017)
Chapter 3
PARKS, REGULATIONS
4-3-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulated use of and the protection of life and property in or on city parks. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given them:
CITY PARK: Any land owned by the city of Rosemount and designated as a park by the city council by separate resolution.
LIQUOR: A beverage capable of inducing intoxication, including, but not limited to, 3.2 beer, wine and wine coolers.
MOTORIZED VEHICLES: Any motor vehicle, whether designed for, used or capable of use for travel, lodging, sport, amusement or recreation, whether or
not eligible to be licensed for use upon streets or highways, including, but not limited to, automobiles, buses, trucks, tractor trailers, tractors, motorbikes,
motor scooters, minibikes, trail bikes, motorcycles, go-karts, hovercrafts, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles or dune buggies. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-3: PARK HOURS:
A. Closing Hours: Except as otherwise provided, parks shall be closed between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the
following day, and no person shall be upon city park property during these hours.
B. Exceptions:
1. Persons shall be allowed upon city park property after closing hours if they have a permit from the parks and recreation department.
2. Erickson park shall be closed at eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. rather than ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
3. The city council may by resolution modify the closing hours as it may deem appropriate.
4. City personnel may be in the parks at any time if acting in the course of their official duties.
5. City personnel may assign special hours of use by posting at park site. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-4: CITY PARK RESERVATIONS:
No person or group shall have exclusive use of all or any portion of a park unless they have first reserved the property with the parks and recreation
department and procured a permit. Unless an exclusive use permit is procured, use of the park property will be on first come, first served basis. (Ord.
XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-5: VEHICLE USE/PARKING REGULATIONS:
A. Use of motorized vehicle, including operation and parking, within city parks shall be unlawful except upon roads or trails specifically designated for such
use.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 71/324
B. No person shall operate or park a motorized vehicle within city parks during hours when the park is closed unless authorized by permit issued by the
parks and recreation department.
C. No person shall park a motorized vehicle within city parks unless that person is a patron of the park at that time or unless authorized by permit issued
by the parks and recreation department.
D. No person shall park a motorized vehicle on the east side of Brazil Avenue within Erickson Park, unless authorized by permit issued by the parks and
recreation department. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-6: FIRE:
A. No person shall ignite a fire in any city park except in:
1. Barbecue grills provided. Charcoal fires are permitted in barbecue grills only, no wood fires allowed.
2. Designated firepit in Central Park by permit authorized by the city fire marshal.
B. No person igniting or attending a fire shall leave the area before the fire has been completely extinguished.
C. City personnel upon authorization of the city fire marshal are able to ignite fires with the use of various combustible materials. (Ord. B-241, 9-16-2014)
4-3-7: LITTER:
No person shall litter any city park or any lake, pond or watercourse within or draining into a city park with any form of trash or waste material. Such trash
or waste material shall be deposited in the proper receptacles when provided; where receptacles are not provided, all trash or waste material shall be
carried away from the area by the person responsible for its presence. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-8: PERSONAL PROPERTY:
No person shall leave or store personal property within any city park without written permission from the parks and recreation department. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-
1-1994)
4-3-9: PROTECTION OF PROPERTY, STRUCTURES AND NATURAL RESOURCES:
A. Damaging Or Removing Property Prohibited: No person shall wilfully deface, vandalize or otherwise cause destruction to city park property.
B. Flowers, Trees And Shrubs: No person shall wilfully and without authority cut, pluck or otherwise injure any flowers, shrubs, trees or other plant material
growing in or around any city park. No person shall introduce any form of vegetation within a park without permission from the parks and recreation
department.
C. Birds Or Animals: No person shall wilfully and without authority kill, trap, hunt, pursue or in any manner disturb or interfere with any species of wildlife in
any city park without permission from the parks and recreation department. No person shall release any insect, fish or animal in any city park without
permission from the parks and recreation department.
D. Restitution: In addition to other penalties, any person violating the provisions of this section shall make restitution to the parks and recreation
department for the full value of the damage caused, including, but not limited to, the cost of repairs, replacement and labor. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-10: LIQUOR RESTRICTIONS:
A. Possession And Consumption Restricted: The possession and/or consumption of liquor in any city park shall be prohibited except as provided in
subsection B of this section.
B. Use In Parks: "Wine" and "3.2 percent malt liquor", as defined in Minnesota statutes, section 340A.101, may be possessed or consumed, but only in the
following city parks or areas of city parks:
1. All areas of Erickson Park.
2. City parks with shelters, by permit only, obtained through the parks and recreation department, provided that consumption and possession of beer
and wine is limited to areas within fifty feet (50') of a shelter.
3. No glass bottles are allowed in the parks.
C. Sale Of Liquor In Erickson Park: With the approval of the city council, a license may be issued for the sale of "3.2 percent malt liquor" as defined in
Minnesota statutes, section 340A.101, only in Erickson Park. If a license is issued, it must be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises selling the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 72/324
3.2 percent malt liquor. (Ord. XVI.30, 4-4-1995)
4-3-11: ANIMALS1:
A. Proper Restraint: A dog or cat is considered to be under restraint on city park property only when it is controlled with the use of a leash no longer than
ten feet (10') or when it is under voice or signal command in the exercise areas designated by the city.
B. Feces Removal: All persons in control of an animal on city park property shall have in his/her possession at all times apparatus which can be used for
cleaning up feces and/or a bag for proper disposal of feces. The person in control of an animal is responsible for picking up his/her animal's feces and
disposing of it properly.
C. Proper Control: No person shall permit a dog or other animal to disturb, harass or interfere with or endanger any visitor or visitor's property. No person
shall tether and leave unattended any dog or animal to a tree, plant, building or city park equipment.
D. Special Events: No animals under human control shall be allowed on the Carrolls Woods Trails during the parks and recreation sponsored Halloween
Haunted Woods event, except lead dogs for the sight impaired persons. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-12: GOLF:
No person shall play the game of golf or engage in putting, practice swinging or the striking of any golf balls in any city park. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-13: RESTROOMS:
Every person shall cooperate in maintaining restrooms, washrooms and other sanitation facilities in a neat, orderly and sanitary condition. No person shall
use the restrooms and washrooms designed and designated for members of the opposite sex, except for children who may be accompanied by an adult
when deemed appropriate. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-14: PUBLIC SALES:
No person shall expose or offer for sale, rent or hire any article or thing or conduct any commercial enterprise within a city park unless that person has
obtained a permit from the parks and recreation department. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-15: POSTERS AND ADVERTISEMENTS:
A. No person shall post, glue, tack or otherwise affix any sign, placard, advertisement or other inscription whatsoever to public property within any city
park.
B. No person shall distribute or disseminate leaflets, pamphlets or other written or printed material, or use loudspeakers or other amplifying systems, in
any city park without a permit from the parks and recreation department. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-16: GLASS:
No person shall bring glass containers of any kind into any city parks, including, but not be limited to, beverage containers, drinking glasses, etc. (Ord.
XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-17: WEAPONS PROHIBITED:
The use or possession of "firearms", as defined in title 7, chapter 5 of this code, within the city parks is prohibited, except the use of archery equipment in
designated archery ranges. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-18: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as
described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
4-3-19: VETERANS MEMORIAL:
Pursuant to Minnesota statutes, section 416.01, the city council is authorized to erect, equip, maintain, supervise and control the veterans memorial
monument and the Rosemount veterans memorial walk project in Central Park in recognition of the services performed by soldiers, sailors, marines and
war veterans of the United States. (Ord. XXI.20, 8-18-2009)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 73/324
Chapter 4
SNOW REMOVAL ON SIDEWALKS
4-4-1: SNOW REMOVAL:
Removal of snow and ice from trails and sidewalks in the city shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owners or occupants. Snow and ice shall
be removed within forty eight (48) hours after the snow or ice has accumulated. In unusual circumstances and when determined by the council to be in the
best interest of the public, the council may, by resolution, suspend the obligation of property owners or occupants to remove snow and ice in all, or any
part, of the city. On trails and sidewalks specified in the city's snowplowing policy and on trails and sidewalks where the city is the abutting property owner,
snow and ice shall be removed in accordance with the city's snowplowing policy. (Ord. 2011-01, 1-4-2011)
4-4-1-1: VIOLATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit snow from private property upon any public street or public right of way within the city. (Ord. 4, 12-4-1984)
4-4-2: NOTICE:
If the snow and ice are not removed as required in section 4-4-1 of this chapter, the city may serve upon the owner or occupant a notice ordering removal
of the snow and ice within twenty four (24) hours. (Ord. 4, 12-4-1984)
4-4-2-1: SERVICE OF NOTICE:
Service of notice may be accomplished by personal service upon the owner or occupant, or by leaving such notice with a person of suitable age and
discretion on the premises. (Ord. 4, 12-4-1984)
4-4-3: NUISANCE:
Snow and ice which is allowed to remain on trails and sidewalks within the city for a longer period of time than forty eight (48) hours after the same falls,
gathers or accumulates is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the city may remove the snow and ice and charge the cost of the removal against the
abutting property. (Ord. XII.16, 1-16-1996; amd. Ord. 2011-01, 1-4-2011)
4-4-3-1: ASSESSMENT OF COSTS:
Following such snow and ice removal, the cost of removal shall be set from time to time by city council resolution. In accordance with Minnesota statutes,
section 429.101, the city council shall assess the cost against the abutting property owner. (Ord. XII.16, 1-16-1996)
4-4-4: PENALTY:
Any person who violates section 4-4-1-1 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord.
XII.21, 6-15-2004)
Chapter 5
LARGE PUBLIC GATHERINGS ON CITY PARK LAND
4-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the assembly of large numbers of persons on city park land and to establish regulations that promote
the health, safety and welfare of large public gatherings organized on city park land. (Ord. 2013-01, 4-16-2013)
4-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
"Large assembly" means a gathering numbering five hundred (500) or more persons; or actions by one or more persons the intention of which is to attract
and assemble a gathering of persons in excess of five hundred (500) persons at a single time on city park land. (Ord. 2013-01, 4-16-2013)
4-5-3: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall permit, maintain, promote, conduct, advertise, manage, sell, barter or give tickets to an actual or reasonably anticipated assembly of five
hundred (500) or more people on city park land unless a license to hold the assembly has been first issued as provided herein. The license may be issued
by the director of parks and recreation or the director's designee for assemblies of between five hundred (500) and one thousand two hundred (1,200) if
the assembly is a baseball tournament, soccer tournament, softball tournament, lacrosse tournament or football tournament. The license may be issued
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 74/324
only by the city council in all other cases or if the director declines to issue a license for the assembly. In addition to the license required herein, the
applicant must possess and submit to the city any other necessary state, county or city licenses and/or permits necessary to carry on the assembly. (Ord.
2013-01, 4-16-2013)
4-5-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
The application for a large assembly license shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk no less than sixty (60) days in advance of the proposed
date for the large assembly, upon forms provided by the city clerk. The application shall contain, without limitation, the following information:
A. The name, age, residence, social security number and mailing address of the applicant, if an individual, all partners if a partnership and all officers of
the corporation if the applicant is a corporation.
B. A full description of the nature, purpose and extent of the proposed large assembly.
C. The maximum number of persons that the proposed large assembly will attract at any given time, together with the dates and hours during which the
proposed large assembly will be conducted.
D. A full description of plans for sound amplification and sound control to be utilized by the applicant.
E. Plans for food or other concessions that will be provided.
F. A detailed plan to ensure waste disposal, sanitary facilities, inspections of vehicle or equipment, postevent cleanup and other necessary precautions to
prevent pollution to land or ponds.
G. All other information required or requested by the city council or the parks and recreation department. (Ord. 2013-01, 4-16-2013)
4-5-5: LICENSE FEES:
The license fee shall be set from time to time by city council resolution.
A. The license fee shall be nonrefundable.
B. As a condition of granting a license the city may require the licensee to make a cash deposit with the city clerk. The cash deposit shall be used to
guarantee payment by the applicant of the city's costs for planning, sanitation, health, traffic control, law enforcement services and other city costs that
are directly attributable to the large assembly. (Ord. 2013-01, 4-16-2013)
4-5-6: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
The city may impose any condition reasonably required to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public and the persons assembled. A
violation of any of the conditions shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-01, 4-16-2013)
4-5-7: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
The following regulations must be complied with:
A. No person granted a license pursuant to this chapter shall gain a vested right to obtain such licenses in the future.
B. By making application, the applicant consents to permitting officers and agents of the city to enter the event area at all times to investigate the activities
and to determine whether the conditions of the license and all applicable laws are being complied with.
C. A surety bond or other financial guarantee approved as to form by the city clerk in an amount deemed sufficient by the city to guarantee performance by
the applicant of the conditions may be imposed by the city in granting the large assembly license.
D. A comprehensive general liability insurance policy, naming the city as an additional insured, covering any and all damages, claims or other liabilities
arising out of the operation of the large assembly whether incurred by the city or by any other association or person. This condition does not apply to
government agencies.
E. No person holding a large assembly license shall permit and no participant in a large assembly shall remain overnight at the location of a large
assembly, except for a reasonable number of persons required for security purposes. (Ord. 2013-01, 4-16-2013)
4-5-8: PENALTY:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 75/324
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as described in title 1, chapter
4 of this code. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
Title 5
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1
SOLID WASTE
5-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
COMPOSTING: Controlled microbial degradation of source separated organic waste to yield a humus like product or mulch to be used as a soil
amendment.
ENCLOSURE: The required area for storage of waste containers between the times of scheduled collection. This area must conform to the requirements
of subsection 5-1-3A3 of this chapter.
RECYCLABLES: Any material such as paper, glass, plastic, and certain metals which are routinely collected and processed for recycling.
RESIDENTIAL HAULER: Any waste hauler making regularly scheduled collections of solid waste or recyclables from single- and multi-family residences.
SINGLE SORT RECYCLING: A system of collecting recyclable materials from the same container without requiring the materials to be sorted or
separated.
SOLID WASTE: Any nonrecyclable material produced by any residential, commercial, institutional or industrial use.
WASTE CONTAINER: Any container designed and used to contain or store solid waste and recyclables.
YARD WASTE: Any waste normally generated in the maintenance of yards and property such as garden waste, leaves, lawn cuttings, sawdust, weeds,
nonwoody shrub and tree prunings and twigs no larger than one-fourth inch (1/4") diameter. (Ord. XVI.59, 12-2-2008)
5-1-2: DISPOSAL REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any resident, tenant, property owner, or business owner to fail to dispose of solid waste, recyclables, and yard waste in a sanitary
manner at least once each week.
A. Exceptions:
1. Single Sort Recycling: Single sort recyclable containers, with securely closing lids, shall be allowed biweekly collection.
2. Composting: Every property owner, occupant, or tenant of any premises who composts shall do so in an environmentally sound manner, and shall
meet the standards set forth in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. XVI.59, 12-2-2008)
5-1-3: CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS:
A. Use Required, Description:
1. Tightly Closed Containers: All solid waste and recyclables accumulating between the times of collection shall be placed in tightly closed containers
specifically designed for such purpose.
a. Exceptions:
(1) The recyclable container provided through the city may be used to store and place recyclables at the curb for collection.
(2) All composting must occur in a container constructed of wood, wire mesh, concrete block, or a combination thereof, or in a commercially
available compost bin designated for composting organic waste.
(3) Yard waste may be composted or placed in bags designed for such purpose.
2. Placement; Enclosure: All waste containers shall be kept in an enclosure that meets the requirements of subsection A3 of this section, until the day
of scheduled pick up.
a. Placement: Waste containers may be placed at the curb for collection the evening before the scheduled day of collection and must be removed
from the curb area and stored as required on the evening of the day of collection.
b. Exception: This section shall not apply to waste containers set out by the city for public use. Nor does it apply to the placement of composting
containers on residential properties.
3. Enclosure Criteria: Enclosures shall meet the following criteria:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 76/324
a. Screening: All residential structures with more than two (2) units, and all commercial, industrial, and institutional uses shall provide a screened
enclosure for required waste containers for solid waste, recyclables, and yard waste. Such enclosures shall completely conceal stored waste
containers from all sides and be designed in such a manner as to contain any spillage from the containers.
b. Single And Double Residential Dwellings: Single and double residential dwellings shall store waste containers inside of a garage, or in a side or
rear yard behind the front line of the house until they are placed for collection as provided in this chapter.
c. Materials:
(1) In all new construction, enclosure materials shall be similar to the principal building.
(2) Existing properties may use such materials as wooden fencing, or chainlink with eighty five percent (85%) opacity inserts, but such materials
must be maintained to provide a good appearance.
(3) All enclosures shall be constructed in a substantially sound manner of materials that reduce normal deterioration from weathering. The
enclosure's construction shall support snow load and wind load as required by the state building code, and all materials shall be properly
anchored. Further, all enclosures shall be constructed and maintained in a safe, orderly condition.
(4) Any enclosure which is defaced, deteriorated, improperly maintained or otherwise altered from its original permitted condition shall be repaired
or replaced upon written notice by the city.
d. Size: Enclosures shall provide sufficient space for required waste containers for solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, and any other waste
container that is intrinsic to the operation of a business on the premises. In no case shall the enclosure exceed six hundred (600) square feet in
area.
e. Location:
(1) Enclosures shall be located behind the front building line of the principal building (as extended to the side lot lines).
(2) Enclosures may be integrated into a building if approved by the building official.
(3) Enclosures shall be set back ten feet (10') from the lot line of any abutting residential property.
f. Landscaping: Enclosures shall be landscaped in accordance with city regulations.
g. Flooring: Enclosures shall have flooring constructed of concrete or bituminous material.
h. Access: Enclosures shall provide access that will facilitate efficient storage and removal of waste materials in all seasons.
i. Exceptions:
(1) This section shall not apply to the construction, size, or location of composting containers on residential properties which are covered in chapter
4 of this title.
(2) Waste containers, or pens, on construction sites need not be screened and may be placed on construction sites without an enclosure.
However:
(A) The container or pen must be set back five feet (5') from any abutting finished residential or commercial property lot line.
(B) Waste containers and pens on construction sites may not be placed in violation of the twenty five foot (25') sight triangle at intersections.
(3) Developers, builders, or contractors on site are responsible for maintaining the waste container or enclosure at a construction site to prevent
trash, refuse, and debris generated by the building project from spilling, blowing, or in any way escaping from the containers or pens required to
contain it. (Ord. XVI.59, 12-2-2008)
5-1-4: OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED1:
No solid waste or yard waste shall be burned without a permit from the appropriate governmental authority. (Ord. XIV.8, 12-20-1988)
5-1-5: COLLECTOR REGULATIONS:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to collect solid waste without first having secured a license to do so from the city council.
B. Application For License: Any person desiring a license to collect solid waste shall make application for the same to the city clerk upon a form prescribed
by the city. The application shall set forth:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. A list of the equipment which he proposes to use in such collection.
3. The place or places to which the solid waste is to be hauled.
4. The manner in which said solid waste is to be disposed of.
5. The portion of the city in which collections are to be made.
C. Insurance Required, Issuance: As part of the license application, the applicant shall provide proof of insurance with coverage amounts as required by
the city council and under the conditions imposed by the ordinances of the city. The city clerk shall then issue and deliver the license.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 77/324
D. Fee: A license fee set by the city council shall accompany the application and upon granting the license, the fee shall be deposited in the general fund.
E. Term: No license issued hereunder shall be for a longer period than one year and all licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year.
F. Yard Waste Disposal: All yard waste shall be disposed of at compost facilities designated or approved by Dakota County or composted on the property
in compliance with chapter 4 of this title.
G. Compliance With County Ordinance: All license applicants must also be licensed by Dakota County and comply with all applicable provisions in Dakota
County ordinances, including the reporting requirements.
H. Limitations On Licensing: The city council, in the interest of maintaining healthful and sanitary conditions in the city, hereby reserves the right to specify
and assign certain areas to all licensees, and to limit the number of licenses issued. The council finds that by reducing the number of collection vehicle
trips through a neighborhood, the neighborhood will be more safe for children and pedestrians, the amount of wear on the street surface will be
reduced, and the total amount of emissions produced by the collection vehicles will decrease.
Only haulers licensed as of the effective date hereof will be allowed to renew their license. When a hauler leaves the industry or merges with another
hauler, the total number of residential hauling licenses available in Rosemount will automatically be reduced.
I. No Vested Right: No hauler licensed under this chapter will gain a vested right in the license. The city council may, upon a finding of public necessity,
determine to establish another means of solid waste collection. (Ord. XVI.59, 12-2-2008)
5-1-6: COLLECTION VEHICLE REGULATIONS:
Each licensed collector shall provide a covered tank or conveyance, so constructed that the contents will not be blown or jostled therefrom, in which all
solid waste, recyclables, and yard waste collected shall be conveyed to the place designated in the license application.
The tank or conveyance used shall be kept clean and as free from offensive odors as possible, and shall not be allowed to stand in any street, alley or
public place longer than is necessary to collect solid waste.
The tank or conveyance shall be subject to inspection by city officers or authorized agents of the city, and the license shall be subject to revocation in the
event that said tank or conveyance is not kept clean or in the event that the licensee violates any other provision of this chapter. (Ord. XVI.59, 12-2-2008)
5-1-7: COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS, REGULATIONS:
A. Frequency Of Collection: Each licensed collector shall make collections at least weekly or more often if necessary in that portion of the city in which the
collector is licensed to collect solid waste or yard waste.
1. Exception: Single sort recycling shall be allowed biweekly collection.
B. Payment For Collection: The expense of solid waste and yard waste collection shall be paid to the collector by the owner, agent, occupant or tenant of
the premises from which such solid waste and yard waste is collected, and such fee shall be full compensation for his services in such collection,
provided that if the tenant or occupant of the property shall fail to pay said expense, the owner shall be liable therefor to the collector.
C. Discontinuance Of Service: The collector may decline to make collections from any premises when the fees provided for herein are not paid within one
month from date such refuse is collected. The collector shall notify the city clerk of the discontinuance of service to any premises within two (2) days
after service is discontinued.
D. Collector Requirements: Each licensed collector shall comply with the following:
1. Recyclable Materials: Make available weekly (or biweekly for single sort recycling) curbside collection of recyclable materials to all residential
customers. The city council may designate by resolution specific materials for which collection must be available. Collection of recyclable materials
from such a customer shall be made at the same time, at the same location, and with the same frequency as collection of solid waste from that
customer. No fee may be charged to a customer for this service.
2. Disposal Of Recyclable Materials: Dispose of recyclable materials at a licensed recycling facility, an organized recyclable materials drive, or through
another licensed hauler of recyclable materials. No fee may be charged to a customer for this service.
3. Collection Of Waste And Recyclable Materials By Residential Haulers: Haulers shall conduct collections as follows:
a. West of Akron Avenue collection may occur only on Monday or Tuesday.
b. East of Akron Avenue collection may occur on any day of the week.
4. Hours Of Collection: Haulers shall conduct collections as follows:
a. Monday through Friday, from six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
b. Saturday, from six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
c. Sunday, from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 78/324
5. Placement Of Waste Containers And Mandatory Use Of Enclosures: Haulers shall conduct collection as follows:
a. After they have emptied the containers, haulers shall place all waste containers within the specific enclosures provided for waste containers as
required by sections 5-1-2 and 5-1-3 of this chapter.
b. No waste containers may be placed or delivered so as to be in violation of city ordinance.
c. No waste containers may be placed within the driving or parking lanes of public streets, roads, or highways.
d. Haulers will clean up any spillage of waste that occurs while they are collecting and transferring waste.
e. Haulers will close and secure the gates of all waste container enclosures when finished collecting and transferring waste from any location with an
enclosure. (Ord. XVI.59, 12-2-2008)
5-1-8: ANIMAL CARCASS DISPOSAL:
When any animal belonging to any person residing in this municipality shall die, such person shall promptly cause the same to be buried at least three feet
(3') underground or cause the same to be disposed of by authorized personnel. It shall be unlawful to dispose of dead animals with solid waste or yard
waste. If the owner of any dead animal cannot be found, the person upon whose property it is shall notify the local health officer who will cause it to be
removed and disposed of by authorized personnel. (Ord. XIV.8, 12-20-1988)
5-1-9: PENALTY:
A. Misdemeanor: Failure to comply with this chapter is a misdemeanor.
B. Suspension Or Revocation Of License: The city council may also suspend or revoke a hauler's license for violation of this chapter, applicable Dakota
County ordinances, or any other applicable laws or regulations. Prior to suspending or revoking a license, the council must first hold a hearing, with five
(5) days' advance notice to the licensee. The notice will include the date, time, and nature of the violations and copies of any documentation or reports
regarding the violation. (Ord. XVI.59, 12-2-2008)
Footnote 1: See also title 6, chapter 3 of this code.
Chapter 2
WEED AND VEGETATION CONTROL
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
BOULEVARD: That portion of a street right of way between the curb or curb line and the property line.
CITY: The city of Rosemount.
CONTROL AREA: An area designated by resolution of the city council in which the shade tree pest control program shall be enacted and enforced.
CONTROL MEASURES: Actions declared and authorized by resolution of the city council to control, manage, or effectively eradicate shade tree pests and
shade tree diseases, including necessary timelines for action. These measures may include spraying, removing, burning, or otherwise effectively treating
the infected tree or wood to prevent the spread of the shade tree pest or disease.
HAZARDOUS TREE: A tree with structural defects likely to cause failure of all or part of the tree which could strike a target or threaten human health or
property.
LANDSCAPE PLAN: An accurately dimensioned drawing of a property showing the location of existing and proposed structures, pavement, trees, shrubs,
grasses, flowers, areas of nonliving ground cover, site furniture and furnishings. The plan shall label symbols shown; provide construction notes, details
and sections as are necessary for a complete installation; and provide calculations for any required buffering, screening, open space or impervious surface
retirements or limitations. Commercial, industrial, office and multi-family project plans, where the structure is over five thousand (5,000) gross square feet,
shall be prepared under the supervision of a landscape architect or designer. The landscape plan shall also include a written description of how the
property owner or manager will prepare the property prior to the new or refurbished landscape construction; how noxious weeds as defined by the state of
Minnesota will continue to be controlled; what the establishment period will be; and what maintenance efforts will occur during and after the establishment
period to create and perpetuate the proposed landscape plan. A landscape plan shall not be required for properties maintained as required by subsection
5-2-2B of this chapter.
MAINTENANCE STRIP: A five foot (5') (minimum) area of an exempt property that abuts a nonexempted property that must be maintained as required in
subsection 5-2-2B of this chapter where feasible so as not to interfere with the maintenance of the nonexempted property.
NATURAL AREA: Those areas that allow wildlife habitat and/or natural vistas and shall include those areas which consist of slopes equal to or greater
than a ratio of three to one (3:1), those areas which are adjacent to public open spaces, parks or drainageways which are retained in a natural condition
with natural vegetation, or open spaces one acre or larger, woods and wetlands. Areas around principal structures and driveways do not qualify as natural
areas.
NOXIOUS WEEDS: Those plants which are determined, from time to time, to be noxious weeds pursuant to Minnesota statutes, 18.171, subdivision 5.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES: Include, but are not limited to, houses, garages, and buildings used for businesses.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: All grounds owned by the city of Rosemount.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 79/324
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane or public sidewalk in which the city has an
interest, including other dedicated rights of way for travel purposes and utility easements of the city. A right of way does not include the airwaves above a
right of way with regard to cellular or other nonwire telecommunications or broadcast service.
SHADE TREE DISEASE: Dutch elm disease caused by Ophiostoma ulmi or oak wilt caused by Ceratocystis fagacearum or any other disease declared by
the city council or identified and designated as a shade tree disease by the Minnesota state commissioner of the department of agriculture or
commissioner of the department of natural resources.
SHADE TREE PEST: Any vertebrate or invertebrate animal, plant pathogen, or plant that is declared by the city council threatening to be harmful,
injurious, or destructive to shade trees or community forests, within the city, including, but not limited to, elm bark beetles and emerald ash borer beetles,
larvae, or eggs thereof.
TREE INSPECTOR: A person or persons, certified by the Minnesota department of natural resources, appointed by the city council to administer the city's
shade tree disease and pest control program. (Ord. XIV.10, 6-4-1991; amd. Ord. 2012-03, 4-3-2012)
5-2-2: NUISANCE:
A. Noxious Weeds: Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, noxious weeds growing upon any lot or parcel of property, regardless of
height, zoning classification or area on the parcel upon which they are growing, are hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the health and
safety of the city.
B. All Zoning Districts Except FP, AG, AG-P; Unplatted Properties: All weeds (other than noxious weeds) or growing grasses upon any lot or parcel of land
in the city but for those in zoning districts FP, AG or AG-P, or upon unplatted properties, that measure, from ground to tip, in excess of eight inches (8"),
or which have gone or are about to go to seed, are hereby declared to be a nuisance, unsightly and dangerous to the health and safety of the city.
C. Shade Tree Pests: A shade tree pest declared by the city council and occurring within a control area is a public nuisance.
D. Diseased Tree: Any living or standing tree or part thereof infected to any degree by a shade tree disease; or any logs, branches, stumps, or other parts
of any dead or dying tree, so infected unless such parts have been fully burned or treated under the direction of the tree inspector is a public nuisance.
E. Hazardous Trees: A hazardous tree is a public nuisance.
F. Nuisances Are Unlawful: It is unlawful for any person to permit any public nuisance as defined in this section to remain on any premises the person
owns or controls within the city. The nuisance may be abated as provided for in section 5-2-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-03, 4-3-2012)
5-2-3: EXEMPTIONS:
A. Zoning Districts Not Included: Land lying within any zoning districts not included in subsection 5-2-2B of this chapter are exempt from this chapter
except as set forth in subsection E of this section.
B. Landscape Plan: Property owners or their assigned managers who file with the city, the landscape plan which has been approved by the city to create
and maintain ornamental grasses, wetland, wooded land, upland, prairie or wild flowers shall be exempted from this chapter. Exemptions shall be
granted or denied administratively. Aggrieved property owners may appeal to the planning commission within ten (10) days of the administrative denial,
and to the city council within ten (10) days of a denial by the planning commission. Failure to maintain the parcel in accordance with the landscape plan
upon proper notice shall void the chapter exemption. A maintenance strip shall be maintained where feasible. A fee established by the city council shall
be charged when a landscape plan is submitted for review.
C. Natural Areas: Natural areas shall be exempt from this chapter. A maintenance strip shall be maintained where feasible.
D. Parks: Parks shall be exempt where topography or intended use do not allow maintenance, provided, however, that maintenance strips shall be
required where feasible.
E. Noxious Weeds: Noxious weeds, regardless of height, zoning classification of lot or parcel on which they are found, shall not be exempt from this
chapter. (Ord. XIV.10, 6-4-1991)
5-2-4: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Notice: Upon discovery of a nuisance as defined in this chapter, the weed inspector, tree inspector, or designee, shall serve a notice upon the owner,
occupant or agent of the property owner ordering such person to have such weeds or grass cut, or shade tree pest or shade tree disease removed,
treated, or otherwise eradicated and removed within the time period specified in the notice. The notice shall specify the steps to be taken to abate the
nuisance and shall also state that in the event of noncompliance, cutting, removal or eradication will be done by the city, with all costs to be paid by the
owner, together with an administrative fee of ten percent (10%) of the costs, or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater.
B. Assessment: A record showing the cost of work attributable to each separate lot or parcel shall be delivered to the city clerk. If all costs and fees are not
paid within thirty (30) days of the date of completion of the work, the amount so charged, including the administrative charge, together with accrued
interest thereon at the maximum lawful rate permitted, against said lot or parcel of land, together with a description of the premises and the name of the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 80/324
owner, if known, shall be certified to the county auditor and shall be collected under Minnesota statutes, section 429.101 in the same manner as taxes
and/or special assessments against said premises. The charge shall be a perpetual lien on the premises until paid. No interest shall accrue after the
amount due is certified to the county auditor.
C. Appeal: Any person receiving a notice under subsection A of this section may appeal. The appeal must be submitted in writing to the city administrator
within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the notice. The city administrator will schedule a hearing before the city council and provide notice to the
individual at least ten (10) calendar days before the hearing. After the hearing, the city council may sustain or modify the abatement notice or extend
the time by which the abatement must be complete. (Ord. 2012-03, 4-3-2012)
5-2-5: HINDRANCE OF CITY EMPLOYEES:
Any person who shall hinder a city employee or agent in carrying out the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as
described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
5-2-6: REMEDIES CUMULATIVE:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to limit or supersede any other statute, regulation or ordinance, and the remedies of the city set forth
herein shall be cumulative with the remedies of the city contained in any other applicable statute, regulation or ordinance. (Ord. XIV.10, 6-4-1991)
5-2-7: SHADE TREE PEST AND DISEASE CONTROL AND TREE MAINTENANCE:
A. Policy And Purpose: The health of the trees in the city is threatened by shade tree pests and diseases. The loss or ill health of trees growing upon
public and private property substantially depreciates the value of property within the city and impairs the safety, good order, general welfare and
convenience of the public. In addition to and in accordance with Minnesota statutes, sections 89.001, and 89.51 through 89.64, the provisions of this
section are adopted to attempt to control and prevent the spread of shade tree pests and shade tree disease within a designated control area.
B. City Jurisdiction: The city shall have control of all trees, shrubs, and other plantings located on public property within the city limits, and shall have the
power to plant, care for, maintain, remove, and replace such trees, shrubs and other plantings.
C. Boulevard Trees: Except in those parts of the city where, by agreement, certain developments or homeowners' associations have accepted this
responsibility, the city of Rosemount shall be responsible for the treatment or removal of a nuisance, diseased, or hazardous tree from the boulevard.
D. Tree Inspector: It is the power and duty of the tree inspector to enter upon public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of
inspecting and diagnosing and, if necessary, abating shade tree diseases or shade tree pests. In the case of suspected shade tree diseases or pests,
and in performance of his or her duties, the tree inspector may remove such specimen or samples as may be necessary or desirable for diagnosis. The
tree inspector shall have the authority to conduct the following:
1. Coordinate the activities of the city relating to the control and prevention of damage by shade tree pests and diseases and employ any control
measures he or she deems appropriate.
2. Recommend to the council the details of any program for the declaration, control and prevention of shade tree pests and diseases and enforce or
cause to be enforced the duties incident to such a program adopted by the council.
3. Inspect, or cause to be inspected, any and all premises within the city upon which it is suspected a shade tree pest or disease exists and investigate
all reported incidents of shade tree pests and diseases.
4. Diagnose shade tree pests and diseases by the presence of commonly recognized symptoms or by tests as may be recommended by the
commissioner of the Minnesota department of agriculture or department of natural resources; or other reliable means.
5. Take all reasonable precautions to prevent the maintenance of public nuisances and enforce the provisions relating to abatement in this chapter,
including hiring private contractors to implement such measures.
E. Abatement Of Shade Tree Nuisances: In abating a "shade tree pest" or disease tree nuisance as defined in this chapter, the following procedures shall
be followed in addition to the procedures in section 5-2-4 of this chapter:
1. The shade tree pest or diseased tree shall be removed or effectively treated so as to destroy and prevent as fully as possible the spread of the pest
or disease. Such abatement procedures shall be carried out in accordance with current technical and expert methods and plans as may be
designated by the commissioner of agriculture, and with the "control measures" as defined in this chapter, and within the control areas prescribed by
the city council.
2. If a notice of abatement for a shade tree pest or disease issued under section 5-2-4 of this chapter and its prescribed control measures are not
complied with within the time provided by the notice or any additional time granted, the tree inspector or designated person shall have the authority to
enter the property and carry out abatement in accordance with the council's declared control measures and the notice of abatement.
F. Abatement Procedure In The Event Of Imminent Danger; Summary Enforcement: If the tree inspector determines that the danger of infestation to other
shade trees is imminent and delay in control measures may put public health, safety, or welfare in immediate danger, the tree inspector may proceed
as follows:
1. Determination; Notice: The tree inspector shall determine all trees to be affected by any appropriate control measures and notify any reasonably
knowable owner and occupant of property or properties on whose land every such tree is located.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 81/324
2. Contents Of Notice: The notice shall state that a public nuisance exists or is being maintained on premises in the city and that a delay in abatement
of the nuisance will unreasonably endanger public health, safety or welfare. The notice shall state the nuisance found, the control measure required,
provide the nuisance must be abated within a specified time, and the time and place of the city council meeting to consider the question of summary
enforcement. The notice and proposed action shall be reported in writing to the council.
3. Abatement: The city council shall determine whether or not the condition identified in the notice to the owner or occupant is a nuisance, whether
public health, safety or welfare will be unreasonably endangered by delay in abatement, and may order that the nuisance be immediately terminated
or abated. If the nuisance is not immediately terminated or abated, the city council may order abatement of the nuisance. After the expiration of the
time provided on the original mailing, the nuisance may be abated.
4. Immediate Abatement: Nothing in this section shall prevent the city, without notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition which
poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety. (Ord. 2012-03, 4-3-2012)
Chapter 3
SWIMMING POOLS
5-3-1: SWIMMING POOLS:
A. Pools of five thousand (5,000) gallons or more capacity shall not be located within ten feet (10') of any side or rear lot line nor within six feet (6') of any
principal structure or frost footing. Pools shall not be located within any required setback from any public streets.
B. Pools shall not be located beneath overhead utility lines nor over underground utility lines of any type or within ten feet (10') of any such utility lines.
C. Pools shall not be located within any private or public utility, walkway, drainage or other easement.
D. In the case of in-ground pools, due precautions shall be taken during the construction period to:
1. Avoid damage, hazards or inconvenience to adjacent or nearby property.
2. Assure that proper care shall be taken in stockpiling excavated material to avoid erosion, dust or other infringement onto other adjacent property.
E. To the extent feasible, back-flush water or water from pool drainage shall drain on the owner's property or into approved public drainage ways. Such
water shall not drain onto adjacent or nearby private land.
F. The Filter unit, pump, cleaning unit and any other noise making mechanical equipment shall be located at least thirty feet (30') from any adjacent or
nearby residential structure and not closer than ten feet (10') to any lot line. In all cases, noise from such shall not be detectable at any property line
and if detectable, shall be enclosed in an improved sound resistant enclosure.
G. Lighting for the pool shall be directed into or onto the pool and not onto adjacent property.
H. A safety fence set back a distance of at least four feet (4') from the edge of the water surface or pool side of a nonclimbable type of at least four feet (4')
in height shall completely enclose the pool from ground level up to the minimum four foot (4') height. Any gate or door in the fence shall be equipped
witha self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when not in actual use.
I. Water in the pool shall be maintained in a suitable manner to avoid health hazards of any type. Water shall be subject to periodic inspection by the
Community Health Officer.
J. All wiring, lighting, installation of heating unit, grading, installation of pipes and all other installations and construction shall require appropriate permits
and shall be subject to inspection by public inspectors.
K. Climbable facilities of any kind which could be utilized in any way shall be kept set back a minimum of five feet (5') from the outside edge of all safety
fences or pool-side walls surrounding swimming pools.
L. Any proposed deviation from these standards and requirements shall require a variance in accordance with the normal zoning procedures.
M. Safety fencing during construction of in-ground pools shall be provided during all phases of construction.
N. Required safety fencing shall be completely installed within three (3) weeks following installation of the pool and prior to pool being filled or prior to final
occupancy inspection.
O. Nuisances, such as undue noise, lighting onto adjacent property, health and safety hazards, damage to nearby vegetation and the like are hereby
prohibited.
P. Filling of pools via fire hydrants and other public means shall require prior approval by the Public Works Superintendent.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 82/324
Q. Drainage of pools onto public streets or other public drainage ways shall require prior approval by the Public Works Superintendent.
5-3-2: SWIMMING POOLS IN MULTIPLE FAMILY AREAS:
Pools in multiple family areas that is zoned for residential structures containing three (3) or more dwelling units shall be subject to the following restrictions:
A. No part of the water surface of the swimming pool shall be less than fifty feet (50') from any lot line.
B. No pump, filter, heating units or other apparatus used in connection with or to service a swimming pool shall be located less than fifty feet (50') from any
lot line.
C. All deck areas, adjacent patios or other similar areas used in conjunction with the swimming pool shall be located not closer than thirty feet (30') to any
adjacent single family lot line.
D. Adequate screening, including both fencing and landscape treatment shall be placed between said areas and adjacent single family lot line. (Ord. V.I, 5-
1-84)
Chapter 4
COMPOSTING
5-4-1: COMPOSTING:
Composting shall be allowed only in residential and agricultural zoned districts. All composting shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord.
XIV.20, 2-20-2001)
5-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
COMPOSTING: Controlled microbial degradation of source separated organic waste to yield a humus-like product or mulch to be used as a soil
amendment.
FOOD WASTE: Vegetable, fruit and other organic waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, except for meat,
bones, whole eggs and dairy products.
MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE: Garbage, refuse and other solid waste from residential, commercial and community activities that the generator of the
waste aggregates for collection.
ORGANIC WASTE: Yard waste and food waste. It also includes community available compost ingredients.
SOURCE SEPARATED: Organic waste that is separated from mixed municipal solid waste at the source by the waste generators for composting in a
container.
YARD WASTE: Garden wastes, leaves, lawn cuttings, sawdust, weeds, nonwoody shrub and tree prunings and twigs no larger than one-fourth inch (1/4")
diameter. (Ord. XIV.20, 2-20-2001)
5-4-3: LOCATION:
A. The compost container must be in the rear yard at least ten feet (10') from all property lines and no closer than twenty feet (20') to any residential
dwellings, except the dwelling on the property at which the compost container is located.
B. No compost container may be placed within twenty five feet (25') of any body of water or area designated as flood plain or shoreland. No compost
container may be placed within wetland buffer areas as defined in the most recent version of the Rosemount comprehensive wetland management
plan.
C. Composting containers shall be located and designed so that seepage from the compost will not run off into public or private streets, storm sewers,
drainage ditches, water retention basins, streams or lakes. (Ord. XIV.20, 2-20-2001)
5-4-4: PROHIBITED MATERIALS:
A. The following materials shall not be placed in a composting container: meat, bones, whole eggs, dairy products, unshredded branches or logs, weeds
heavily loaded with seeds, plastic, synthetic fiber, human or pet wastes, diseased plants and any other mixed municipal solid waste.
B. No herbicides or pesticides shall be added to a composting container. (Ord. XIV.20, 2-20-2001)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 83/324
5-4-5: COMPOSTING CONTAINER:
All composting must occur in a container constructed of wood, wire mesh, concrete block, or a combination thereof, or in a commercially available compost
bin designated for composting organic waste. (Ord. XIV.20, 2-20-2001)
5-4-6: COMPOSTING CONTAINER SIZE:
A. Composting containers shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) cubic feet in volume for those lots of ten thousand five hundred (10,500) square feet or
less.
B. For those lots of more than ten thousand five hundred (10,500) square feet, composting containers shall not exceed two hundred fifty (250) cubic feet in
volume.
C. The maximum height of the composting container shall be five feet (5'). (Ord. XIV.20, 2-20-2001)
5-4-7: MAINTENANCE:
The compost shall be periodically turned and watered to incorporate air and properly mix wet and dry material and to promote a rapid degradation of the
composting material. (Ord. XIV.20, 2-20-2001)
5-4-8: NUISANCE:
A compost container must not be established or maintained in such a manner as to create an odor or other nuisance and any composting shall be
suspended or terminated if at any time the city determines a nuisance exists or that conditions exist constituting a fire hazard or health hazard, or if there is
a threat to surface or ground water from runoff or leaching. (Ord. XIV.20, 2-20-2001)
Title 6
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Chapter 1
FIRE CODE
6-1-1: MINNESOTA STATE FIRE CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by the city council for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or
explosion, that certain code known as the current edition of the Minnesota state fire code, as adopted pursuant to Minnesota statutes, section 299F.011
and modified by Minnesota rules, chapter 7511, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended by this chapter, of which
code not less than three (3) copies have been and are now filed in the office of the clerk and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set out at length herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city.
(Ord. 2011-05, 6-21-2011)
6-1-2: ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF CODE:
A. Enforcement By Fire Officials:
1. The fire chief of the Rosemount fire department, or a representative authorized by the fire chief, shall enforce the provisions of this chapter.
2. The chief of the Rosemount fire department may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary.
The chief of the fire department may recommend the employment of technical inspectors who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected
through an examination to determine their fitness for the position. The examination shall be open to members and nonmembers of the fire
department, and appointments made after examination shall be for an indefinite term with removal only for cause.
B. Appeals: Whenever the fire chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the
code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the fire chief to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appealed.
C. Power And Duty To Enforce: The fire chief, police chief or a representative authorized by the fire chief shall have the power and duty to enforce this
chapter through appropriate administrative and legal remedies, including, but not limited to, issuance of citation. (Ord. 2011-05, 6-21-2011)
6-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION (AHJ): Wherever the term "AHJ" is used in the Minnesota state fire code, it shall be held to mean the Rosemount
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 84/324
fire chief, or a representative authorized by the fire chief.
CORPORATION COUNSEL: Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the Minnesota state fire code, it shall be held to mean the attorney for the
city of Rosemount.
JURISDICTION: Wherever the word "jurisdiction" is used in the Minnesota state fire code, it shall be held to mean the city of Rosemount. (Ord. 2011-05, 6-
21-2011)
6-1-4: NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES, OCCUPANCIES:
The mayor, the fire chief and the fire marshal shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard,
any new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in said code. The Fire Marshal shall post
such list in a conspicuous place in the Fire Marshal's Office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. (Ord. 2011-05, 6-21-2011)
6-1-5: STORAGE LIMITS FOR HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES:
A. Combustible Liquids In Aboveground Tanks:
1. The limits referred to in the State Fire Code in which storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, are
hereby established as follows: area west of Akron Avenue within the City, except those parcels zoned GI-General Industrial.
2. The limits referred to in the State Fire Code, in which new bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited, are hereby established as
follows: area west of Akron Avenue within the City.
3. Storage tanks must be installed by a dealer or supplier with demonstrated competency under permit issued by the building official. (Ord. 2018-01, 2-
20-2018)
B. Liquefied Petroleum Gases, Bulk Storage:
1. Bulk storage limited to five hundred (500) gallon water capacity maximum in R-1 zoning districts except as may be approved by the Fire Chief or a
representative authorized by the Fire Chief. One thousand (1,000) gallon water capacity maximum in RR zoning and nonresidential installations,
except as may be approved by the Fire Chief or a representative authorized by the Fire Chief.
2. Separation from house, structures, property and other LP storage installations as per the State Fire Code. Staggered alignment of storage tanks of
any capacity in residential applications shall be required by this Code.
3. Storage tanks must be installed by a dealer or supplier with demonstrated competency under permit issued by the building official.
4. Tanks must be installed level and true on substantial concrete pad or footing with positive form of weed and grass control.
5. Tanks and equipment including, but not limited to: tank, piping, valves and regulators should be inspected on a regular basis by a dealer or supplier
with demonstrated competency. Copy of inspection report should be available to the Fire Chief or designated representative upon request.
6. All installations in existence at the time of this adoption shall be allowed to remain until such time that equipment must be changed by obsolescence
or by owner's choice.
C. Explosives And Blasting Agents: The limits referred to in the State Fire Code, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are
hereby established as follows: area west of Akron Avenue within the City, except University of Minnesota property. (Ord. 2011-05, 6-21-2011)
6-1-6: PENALTIES:
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any
order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified
by the Fire Chief, or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and
noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code. The imposition of one penalty for
any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. All such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects
within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
B. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (Ord. XVIII.3, 1-16-1979)
Chapter 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT
6-2-1: ORGANIZATION:
The Fire Department created by Ordinance X.1 on August 16, 1973, shall consist of such number of officers and firefighters as the City Council deems
necessary to meet the needs of the City. (Ord. X.5, 6-17-1997)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 85/324
6-2-2: RELIEF ASSOCIATION:
The officers and firefighters may organize and incorporate a relief association in accordance with the laws of the State. (Ord. X.5, 6-17-1997)
6-2-3: INTERFERENCE WITH DEPARTMENT; PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to give or make, or cause to be given or made, an alarm of fire without probable cause, or to neglect or refuse to obey
any reasonable order of the chief at a fire, or to interfere with the Department in the discharge of its duties; and any person guilty of violating any provision
of this Chapter is guilty as provided by State law. (Ord. X.5, 6-17-1997)
Chapter 3
OPEN BURNING1
6-3-1: OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful, a violation of this chapter and a misdemeanor for any person to start or allow to burn any open fire on any property within the city
without a permit, except for supervised recreational fires contained within approved fire rings. (Ord. 2011-08, 6-21-2011)
6-3-2: PERMIT ISSUING AUTHORITY:
A. The fire chief, or a representative authorized by the fire chief is hereby authorized to issue permits under this chapter, and may establish reasonable
permit conditions for open burning consistent with the rules adopted herein. The signature of one authorized official is necessary for a permit to be
issued.
B. The open burning permits are subject to revocation at the discretion of DNR forest officer, the fire chief, or a representative authorized by the fire chief.
Reasons for revocation include, but are not limited to, a fire hazard existing or developing during the course of the burn, any of the conditions of the
permit being violated during the course of the burn, pollution or nuisance conditions developing during the course of the burn, or a fire smoldering with
no flame present. (Ord. 2011-08, 6-21-2011)
6-3-3: PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBILITY:
A. Every open burn event shall be constantly attended by the permit holder. The open burning site shall have available appropriate communication and fire
suppression equipment, as set out in the fire safety plan.
B. The open burn fire shall be completely extinguished before the permit holder leaves the site. No fire may be allowed to smolder with no person present.
C. The permit holder shall have a valid permit, as required by this chapter, available for inspection on the open burn site by the fire department, police
department, MPCA representative or DNR forest officer.
D. No recreational fire or open burn will be permitted when the city or DNR has officially declared a burning ban due to potential hazardous fire conditions,
or when the MPCA has declared an air quality alert.
E. All fires shall be extinguished at the direction of the fire department, police department, or DNR fire warden.
F. The permit holder shall comply with and implement all permanent conditions of the burn event safety plan as established. The permit holder shall be
responsible for all costs incurred as a result of the burn, including, but not limited to, fire suppression and administrative fees.
G. No prohibited materials as defined in Minnesota statutes shall be combusted in an open fire. (Ord. 2011-08, 6-21-2011)
6-3-4: RECREATIONAL FIRES:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish the guidelines for recreational fires.
B. Definitions:
PERMANENT FIRE RING: Must be constructed of concrete, steel or other approved noncombustible materials. The ring must extend at least six
inches (6") below the ground and extend at least six inches (6") above the ground. The area around a permanent fire ring must be cleared of all grass
and vegetation for at least five feet (5').
PERMITTED MATERIALS: The only materials permitted in a recreational fire are wood from trees, small branches, or charcoal.
PROHIBITED MATERIALS: Include leaves, brush, oil, rubber, plastic, tires, chemically treated materials such as railroad ties, treated lumber,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 86/324
construction debris, composite shingles, tar paper, insulation composition board, waste materials, hazardous waste or garbage.
RECREATIONAL FIRE: An outdoor fire burning permitted materials where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace,
barbecue grill or barbecue pit and has a total fuel area of three feet (3') or less in diameter and two feet (2') or less in height for pleasure, religious,
ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar purposes.
STRUCTURES: Include a house, garage, shed, deck or fence.
C. Requirements:
1. Adult Supervision Required: All recreational fires shall be supervised by an adult who is in the immediate vicinity of the recreational fire until it is
extinguished.
2. Extinguisher Or Similar Device Required: A fire extinguisher with a minimum 4A rating, dirt or sand and a shovel or a garden hose shall be readily
available at all times until the fire is extinguished.
3. Wind Restriction: No fire shall be allowed if the winds are greater than fifteen (15) miles per hour.
4. Smoke Complaints: Complaints about smoke from a fire shall be cause for immediate extinguishment of the fire.
5. Extinguishment Authority: All fires shall be extinguished at the direction of the fire department, police department, or DNR fire warden.
6. Prohibited Materials: No prohibited materials as defined in Minnesota statutes shall be combusted in a recreational fire.
7. Recreational Fire Site: Recreational fires, including fires in freestanding, manufactured fire pits, shall not be conducted within twenty five feet (25') of
a structure or combustible material. Conditions that could cause a fire to spread within twenty five feet (25') of a structure shall be eliminated prior to
ignition.
8. Wood Length Limit: No wood combusted in a recreational fire shall exceed three feet (3') in length. (Ord. 2011-08, 6-21-2011)
6-3-5: FIRES OR BARBECUES ON BALCONIES OR PATIOS:
A. Open Flame Prohibited: In any structure containing three (3) or more dwelling units, no person shall kindle, maintain, or cause any fire or open flame on
any deck/balcony above ground level, or on any ground floor patio within fifteen feet (15') of the structure.
B. Fuel Storage Prohibited: No person shall store or use any fuel, barbecue, torch or similar heating or lighting chemical or device in the locations
designated in subsection A of this section.
Exception: Listed electric or gas fired barbecue grills that are permanently mounted and wired or plumbed to the building's gas supply or electrical
system and that maintain a minimum clearance of eighteen inches (18") on all sides, unless listed for lesser clearances, may be installed on balconies
and patios when approved by the Rosemount fire chief or a representative authorized by the fire chief. (Ord. 2011-08, 6-21-2011)
6-3-6: AIR POLLUTION CONTROL:
The air pollution control rules, promulgated by the Minnesota pollution control agency, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as
if fully set forth herein; three (3) copies are on file with the city clerk. Any violation of said rules is a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-08, 6-21-2011)
6-3-7: PENALTY:
Any person who shall fail to comply with any order given under the terms of this chapter, or who shall in any way violate any of the provisions or
requirements of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this
code. (Ord. 2011-08, 6-21-2011)
Chapter 4
FIREWORKS
6-4-1: PURPOSE:
Due to the inherent risks of fire and injury to persons and property associated with the sale, possession and use of fireworks, the city council has
determined that it is necessary and in the interest of public health, safety and welfare to establish reasonable regulations concerning fireworks. (Ord. X.6,
7-6-2004)
6-4-2: ADOPTION OF STATE LAW:
It is unlawful to sell, use or possess fireworks in violation of Minnesota state statutes 624.20 through 624.25, inclusive, which are adopted by reference.
(Ord. X.6, 7-6-2004)
6-4-3: DEFINITION:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 87/324
For purposes of this chapter, "consumer fireworks" are defined as:
A. Sparklers of not more than one hundred grams (100 g) of mixture per item,
B. Other sparkling items that are nonexplosive and nonaerial and contain seventy five grams (75 g) or less of chemical mixture per tube or a total of five
hundred grams (500 g) or less for multiple tubes,
C. Paper caps containing twenty five hundredths grain of explosive or other toy caps containing twenty hundredths grain of explosives,
D. Snakes, and glow works, smoke devices, or trick noisemakers which include paper streamers, party poppers, string poppers, snappers, and drop pops,
each consisting of not more than twenty five hundredths grain of explosive mixture. (Ord. 2011-06, 6-21-2011)
6-4-4: LICENSE PROVISIONS:
A. Sale Of Fireworks: It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, expose for sale, or sell at retail or wholesale any consumer fireworks in the city of
Rosemount without a license.
B. License Application: The applicant shall completely fill out and submit an application form for a consumer fireworks license prepared by the Rosemount
fire department, fire prevention bureau. Information to be submitted as part of the license application includes, but is not necessarily limited to, the
following information: name, address and telephone number of the applicant; address of location where the fireworks will be sold; estimated quantity of
the fireworks that will be stored on the premises; description of the premises and facility from which the fireworks are proposed to be sold; approval of
the property owner, if different from the applicant. Prior to the issuance of a license, the premises must be inspected and approved by the city fire code
official.
C. Conditions Of License: A license to sell consumer fireworks shall be issued subject to the following conditions:
1. The license is nontransferable, either to a different person or location.
2. The license must be publicly displayed on the licensed premises.
3. The premises are subject to inspection by city fire and police officers during normal business hours.
4. The premises for which a license will be issued must be located in a zoning district permitting retail sales.
5. Consumer fireworks shall only be stored in or sold from buildings or retail stands that comply with National Fire Protection Association standard 1124
(2003 edition) as required under Minnesota statutes, section 624.20(d)(2).
6. Storage of consumer fireworks on the premises must be in compliance with the Minnesota state fire code.
7. Consumer fireworks shall not be sold to persons under the age of eighteen (18).
8. The display of consumer fireworks in exit access aisles, corridors, covered malls or within five feet (5') of exits and exterior exit doors is prohibited.
(Ord. 2011-06, 6-21-2011)
6-4-5: PROHIBITIONS ON USE:
A. Consumer fireworks shall not be used on public property.
B. Consumer fireworks shall not be used indoors. (Ord. X.6, 7-6-2004)
Title 7
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
OFFENSES
7-1-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
The doing of any of the following acts without authority of law in a public or private place, by any person knowing, or having reasonable grounds to know,
that it will, or will tend to, alarm, anger or disturb others or provoke an assault or breach of the peace, is hereby declared to be disorderly conduct:
A. Engaging in brawling or fighting.
B. Disturbing an assembly or meeting not unlawful in its character, or the peace and quiet of any family or neighborhood.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 88/324
C. Engaging in offensive or abusive language or in boisterous and noisy conduct tending to reasonably arouse alarm, anger and resentment in others.
D. Wilfully and lewdly exposing his person or the private parts thereof, or procuring another to so expose himself, or any open and gross lewdness or
lascivious behavior or any act of public indecency.
E. Appearing upon private property without the consent of the owner or occupant in an intoxicated condition.
F. Lurking, lying in wait or concealing oneself in any building, yard, premises or street within the limits of the city with intent to do any mischief, or to pilfer
or to commit any crime or misdemeanor.
G. Making, aiding or assisting in making any riot, disturbance, or improper diversion, or collecting in bodies or crowds in the city for unlawful purposes or to
the annoyance or disturbance of the citizens or travelers.
H. Wilfully attempting, offering or threatening with force or violence to do bodily harm to another without lawful authority, or wilfully applying force to the
person of another without lawful authority and with intent to do bodily harm.
I. Resisting any police officer or any member of the police department, or any person duly empowered with police authority, while in the discharge of his
duty or giving false information to any police officer, or in any way interfering with or hindering him in the discharge of his duties or in any way
impersonating or attempting to impersonate a police officer.
J. Congregating with three (3) or more together or near each other in any public street or any footwalk or sidewalk in the city so as to obstruct the free
passage of foot passengers or motor vehicles and, so standing, refuses to move on immediately upon the request so to do made by any police officer.
K. Frequents or loiters about any place soliciting any person for the purpose of committing any crime against nature or other lewdness.
L. Interferes with or obstructs the fire department while engaged in fighting a fire1.
M. Stands or loiters in or upon a driveway of any building, or sits upon the steps, window sills or railings of any building in such a manner as to obstruct
ingress and egress to and from such building or to the annoyance of the owner or occupant thereof, or the business in case of a public building. (Ord.
XV.1, 9-28-1972; amd. 1983 Code)
N. Participating in any party or assembly of two (2) or more people from which noise emanates of a sufficient volume or of such nature to disturb the
peace, quiet or repose of another person or persons.
Disorderly conduct is hereby prohibited and anyone doing any of the above acts shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction thereof be
punished as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
7-1-2: LOITERING:
A. Definitions: The following definitions shall apply to this section:
LAWFUL BUSINESS: A reason for being present upon a school property which is not otherwise prohibited by statute, by ordinance, or by any
regulation adopted pursuant to statute or ordinance.
SCHOOL: Any elementary school, junior high school, four (4) year high school, senior high school, adult school, vocational school or any branch
thereof or community college.
B. Disruptive Presence At Schools: It shall be unlawful for any person to come into any school building or upon any school ground, street, sidewalk or
public way adjacent thereto, without lawful business thereon, and whose presence or acts interfere with the peaceful conduct of the activities of such
school or disrupt the school or its pupils or school activities, and who remains there or who reenters or comes upon such place within forty eight (48)
hours after being asked to leave by the chief administrative official of the school, or his designee in the absence of the chief administrative official.
C. Loitering About Schools Or Public Places: It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter about any school or public place. (Ord. XII.7, 5-20-1975)
D. Penalty: Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof may be punished as
described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
7-1-3: OBSCENE MATERIALS; SALE AND POSSESSION:
A. Definitions: As used in this section:
DISTRIBUTE: To transfer possession, whether with or without consideration.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 89/324
KNOWINGLY: Being aware of the character of the matter or live conduct.
MATTER: Any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture or other pictorial
representation or any statue or other figure, or any recording, transcription or mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction or any other articles,
equipment, machines or materials.
OBSCENE: That which to the average person applying contemporary community standards appeals to the prurient interest and taken as a whole
lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value and is:
1. A patently offensive representation or description of ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or
2. A patently offensive representation or description of masturbation, excretory functions and lewd exhibition of the genitals.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other legal entity. (Ord. XV.2, 7-20-1976)
B. Violation; Penalty: Every person who knowingly sends or causes to be sent, or brings or causes to be brought, into this city for sale or distribution, or in
this city prepares, publishes, prints, exhibits, distributes or offers to distribute, or has in his possession with intent to distribute or to exhibit or offer to
distribute, any obscene matter, is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
Such violation shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of any and all licenses held at such premises. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
7-1-4: OBSCENE MATERIALS; SALES TO MINORS:
A. Definitions: As used in this section the terms defined in this subsection shall have the meanings given them as follows:
HARMFUL TO MINORS: That quality of any description or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or
sadomasochistic abuse, when it:
1. Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of minors, and
2. Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors, and
3. Is utterly without redeeming social importance for minors.
KNOWINGLY: Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry or both:
1. The character and content of any material which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant, and
2. The age of the minor, provided, however, that an honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a
reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor.
MINOR: Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the
female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE: Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of
being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed.
SEXUAL CONDUCT: Acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse or physical contact with a person's unclothed genitals, pubic area,
buttocks, or if such a person be a female, her breast.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT: The condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Sales Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person knowingly to sell or loan for monetary consideration to a minor:
1. Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body
which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors, or
2. Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in subsection B1 of
this section, or which contains explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or
sadomasochistic abuse which, taken as a whole, is harmful to minors.
C. Exhibits Prohibited:
1. It is unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit for a monetary consideration to a minor or knowingly to sell to a minor an admission ticket or pass or
knowingly to admit a minor for a monetary consideration to premises whereon there is exhibited a motion picture, show or other presentation which,
in whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors.
2. It is unlawful for any person knowingly to openly exhibit, show, display, demonstrate or otherwise allow to be exposed to public view in any public
commercial establishment where minors are allowed or permitted to enter for the purpose of doing business in such commercial establishment for
profit:
a. Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body
which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors, or
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 90/324
b. Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in subsection C2a
of this section, or which contains explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or
sadomasochistic abuse which, taken as a whole, is harmful to minors, unless said matters enumerated in subsection C2a of this section and this
subsection C2b shall be kept in an "adults only" area, the contents of which are protected from the view or person of a minor.
D. Exemptions: The following are exempt from criminal or other action hereunder:
1. Recognized and established schools, churches, museums, medical clinics and physicians, hospitals, public libraries, governmental agencies or
quasi-governmental sponsored organizations, and persons acting in their capacity as employees or agents of such organizations. For the purpose of
this subsection, "recognized and established" shall mean an organization or agency having a full time faculty and diversified curriculum in the case of
a school; a church affiliated with a national or regional denomination, a licensed physician or psychiatrist or clinic or licensed physicians or
psychiatrists; and in all other exempt organizations shall refer only to income tax funds or which receive at least one-third (1/3) of their support from
publicly donated funds.
2. Individuals in a parental relationship with the minor.
3. Motion pictures machine operators, stagehands or other theater employees such as cashiers, doormen, ushers and concession employees, if such a
person or persons have no financial interest in the entertainment presented other than the salary or wage, or in any theater or place where such
employee has no financial interest when his services are obtained solely for salary or wage; provided, that such employee is under the direct
supervision of a theater manager who is a resident of this state and who is not exempt from action. (Ord. XV.3, 7-20-1976)
E. Penalty: Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this
code. Such violation shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of any and all licenses held at such premises. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
7-1-5: NOISY PARTIES OR GATHERINGS:
A. Unlawful Noises Or Disturbances: No person shall participate in any party or other gathering of people giving rise to noise which disturbs the peace,
quiet or repose of the occupants of adjoining or other property. This shall not apply to city authorized events.
B. Duty To Disperse: When a police officer determines that a gathering is creating such noise disturbance, the officer shall order all persons present, other
than the owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance is occurring, to disburse immediately. Any person who refuses to disburse from such a
gathering after being ordered by a police officer to do so, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Every owner or tenant of such premises who has knowledge of
the disturbance shall cooperate with police officers and shall make every reasonable effort to see that the disturbance is immediately abated.
C. Owner Or Tenant Liability: Every owner, tenant or agent of the premises where a party or gathering in violation of this section occurs, and who is
present at such party or gathering, or who is not present, but knows such party or gathering is occurring, is deemed a participant and is guilty of a
violation of this section.
D. Evidence: It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section if the sound of the party or gathering is audible to a human ear at a distance of
fifty feet (50') from the premises from which the gathering, conduct or disturbance is occurring. (Ord. XV.6, 9-21-1993)
E. Penalty: Every person who violates this section when they perform an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is
thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code, except as
otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
7-1-6: ELECTRONIC SOUND SYSTEM/AUDIO EQUIPMENT:
A. No person shall use or operate any electronic sound system or audio equipment including, but not limited to, any compact disc player, AM-FM radio,
citizen band radio, paging system, or any other device designed to produce or reproduce audio sound in such an unreasonably loud manner that it
disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of others or interferes with the right of another to use peacefully his/her property or public property without
disturbance.
B. It shall be presumed that a violation of this section has occurred when any electronic sound system or audio equipment is operated in a manner in
which it is plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet (50') or more from the property line or from the vehicle operating the audio equipment.
C. When sound violating this section is produced by an electronic sound system or audio equipment that is located in or on a vehicle, the vehicle's owner
is guilty of the violation, provided that if the vehicle's owner is not present, the person in charge of the vehicle at the time of the violation is guilty of the
violation.
D. This section shall not apply to sound produced by the following:
1. Amplifying equipment used:
a. In connection with activities for which a permit has been granted by the city, subject to the terms of the permit; or
b. In connection with any special community event or special activity sponsored or organized by a school, church, or the city, provided the amplifying
equipment is not used later than ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M.;
2. Antitheft devices;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 91/324
3. Church bells, chimes or carillons, school bells, or emergency civil defense warning signals; and
4. Authorized emergency vehicles or other vehicles required by law to be equipped with sound devices. (Ord. 2015-7, 8-18-2015)
Chapter 2
MINORS' CURFEW
7-2-1: CURFEW IMPOSED:
Dakota County Ordinance 122, Juvenile Curfew Ordinance is adopted by reference. (Ord. XV.8, 9-5-1995)
Chapter 3
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
7-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this Chapter are as follows:
A. To protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare by prohibiting the possession, manufacturing, delivery and advertisement of drug
paraphernalia within the City.
B. To deter the use of controlled substances by controlling certain paraphernalia associated with their use and manufacture.
C. To reduce the availability of drug paraphernalia in order to prevent their availability from inducing, promoting, suggesting or increasing the public
acceptability of controlled substances.
7-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
The term "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation
of Minnesota Statutes, section 152. It includes, but is not limited to:
A. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived.
B. Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances.
C. Isomeric devices used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance.
D. Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness orpurity of controlled substances.
E. Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances.
F. Diluents and adulterants such as quinine, hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in cutting
controlled substances.
G. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning and refining,
marijuana.
H. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances.
I. Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances.
J. Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
K. Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in parenternally injecting controlled substances into the
human body.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 92/324
L. Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the
human body, such as:
1. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls.
2. Water pipes.
3. Carburetion tubes and devices.
4. Smoking and carburetion masks.
5. Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the
hand.
6. Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials.
7. Chamber pipes.
8. Carburetor pipes.
9. Electric pipes.
10. Air driven pipes.
11. Chillums.
12. Bongs.
13. Ice pipes or chillers. (Ord. XVI.16, 8-5-1980)
7-3-3: PROHIBITED PARAPHERNALIA:
A. Prohibited Use: It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise
introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of Minnesota statutes, section 152.
B. Prohibited Delivery: It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia,
knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of Minnesota statutes, section 152.
C. Prohibited Advertising: It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or
under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects
designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. (Ord. XVI.16, 8-5-1980)
7-3-4: EVIDENCE OF PARAPHERNALIA:
In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the
following:
A. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use.
B. Prior convictions, if any, of any owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance.
C. The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this chapter.
D. The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
E. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
F. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or should
reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this chapter; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a
direct violation of this chapter shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
G. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use.
H. Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use.
I. National and local advertising concerning its use.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 93/324
J. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
K. Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or
dealer of tobacco products.
L. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise.
M. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community.
N. Expert testimony concerning its use. (Ord. XVI.16, 8-5-1980)
7-3-5: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates section 7-3-3 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord.
XII.21, 6-15-2004)
Chapter 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE A. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
7-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
ANIMAL: Any nonhuman mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird (including all fowl and poultry) or other member commonly accepted as a part of the animal
kingdom.
Allowed Animals: Those animals commonly accepted as domesticated household pets. Unless otherwise defined, such animals shall include dogs,
cats, spayed or neutered ferrets, caged birds, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, domesticated rabbits, fish, nonpoisonous, nonvenomous and
nonconstricting reptiles or amphibians, and trained service animals that are assisting disabled persons.
Farm Animal: Cattle, horses, ponies, mules, sheep, goats, swine (including potbellied pigs and other miniature varieties), ducks, geese, turkeys,
chickens, and other animals of husbandry.
Wild Animals: A nonhuman terrestrial mammal or bat that is wild by nature; any poisonous, venomous, constricting or inherently dangerous member
of the reptile or amphibian families; any crossbreed between a wild and domestic animal.
AT LARGE: Any animal that is off the property of its owner and not "under restraint" as herein required.
COMMERCIAL KENNEL: A place where more than five (5) dogs, cats, or ferrets over six (6) months of age are kept, and where the business of selling,
boarding, breeding, showing, treating or grooming such animals is conducted.
COOP: Any structure used for the keeping of fowl.
DANGEROUS: Able or likely to inflict injury or harm.
DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog that:
A. Has without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a human being while on public or private property.
B. Has killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's property; or
C. Having been found to be potentially dangerous and after the owner has notice that the dog is potentially dangerous, the dog aggressively bites,
attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
GREAT BODILY HARM: Bodily injury which creates a high probability of death, or which causes serious permanent disfigurement, or which otherwise
causes a permanent or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ or other serious bodily harm.
HORSE: Any breed of horse, pony, mule, ass or similar animal.
LOFT: Any and all quarters in which pigeons are housed.
OWNER: Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping, harboring, or in custody or control of animals within or being
transported within the city.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 94/324
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog that:
A. When unprovoked, inflicts bites on a human or domestic animal on public or private property;
B. When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person, including a person on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private property,
other than the dog owner's property, in an apparent attitude of attack; or
C. Has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or domestic
animals.
PROPER ENCLOSURE: An enclosure for an animal that securely confines the animal indoors; or, in an enclosure that has flooring that prevents digging,
sides that prevent chewing or exit through them, and a covering that prevents escape and provides protection from the elements. This enclosure must be
locked. A porch, patio, house, garage or other structure that cannot be locked or has walls, windows or doors that are not substantial enough to prevent
the escape of the animal shall not be considered a proper enclosure. A door or window secured with only a screen is not a secure enclosure.
SERVICE ANIMAL: Animals that are individually trained to perform tasks for people with disabilities, such as: guiding people who are blind, alerting people
who are deaf, pulling wheelchairs, alerting and protecting a person who is having a seizure, or performing other special tasks.
SUBSTANTIAL BODILY HARM: Bodily injury that involves a temporary but substantial disfigurement, or that causes a temporary but substantial loss or
impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ, or that causes a fracture of any bodily member.
UNDER RESTRAINT: Controlled by a leash; under voice or signal command of a competent person, providing that the animal will obey such voice or
signal commands; within the limits of the owner's property; or confined within a vehicle being driven or parked in the street. An animal must be controlled
with the use of a leash no longer than six feet (6') while on any public property, including, but not limited to, a street, sidewalk, trail, or park. This leash
requirement does not apply while the animal is in an exercise area designated by the city. Retractable leashes may be used but must be kept to a length of
six feet (6') or less when in the vicinity of any other person or animal. Registered potentially dangerous and dangerous dogs must be restrained as
required by other sections of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4A-2: OFFICERS APPOINTED TO ENFORCE CHAPTER:
The city council may appoint community service officers, animal control officers, humane agents or other officers to assist the police officers of the city in
the enforcement of this chapter, and no person shall interfere with the exercise of such powers. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4A-3: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS:
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any unauthorized person to break open a shelter or attempt to take from any officer any animal taken up in
compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4A-4: ANIMAL SHELTER PROVIDED:
The city council may provide for a city owned animal shelter or may designate as an animal shelter a suitable kennel whether within or outside the limits of
the city. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4A-5: RABIES, BITES, IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSAL OF ANIMALS:
A. Reports Of Rabies: Any person having knowledge of an animal that is a rabies suspect or of an animal or human who may have been bitten by a rabies
suspect must report it to the city police department. All rabies reports and incidents will be handled in accordance with the Minnesota board of animal
health rules and regulations.
B. Reports Of Bites: Any person having knowledge of an animal bite to a human must report it to the city police department.
C. Impoundment:
1. Violation: In the event of a violation of this chapter, any designated officer may capture and impound an animal in the city designated shelter.
2. Notice: Immediately upon the impounding of any animal wearing a current registration, the city will attempt to notify the owner of the impoundment
and the conditions of regaining custody of the animal. Verbal notices will be confirmed in writing.
3. Right Of Entry: To enforce this chapter, designated officers may enter upon private premises where it appears or where there is reasonable cause to
believe that an animal is not registered or is not being kept, confined or restrained as required herein, or in pursuit of an animal running at large. Any
owner shall produce for the officer's inspection, the animal's registration or receipt upon request.
4. Length Of Impoundment: Any animal that is impounded in the city animal shelter shall be kept in the city shelter for at least five (5) business days
unless sooner reclaimed by its owner. If such animal is known to be or is suspected of being rabid or has bitten a person, it shall be kept quarantined
for a period as recommended by the Minnesota board of animal health.
D. Reclamation Or Disposal Of Impounded Animals:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 95/324
1. Fines And Fees: Fines shall be determined by council resolution and reviewed annually. An administrative fee shall be charged and collected by the
city animal shelter, or cooperating pet adoption agency, to recover costs incurred by the shelter in caring for and maintaining the animal.
2. Registration: If the animal requires a city registration, such registration must also be obtained before the animal is released.
3. Abandonment/Adoption: If at the end of the impounding period the animal is not reclaimed by the owner, the animal shall be deemed abandoned and
may be placed for adoption if appropriate. The shelter or cooperating pet adoption agency shall ensure that anyone purchasing unclaimed animals
shall have the animal spayed or neutered prior to release, or as soon as conditions of health or age of the animal permit. Failure on the part of the
adopting owner to comply with this section shall be a violation of this chapter.
4. Disposal:
a. If an animal is not adopted, then it may be euthanized in a humane manner. Final determination on the adoptability of animals shall rest with the
police department, in consultation with the city animal shelter or cooperating pet adoption agency.
b. If the owner requests disposal of the animal, the owner shall pay for the cost of disposal, including any boarding or other fees incurred prior to
disposal. A request to dispose of an animal must be made in writing to the police department, along with proof of ownership or an affidavit of
ownership. Payment of the cost for disposal will be made to the police department by the owner upon filing of the request for disposal with the
police department and receiving approval.
c. Any animal that has a history of or shows a propensity to attack humans or other animals; or, has a documented history of attacks and bites on
humans or other animals; or, is suspected to have a disease that can be transmitted to humans or other animals will not be placed for adoption but
will be humanely euthanized.
E. Killing Of Animals That Cannot Be Impounded: Any animal that is diseased, dangerous, rabid or exposed to rabies and cannot be captured or
impounded after a reasonable effort or impounded without serious risk to the person attempting to capture or impound the animal, may be immediately
killed by or under the direction of a police officer. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
ARTICLE B. REGISTRATION AND CARE OF ANIMALS
7-4B-1: ANIMAL REGISTRATION:
A. Requirements:
1. No person in the city shall own or keep a dog or ferret over six (6) months of age, within the city, unless a current city registration for such dog or
ferret has been obtained as herein provided.
a. All ferrets over the age of six (6) months kept within the city must be sterilized.
2. No person in the city shall own or keep a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog within the city, unless a current city registration for such dog has
been obtained as provided in article C of this chapter.
B. Ownership Limits:
1. Household Limit: No person shall own or keep more than a combined total of five (5) cats, dogs or ferrets over the age of six (6) months within any
household in the city of Rosemount unless authorized elsewhere in this chapter.
a. For the purposes of this section, the term "household" refers to a single-family residence or a single unit of a town home, condominium, apartment
or comparable structure that is rented, leased or used as a single unit.
b. This section shall not be construed to limit the ability of apartment managers, landlords, town home and condominium associations or other
representatives of property owners to impose greater restrictions.
2. Exception: For premises that are ten (10) acres or more and zoned agricultural the resident may own or keep up to ten (10) cats over the age of six
(6) months as long as they have been spayed or neutered and documentation of that fact is provided.
C. Application: Application for city registration shall be made to the police department. It shall include such descriptive information as is necessary to
provide a reasonable identification of the dog or ferret and owner.
D. Term Of Validity: City registrations shall be valid for the period the certificate of rabies vaccination certifies, and shall expire on the date the rabies
vaccination certificate expires. Nonspayed and unneutered dogs are only eligible for a year long registration.
E. Fees:
1. City Registration: The city registration fee shall be set by council resolution and reviewed annually. The following provisions shall also apply:
a. Fee Discount: Spayed or neutered dogs and ferrets shall qualify for a discount of half (1/2) of the normal fee.
b. Multiyear Registration: Spayed or neutered dogs and ferrets shall qualify for a multiyear registration. This multiyear registration shall expire on the
date the rabies certification expires.
c. Nonspayed Or Unneutered Dogs And Ferrets: The registration fee shall not be discounted for nonspayed or unneutered dogs and ferrets.
d. Service Animals And Police Canines: Service animals and police canines must be registered but the normal fee will be waived.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 96/324
e. Senior Citizen Discount: Senior citizens shall be offered a fifty percent (50%) discount of the registration fee. For purposes of this discount a
"senior citizen" will be considered anyone aged fifty five (55) years or older.
2. Potentially Dangerous And Dangerous Dog Registration: The city potentially dangerous and dangerous dog registration fee shall be set by council
and reviewed annually.
F. Vaccinations: In order to register a dog or ferret, an owner must provide proof of up to date vaccinations and a certificate from a currently state licensed
veterinarian showing the effective dates of the vaccinations.
G. Duplicate Tags: In the event that any registration tag issued for any animal is lost, the owner must obtain a duplicate tag from the city on the payment of
an amount as set by council resolution.
H. New Resident Exemptions: Any dog or ferret owner, upon first becoming a resident of the city, shall be allowed thirty (30) days' time within which to
obtain the animal's registration. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4B-2: REGISTRATION PROVISIONS FOR COMMERCIAL KENNELS:
A. Registration Requirements: No person shall operate a commercial kennel, without first obtaining the required city registration and paying all fees as
required in this chapter.
B. Applications: A commercial kennel application must be made to the police department and shall include:
1. The name and address of the owner and the operator of a commercial kennel,
2. The address where the kennel is to be located,
3. A site plan for review,
4. Any required secure enclosure details,
5. The number of dogs, cats, or ferrets proposed to be kept.
C. Issuance Or Suspension Of Registration:
1. The police department will issue the registration if all requirements are met.
2. If the application is missing any required documentation, or any necessary staff approvals or recommendations are missing or incomplete the
application will be suspended until all required or missing items are supplied. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4B-3: RESTRAINT OF ANIMALS:
No animal may be at large. All owners or persons in custody or control of an animal shall keep the animal "under restraint" at all times. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-
2011)
7-4B-4: ANIMAL TAG AND COLLAR REQUIREMENTS:
A. Upon complying with the registration provisions of this chapter, the city shall issue to the owner a permanent tag, stamped with a number that will
uniquely identify the animal and owner for which it was issued.
B. Every dog and ferret owner is required to keep a valid tag securely fastened to the registered animal's chain, collar or harness, which must be worn by
the animal at all times. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4B-5: ANIMAL CARE AND MAINTENANCE:
A. No owner shall fail to provide:
1. Any animal with sufficient food, potable water, or proper diet appropriate for its species,
2. Proper shelter and protection from the weather appropriate for its species,
3. Veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and maintain the normal health of the animal, and
4. Humane care and treatment.
B. No person shall:
1. Abandon any animal anywhere within the city, or at the animal shelter designated by the city. Any owner of, or person in custody or control of, an
animal who fails to retrieve an animal from the pound after notification from animal control shall be deemed to have abandoned such animal and to
have violated this section.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 97/324
2. Beat, treat cruelly, torment or otherwise abuse any animal.
3. Cause or permit any dog, cat, cock, or any animal fights.
4. Use any weighted collars, over two (2) pounds; any pronged collars that may cause injury or discomfort to the animal's neck (other than common
electronic training collars); or any treadmill or other training device to develop any animal's stamina or musculature for any animal fighting.
5. Leave any animal unattended in a standing or parked motor vehicle in a manner that endangers the animal's health or safety. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-
2011)
7-4B-6: DANGEROUS ANIMAL CONFINEMENT:
Dangerous animals must be confined in a proper enclosure. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4B-7: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
A. No person shall keep or harbor any animal in any unsanitary place or condition, or in a manner that results in noisome odors or that annoys others by
barking, crying, howling, fighting or other similar noises.
B. No person shall feed animals in such a manner that attracts animals, causes property damage, allows for excessive amounts of feed to accumulate, or
poses a public health threat. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4B-8: DISPOSAL OF ANIMAL FECES:
A. All persons in control of an animal on any park property, public property or right of way shall have in possession at all times apparatus that can be used
for cleaning up feces, or a bag for proper disposal of feces. The person in control of an animal is responsible for picking up the animal's feces and
disposing of it properly. Failure to properly collect and dispose of animal feces is a violation of this chapter.
B. A property owner is required to clean all feces from his or her property as often as necessary to prevent contamination to animals or humans and to
avoid nuisance from odors and breeding of insects, but in no case less than weekly.
C. Any stable, barn or yard area in which horses, cattle or any farm animals are kept shall be kept clean. Manure shall be removed with sufficient
frequency to avoid nuisance from odors, breeding of insects, public nuisance, or a public health nuisance, and in no case less than weekly.
D. Manure on public streets, roadways, or public right of way shall be removed by the owner, rider or driver of a horse and disposed of properly on the
person's property, or in a public waste receptacle if the manure is packaged in a sealed plastic bag or similar container. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4B-9: KEEPING OF ANIMALS:
The keeping of animals is regulated in the following manner:
A. Farm Animals: Farm animals are permitted on all property zoned by the city as agricultural and on property owned by the University Of Minnesota while
used for agricultural or research purposes. Farm animals may not be confined in a pen, feedlot or building within one hundred feet (100') of any
residential dwelling not owned or leased by the farmer except as otherwise allowed in this chapter.
B. Allowed Animals: Allowed animals, and pigeons and fowl, may be kept in any zoning districts in accordance with all applicable ordinances and laws
concerning care, maintenance, registration, and restraint. In commercial districts, allowed animals, including pigeons and fowl, must be kept within the
principal structure.
C. Wild Animals: Wild animals are prohibited from being kept in all parts of the city, except as otherwise allowed in this chapter. A wild animal may be
transported through the city if the transit period is thirty (30) minutes or less in duration and the wild animal is kept securely restrained in a proper
enclosure or cage appropriate for the species during the transit period.
D. Commercial Kennels: Commercial kennels are allowed only in areas zoned agricultural or commercial, except C-1 and DT.
E. Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
1. Institutions accredited by the American Zoo And Aquarium Association (AZA) or the American Sanctuary Association (ASA) that are permitted uses
within the city.
2. Registered nonprofit humane societies.
3. Animal control or law enforcement officers acting under the authority of city, county, state or federal regulation, rule, ordinance or statute.
4. Licensed veterinary hospitals or clinics.
5. State licensed wildlife rehabilitators.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 98/324
6. Licensed or accredited research or medical institutions.
7. Licensed or accredited educational institutions.
8. Service animals, as defined in this chapter if application of this section would violate state or federal laws relating to persons with disabilities.
F. Private Zoos, Game Farms, Hunt Clubs Or Animal Exhibitions: No private zoos, game farms, hunt clubs or animal exhibitions are allowed within any city
zoning district.
G. Commercial Purpose: Animals may only be kept for commercial purposes if authorized in the zoning district where the animals are located.
H. Pet Shops And Commercial Kennels: Pet shops and kennels must be operated in accordance with any applicable state regulations in addition to the
regulations provided by this chapter. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4B-10: HORSE REGULATIONS:
A. The keeping of horses is a permitted use in the agricultural and rural residential zoning districts, provided:
1. The lot size is at least two and one-half (2.5) acres.
2. The number of horses does not exceed one horse per one acre.
B. Exceptions:
1. Miniature Horses: The number of miniature horses allowed per acre is three (3).
2. Commercial Stables: Horses kept in commercial stables may exceed the limits. However, all regulations regarding the welfare, care, and keeping of
horses, manure management and any other applicable ordinance, statute, or regulation shall be met.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive a horse after the hour of sunset and before the hour of sunrise along or crossing any public right of
way without appropriate lighting or reflective material.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive or otherwise take a horse into any public park or other public property, except within the right of way of
public streets.
E. Every person riding a horse or driving a horsedrawn vehicle shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this code and Minnesota state statutes
regulating motor vehicle traffic. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4B-11: MAINTENANCE OF FOWL AND BIRDS:
A. Fowl Not To Be At Large: No person owning or keeping chickens, ducks, geese, pigeons or other fowl or birds may permit the same to run at large or
enter upon the premises of another without permission, nor may any such fowl or birds be kept, raised or permitted to go on any street, park, lake or
public ponding area.
B. Limitation On Number: No more than three (3) fowl or birds and no more than twenty five (25) pigeons may be kept on any residential property in the
city.
C. Injury Or Annoyance To Others: No fowl or birds may be kept in a manner as to cause injury or annoyance to persons on other property in the vicinity by
reason of noise, odor or filth.
D. Impounding Of Fowl Or Birds: A fowl or bird at large in violation of this section may be impounded by the city, and after being impounded for five (5)
business days or more without being reclaimed by the owner, may be humanely euthanized or sold. A person reclaiming any impounded fowl or bird
shall pay the cost of impounding and keeping the same.
E. Feeding Within Loft Or Coop: Pigeons and fowl shall be fed within the confines of the loft or coop on the premises on which the pigeons or fowl are
housed.
F. Confinement: Pigeons and fowl must be confined to the loft or coop except for short periods of exercise during which time they may be permitted to
exercise in the fenced enclosure area, or in the case of pigeons, to fly outside the loft. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4B-12: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
A. Commercial Kennels:
1. Must comply with all requirements in the zoning code.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 99/324
2. Shall be maintained and operated in a neat and sanitary manner. All refuse, garbage and animal waste shall be removed at least daily so as to keep
the surrounding area free from obnoxious odors.
B. Lofts And Coops:
1. Lofts and coops must be cleaned and kept in a sanitary manner free of objectionable odors and wastes as often as necessary to prevent
contamination of the animal(s) contained therein, and any other animals or humans who may come in contact with them, but in no case less than
weekly.
2. Grains and food stored for the use of pigeons or fowl shall be kept in rodentproof containers.
3. The loft or coop shall be elevated a minimum of twelve inches (12") and a maximum of twenty four inches (24") above grade to ensure circulation
beneath the loft or coop.
4. The loft or coop shall:
a. Be a maximum height of six feet (6');
b. Be screened from view by fencing or evergreen plantings with a minimum height of four feet (4'), unless the structure meets the standards for
accessory structures in the zoning code; and
c. Be set back a minimum of fifty feet (50') from any adjoining principal structure, and a minimum of ten feet (10') from the property line.
C. Housing Facilities: All facilities for housing animals shall:
1. Be constructed of material appropriate for the animal involved;
2. Contain and restrain the animal they are designed or built to contain without causing injury to, or depriving the animal of necessary environmental
elements;
3. Be maintained in good repair;
4. Be controlled as to temperature, ventilation, lighting, and humidity as necessary to provide conditions compatible with the health and comfort of the
animal(s);
5. Be of sufficient size to allow each animal to make normal postural and social adjustments with adequate freedom of movement. Inadequate space
may be indicated by evidence of malnutrition, poor condition, debility, stress or abnormal behavior patterns;
6. Conform with the front, side and rear yard setback standards for buildings in the zoning district where the structure is to be located;
7. Be cleaned as often as necessary to prevent contamination of animals, and any humans who may come in contact with them and to reduce
objectionable odors, but in no case less than weekly; and
8. Be cleaned in a manner utilizing proper protocols, methods, equipment and materials recommended to minimize disease hazards or transmission as
required by particular species of animal.
9. On through lots be permitted on the side adjacent to the rear of the principal structure and shall meet the required front yard setback; and
10. On corner lots be prohibited in a side yard that is adjacent to a street or roadway.
D. Enclosures: Enclosures confining domestic animals to an area of less than half of a rear yard area must comply with the property line setback standards
for accessory structures. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
ARTICLE C. POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS AND DANGEROUS DOGS
7-4C-1: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
Except as otherwise provided in sections 7-4C-2 to 7-4C-15 of this article, the regulatory and procedural provisions of Minnesota statutes sections 347.50
to 347.565 are adopted by reference. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-2: DECLARATION BY POLICE OR ANIMAL CONTROL:
A police officer, community service officer, or animal control officer may declare a dog to be dangerous or potentially dangerous. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-3: EXCEPTIONS:
A. The provisions of sections 7-4C-1 to 7-4C-15 of this article do not apply to dogs used by law enforcement officials for police work.
B. Dogs may not be declared dangerous or potentially dangerous if the threat, injury or danger was sustained by a person who was:
1. Committing a wilful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 100/324
2. Provoking, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or who can be shown to have a history of repeatedly provoking, tormenting, abusing, or
assaulting the dog; or
3. Committing or attempting to commit a crime. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-4: NOTICE TO OWNER:
If a dog is declared potentially dangerous or dangerous, the police department will give notice, by delivering or mailing it to the owner of the dog, of intent
to declare the dog potentially dangerous or dangerous. Such notice shall inform the owner of this designation, the basis for the designation, the
procedures for contesting the designation as described in subsection 7-4C-5A of this article and the result of the failure to contest the designation as
described in subsection 7-4C-5B of this article. Immediately upon receipt of the notice, the dog owner must comply with the requirements of section 7-4C-
11 of this article and continue to comply with such requirements until the dog is dead or removed from the city, or the city has determined that the dog is
not dangerous or potentially dangerous. The owner shall be informed of this requirement in the notice of intent. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-5: CONTESTING DECLARATION OF POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS OR DANGEROUS DOG:
A. If the dog owner has received a notice of intent to declare the dog as potentially dangerous or dangerous, the owner may request that a hearing be
conducted to determine whether or not such a designation is justified. This request must be made in writing and delivered to the police department
within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the notice of intent to declare an animal as potentially dangerous or dangerous.
B. If the owner fails to contest a notice within fourteen (14) days, the owner shall be considered as having forfeited the right to the hearing and the
designation of the dog as potentially dangerous or dangerous is final. The Police Department will then issue a declaration of dangerous or potentially
dangerous dog to the owner and the owner must immediately comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter or cause the dog to be humanely
destroyed or removed from the City. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-6: HEARING PROCEDURE:
The animal control review panel will conduct the hearing. The panel will consist of the Mayor, a Council member, and a citizen representative. The panel
will schedule a hearing and may call witnesses and review documents as needed to make a determination on the issue. Owners shall have the right to
present evidence on their behalf and to cross examine any witnesses. A simple majority of the members of the panel is necessary for a finding that the
animal is either dangerous or potentially dangerous. A finding supporting a designation of dangerous or potentially dangerous must be proven by a
preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the animal control review panel shall be in writing and shall indicate the reasons for the findings. A copy of
the findings shall be provided to animal control and the animal owner. If the panel upholds the designation of the dog, the owner is responsible for all costs,
up to a maximum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), associated with the hearing. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-7: EFFECT OF FINDINGS:
If the panel finds there is sufficient basis to declare the dog potentially dangerous or dangerous, the owner must immediately comply with all applicable
requirements of this chapter or immediately cause the dog to be humanely destroyed or removed from the City limits. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-8: APPEAL:
If the owner of the dog disputes the decision of the panel, the owner shall have the right to appeal the decision to the Rosemount City Council. The appeal
must be filed with the Police Department within fourteen (14) days of the panel's ruling. If the dog owner disputes the findings of the City Council, the
owner may appeal to the Minnesota Court of Appeals as provided by State law. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-9: REVIEW OF DESIGNATION:
Beginning six (6) months after a dog is declared potentially dangerous or dangerous dog, an owner may request annually that the animal control review
panel review the designation. The owner must provide evidence that the dog's behavior has changed due to the dog's age, neutering, environment,
completion of obedience training that includes modification of aggressive behavior, or other factors. If the panel finds sufficient evidence that the dog's
behavior has changed, the panel may rescind the potentially dangerous or dangerous dog designation. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-10: REGISTRATION OF POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS AND DANGEROUS DOGS:
A. Requirement: No person may own a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog in the City unless the dog is registered as provided in this section. (Ord.
2011-09, 8-1-2011)
B. Certificate Of Registration: The City will issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog if the owner
presents:
1. Evidence that a proper enclosure exists for the dog and all accesses to the premises are posted with clearly visible warning signs issued or
approved by the Police Department that there is a dangerous dog on the property;
2. A certificate of liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to conduct business, which specifically states that the owner is insured
for any personal injuries inflicted by the potentially dangerous or dangerous dog, in the amount of at least three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00);
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 101/324
3. Proof of payment of the required annual registration fee;
4. Proof that the owner has had microchip identification implanted in the dog as required under Minnesota Statutes section 347.515; and
5. Proof of payment of any hearing costs, if applicable. (Ord. 2017-02, 5-16-2017)
C. Warning Sign: If the City issues a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous dog under subsection B of this section, the City will provide, for
posting on the owner's property, a copy of a warning symbol to inform children that there is a dangerous dog on the property. The City may charge the
dog owner a reasonable fee to cover its administrative costs and the costs of the warning symbol.
D. Fee: The city will charge the owner an annual fee to obtain a certificate of registration for a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog.
E. Tag: A dangerous dog registered under this section must have a tag, issued by the city, identifying the dog as dangerous. This tag must be affixed to the
dog's collar and worn by the dog at all times. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-11: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Enclosure And Proper Restraint: An owner of a dangerous dog shall keep the dog, while on the owner's property, in a proper enclosure. If the dog is
outside the proper enclosure, the dog must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and under the physical restraint of a responsible
person. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will prevent the dog from biting any person or animal but that will not cause injury to the dog or
interfere with its vision or respiration.
B. Registration Renewal: An owner of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog must renew the registration of the dog annually until the dog is deceased.
If the dog is removed from the jurisdiction, it must be registered in its new jurisdiction.
C. Death Or Transfer: An owner of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog must notify the city police department in writing of the death of the dog or its
transfer, and must, if requested by the police department, execute an affidavit under oath setting forth either the circumstances of the dog's death and
disposition or the complete name, address, and telephone number of the person to whom the dog has been transferred.
D. Sterilization: The city shall require a dangerous dog to be sterilized at the owner's expense. If the owner does not have the animal sterilized within thirty
(30) days, the city shall have the animal sterilized at the owner's expense. The owner may contest and appeal a decision requiring a dog to be
sterilized in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection 7-4C-5A of this article.
E. Rental Property: A person who owns a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog and who rents property from another where the dog will reside must
disclose to the property owner prior to entering the lease agreement and at the time of any lease renewal that the person owns a potentially dangerous
or dangerous dog that will reside at the property. A dog owner, who is currently renting property, must notify the property owner within fourteen (14)
days of city notification if the dog is newly declared as potentially dangerous or dangerous and the owner keeps the dog on the property.
F. Sale: A person who sells a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog must notify the purchaser that the dog has been declared potentially dangerous or
dangerous. The seller must also notify the city police department with the new owner's name, address, and telephone number.
G. Training Required: Any dangerous or potentially dangerous dog and its owner shall be required to attend and complete animal behavioral modification
and socialization training, from a provider approved by the city. The costs for this training will be the responsibility of the animal owner.
H. New Resident: If any dog comes into residency in the city and has been previously declared dangerous or potentially dangerous by another agency or
jurisdiction within the state, the owner shall report this to the city police department within ten (10) days of taking up residency in the city. The owner
must comply immediately with all requirements for posting, restraint, muzzling, and confinement. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-12: SEIZURE:
A. Immediate Seizure: An animal control officer or any police officer may immediately seize any dangerous or potentially dangerous dog and/or issue a
citation or summons to the owner of the dog if:
1. Within fourteen (14) days after the owner has received notice that the dog is dangerous, the dog is not validly registered and microchipped as
required by this article; or
2. The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure; or
3. The dog is outside the proper enclosure and is not muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and under the physical restraint of a
responsible competent person; or
4. Fourteen (14) days after the owner has received notice that the dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous, the owner does not secure the proper
liability insurance or surety bond as required by this article; or
5. After the owner has been notified that the dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous, the dog bites or attacks a person or domestic animal; or
6. The dog is not sterilized within thirty (30) days pursuant to subsection 7-4C-11D of this article.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 102/324
B. Conviction: If an owner of a dog is convicted of a crime for which the dog was originally seized, the court may order that the dog be confiscated and
destroyed in a proper manner, and that the owner pay the costs incurred in confiscating, confining, and destroying the dog.
C. Reclaimed: A dog seized under subsection A of this section may be reclaimed by the owner of the dog upon payment of impounding and boarding fees,
and presenting proof to the police department that the requirements of sections 7-4C-10 and 7-4C-11 of this article will be met. A dog not reclaimed
within seven (7) days of seizure may be disposed of as provided in Minnesota statutes section 35.71, subdivision 3. The owner is liable to the city for
costs incurred in confining and disposing of the dog.
D. Subsequent Offenses: If a person has been convicted of a misdemeanor for violating a provision of section 7-4C-10 or 7-4C-11 of this article, and the
person is charged with a subsequent violation relating to the same dog, the police department must seize the dog. If the owner is convicted of the crime
for which the dog was seized, the court shall order that the dog be destroyed in a proper and humane manner and the owner is responsible for paying
the cost of confining and destroying the animal. If the person is not convicted of the crime for which the dog was seized, the owner may reclaim the dog
upon payment to the city of a fee for the care and boarding of the dog. If the dog is not reclaimed by the owner within seven (7) days after the owner
has been notified that the dog may be reclaimed, the dog may be disposed of as provided under Minnesota statutes section 35.71, subdivision 3. The
owner is liable to the city for the costs incurred in confining, impounding, and disposing of the dog.
E. Disposition Of Seized Dogs:
1. Right To Hearing: The owner of any seized dog has the right to a hearing by the animal control review panel. The notice and hearing requirements in
sections 7-4C-4 to 7-4C-8 of this article will apply to a hearing requested under this section. Any hearing requested under this section will be held
within fourteen (14) days of the request. In the event that the seizure is upheld by the panel, actual expenses of the hearing up to a maximum of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) will be the responsibility of the dog owner. The panel will issue a decision within ten (10) days after the hearing. The
decision will be hand delivered to the dog's owner or delivered via registered mail as soon as practical and a copy will be provided to the city police
department.
2. Security: A person claiming an interest in a seized dog may prevent disposition of the dog by posting security in an amount sufficient to provide for
the dog's actual cost of care and keeping. The security must be posted within seven (7) days of the seizure inclusive of the date of seizure. (Ord.
2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-13: RESTRICTIONS ON DOG OWNERSHIP:
A. Dog Ownership Prohibited: Except as provided in subsection C of this section, no person may own a dog if the person has been:
1. Convicted of a third or subsequent violation of section 7-4C-10 or 7-4C-11 of this article or Minnesota statutes section 347.515;
2. Convicted of second degree manslaughter due to negligent or intentional use of a dog under a violation under Minnesota statutes section 609.205,
clause 4;
3. Convicted of a gross misdemeanor harm caused by a dog under Minnesota statutes section 609.226, subdivision 1;
4. Been convicted of a violation under Minnesota statutes section 609.226, subdivision 2;
5. Had a dog ordered destroyed under section 7-4C-14 of this article and been convicted of one or more violations of section 7-4C-10 or 7-4C-11 of this
article, or Minnesota statutes section 347.515 or 609.226, subdivision 2.
B. Household Members: If any member of a household is prohibited from owning a dog under subsection A of this section, unless specifically approved
with or without restrictions by the city, no person in the household is permitted to own a dog.
C. Dog Ownership Prohibition Review: Beginning three (3) years after a conviction under subsection A of this section that prohibits a person from owning a
dog, and annually thereafter, the person may request in writing to the city police department that the animal control review panel review the prohibition.
The panel may consider such facts as the seriousness of the violation or violations that led to the prohibition, any criminal convictions, or other facts
that the panel deems appropriate. The panel may rescind the prohibition entirely or rescind it with limitations. The panel also may establish conditions a
person must meet before the prohibition is rescinded, including, but not limited to, successfully completing dog training or dog handling courses. If the
panel rescinds a person's prohibition and the person subsequently fails to comply with any limitations imposed by the city or the person is convicted of
any animal violation involving unprovoked bites or dog attacks, the panel may permanently prohibit the person from owning a dog in this state. (Ord.
2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-14: DESTRUCTION OF DOG IN CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES:
A. Circumstances: Notwithstanding sections 7-4C-10 to 7-4C-13 of this article, a dog may be ordered destroyed in a proper and humane manner by the
city police department if the dog:
1. Inflicted substantial or great bodily harm on a human being on public or private property without provocation;
2. Inflicted multiple bites on a human being on public or private property without provocation;
3. Bit multiple human victims on public or private property in the same attack without provocation; or
4. Bit a human on public or private property without provocation in an attack where more than one dog participated in the attack.
B. Hearing: The police department may not destroy the dog until the dog owner has had the opportunity for a hearing before the animal control review
panel. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 103/324
7-4C-15: PENALTIES:
A. Any person violating the provisions of section 7-4C-10 or 7-4C-11 of this article, shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
subject to penalties specified for misdemeanors in Minnesota statutes section 609.03, as amended from time to time. Each day that a violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense.
B. It is a misdemeanor to remove a microchip from a dangerous dog, to fail to renew the registration of a dangerous dog, to fail to account for a dangerous
dog's death or change of location where the dog will reside, to sign a false affidavit with respect to a dangerous dog's death or change of location
where the dog will reside, or to fail to disclose ownership of a dangerous dog to a property owner from whom the person rents property.
C. A person who is convicted of a second or subsequent violation of subsection A or B of this section is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.
D. An owner who violates Minnesota statutes section 347.542 or section 7-4C-13 of this article is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.
E. Any household member who knowingly violates Minnesota statutes section 347.542, subdivision 2, or section 7-4C-13 of this article is guilty of a gross
misdemeanor. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
ARTICLE D. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
7-4D-1: VIOLATION, REVOCATION AND HEARING:
A. The council may revoke any city animal registration for violation of this chapter or for violation of any other applicable local, state, or federal law or
regulation.
B. Before revoking a registration, the animal owner shall be given notice of the meeting at which such revocation will be considered and if the owner is
present at such meeting, an opportunity to be heard.
1. Notice of such meeting shall be given to the owner in writing, mailed to the address of the owner as set forth in the application, and mailed at least
five (5) days prior to the date of the meeting for consideration of the matter.
2. If the council finds, after hearing evidence and testimony, that a violation has occurred, it may suspend, place conditions on, or revoke the animal
registration. The council may also take any appropriate action to abate a public nuisance caused by an animal or its owner.
3. If the owner does not comply with the council action, then the city may seize and hold the animal pursuant to applicable laws.
4. Registration and hearings related to potentially dangerous and dangerous dogs are governed by article C of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4D-2: PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any person(s) who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be
punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or both, as provided by Minnesota state statutes.
If penalties greater than those set forth in this section are allowed by Minnesota state statute, the more severe penalties may be applied. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-
1-2011)
7-4D-3: STATUTORY CITATIONS:
References to Minnesota state statutes in this chapter also include any amendments to those statutes. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4D-4: CONFLICT:
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health ordinance or code in
this city, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of people or animals shall prevail. In
any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the city existing on the effective date
of this chapter which established a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of people or animals, the provision of this
chapter shall be deemed to prevail. The determination of the applicability of this chapter, in light of the above rules of interpretation, shall be made by the
city and its determination shall be final. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
Chapter 5
BOWS, FIREARMS AND TRAPPING
7-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
BOW: Any device capable of propelling an arrow or similar projectile for a distance greater than fifty feet (50').
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 104/324
CARRY: The handling or transportation of a bow or firearm concealed or otherwise outside a person's domicile.
DISMANTLED BOW OR FIREARM: Any unloaded firearm or bow which is dismantled in such a manner so as to prevent shooting it.
ENCASED BOW OR FIREARM: Any unloaded bow or firearm, placed in a case which is tied or otherwise secured, to prevent shooting it.
FIREARM: A device that discharges shot or a projectile by means of an explosive, a gas, a spring or compressed air.
LANDOWNER: Any person, group, firm or corporation owning, leasing or legally controlling any lands within the territorial limits of the City.
NONRESTRICTED: That area in the City in which the use of firearms and bows and arrows are regulated only by State and Federal Statutes, without any
further restrictions of this chapter.
PROJECTILE: Any object intended and capable of being discharged from a bow or firearm.
RESTRICTED: That area of the City in which the use of firearms and bows and arrows is restricted by regulations included in this chapter in addition to
State and Federal Statutes.
RESTRICTED SHOTGUN: That area of the City in which hunting with a firearm is restricted to the use of a shotgun.
SHOOTING: The firing or discharge of any bow or firearm.
SUITABLE BACKSTOP: Any natural or manmade barrier of sufficient mass, size, or construction to wholly contain the projectile being discharged from a
bow or firearm.
TRAPPING: The act of setting or laying a trap used to catch, snare or kill an animal or bird.
WRITTEN PERMISSION: A written document containing the following information: the full name, address, date of birth and signature of the person
authorized to hunt or shoot; the full name, address, and signature of the landowner providing the written permission. (Ord. XIV.11, 10-6-1992; amd. Ord.
XVI.51, 6-3-2003; Ord. XVI.58, 9-16-2008)
7-5-2: DESIGNATED AREAS:
For purposes of regulating the use of bows and firearms within the City, all area within the corporate City limits is divided into certain restricted R and nonrestricted
NR areas. The area designated restricted bow and restricted shotgun, restricted bow, non-restricted, and no hunting are depicted in the
approved Hunting Restrictions Map. (Ord. 2017-04, 6-6-2017)
7-5-3: PERMITTED USES OF BOWS AND FIREARMS:
In areas R and NR, the shooting or carrying of bows and firearms which are not encased or dismantled is permitted under the following circumstances in
the designated areas R and NR unless otherwise prohibited by State or Federal law:
A. By law enforcement officers in the line of duty or military personnel in the line of duty.
B. By any person to resist or prevent an offense which that person reasonably believes exposes him or her or another person to great bodily harm or
death.
C. By any person on a rifle, trap, archery or target range established in accordance with the City's zoning ordinance or as part of a City sponsored or
authorized activity. (Ord. XIV.11, 10-6-1992)
D. By any person target practicing with a bow and a suitable backstop in a designated City park(s) area(s) or on school grounds in connection with a
school sponsored class or program or in an area zoned Rural Residential and at least two hundred feet (200') from all buildings, unless the buildings
are owned by him or her or unless he or she has the owner's written permission carried on his or her person. Bow and arrow target practice may also
take place within the confines of a building if a suitable backstop is used. (Ord. XVI.47, 6-5-2001)
E. By a person participating in a special hunting season, which season may not conflict with State law or regulations, established by the City Council upon
the recommendation of the Chief of Police for the purpose of wildlife management. The seasons shall be established by the City Council when, based
upon competent professional advice (such as a conservation officer), a season is needed to reduce an animal population. (Ord. XIV.11, 10-6-1992)
F. Bow and arrow use for hunting purposes is permitted on platted parcels of a minimum of 2.5 acres that are zoned Rural Residential or Agriculture. All
hunting must be done from an elevated stand of a minimum of five feet (5'). Hunting with a bow and arrow shall be in accordance with all applicable
State laws and regulations. (Ord. XVI.51, 6-3-2003)
7-5-4: ADDITIONAL PERMITTED USES OF FIREARMS IN AREA NR:
The shooting or carrying of firearms which are not encased or dismantled is permitted under the following circumstances in designated area NR unless
otherwise prohibited by State or Federal law:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 105/324
A. By any person for target practice provided that the projectiles are stopped by a suitable backstop and provided further that the property on which the
target practice occurs is owned by him or her or is undertaken with the owner's written permission carried on his or her person.
B. By any person hunting provided that the projectiles do not leave the property on which the hunting is occurring and provided further that the shooting
occurs at least five hundred feet (500') from all buildings unless owned by the hunter or with the owner's written permission carried on the hunter's
person. (Ord. XIV.11, 10-6-1992)
7-5-5: BOW AND FIREARM PROHIBITIONS:
Except as specifically allowed in sections 7-5-3 and 7-5-4 of this chapter:
A. Unless it is encased or dismantled, the carrying of a bow or firearm in a motor vehicle, in a place or area open to the public or in any private place or
area, unless the private place or area is owned by the person carrying the bow or firearm, or with the owner's permission, is prohibited.
B. The shooting of or hunting using a bow or firearm is prohibited.
C. Carrying or shooting a bow or firearm by any person under the age of fourteen (14) is prohibited except when accompanied by a parent, adult guardian
or certified safety training instructor. (Ord. XIV.11, 10-6-1992)
7-5-6: PERMITTED USES OF SHOTGUNS WITHIN THE RESTRICTED R AREA:
The shooting or carrying of shotguns that are not encased or dismantled is permitted under the following circumstances in designated SH areas in
accordance with applicable State and Federal law:
A. Single projectile slugs are authorized only for deer hunting.
B. Shot up to Number 2 shot is authorized for all other hunting or target shooting.
C. All hunting of deer must be done from an elevated stand of a minimum of five feet (5') in height. (Ord. XVI.51, 6-3-2003)
7-5-7: HUNTING MAP:
Hunting Map dated June 1, 2017.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 106/324
(Ord. 2017-04, 6-6-2017)
7-5-8: TRAPPING PERMITTED IN DESIGNATED AREAS AND PROHIBITIONS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 107/324
A. Permitted Where; Exceptions:
1. Trapping is permitted on platted parcels of a minimum of 2.5 acres that are zoned rural residential or agriculture; and parcels of a minimum of five (5)
acres located east of County Road 71 (Blaine Avenue) and zoned heavy industrial. All trapping shall be conducted in accordance with all applicable
state laws and regulations. Trapping may be conducted by an owner, members of the owner's family or by written consent of the owner of the platted
parcel. Written consent shall be carried on the person while trapping is being conducted on the property.
2. In addition, trapping shall not be done:
a. Within fifty feet (50') of any city, county or state park land or other public property. This restriction shall include public roadways and the fifty feet
(50') shall be measured from the curb or edge of the roadway.
b. Within twenty five feet (25') of any property line when the trapping is conducted in an area zoned as rural residential.
c. Within twenty five feet (25') of any property line when the trapping is conducted in an area zoned as agriculture if the adjoining property is not also
zoned as agriculture.
B. Prohibited Where: Trapping is prohibited in all areas not listed in subsection A of this section.
C. Restrictions Of Types And Sizes Of Traps: Traps used in the permitted areas are restricted as follows:
1. Snare traps are prohibited.
2. No leg hold trap larger than #2 or conibear type with a jaw spread larger than six and one-half inches (61/2") shall be used.
3. If conibear type traps are to be baited or bait is used in conjunction with the trap sets, it must be set in the following way: They must be set in a
cubby with the trap inserted a minimum of seven inches (7") from the front, with the cubby opening no more than fifty (50) square inches in area.
Openings may be restricted with wire mesh, wood strips, or other material.
D. Exceptions: This section does not apply to:
1. Quick kill trapping if the traps are designed and intended to kill rats, mice, gophers or moles.
2. Live trapping of wild animals.
3. Any person duly appointed and designated through city council action for the purpose of wildlife management and control. (Ord. XVI.58, 9-16-2008)
Chapter 6
DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
7-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
In this Chapter:
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
NET PROCEEDS: The sale price of any item of property or of a motor vehicle, less any costs of handling, storage and sale.
PROPERTY: All forms of tangible personal property. (Ord., 10-16-1984)
7-6-2: DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY OTHER THAN MOTOR VEHICLES:
Unless otherwise specified in this Section or by law, property lawfully coming into the possession of the City and its duly designated agents, in the course
of its Municipal operations, shall be stored and safely maintained by the City for a period of sixty (60) days. Such property shall be disposed of by the City
in the following manner: (Ord. XIV.19, 4-20-1999)
A. During such sixty (60) day period, the City may deliver such property to the true owner thereof upon proof of ownership, and upon ten (10) days' notice
by mail to other persons who may have asserted a claim of true ownership. In the event ownership cannot be determined to the satisfaction of the City
Clerk, or his designee, he may refuse to deliver such property to anyone until ordered to do so by the court. The City Clerk may in his discretion choose
to deposit such property with the court if there are sufficient competing claims to the property.
B. If the true owner does not claim the property during the sixty (60) day period, the City may release the unclaimed property to the finder of the property if,
at the time of delivery to the City, the finder indicated in writing that he or she wished to assert a claim to the property as finder. This subsection is not
applicable if the property was found by a City officer, employee or agent in the ordinary course of his duties. (Ord., 10-16-1984)
C. Upon the expiration of the sixty (60) day period, property remaining unclaimed may be sold by the City to the highest bidder at public auction or sale
following ten (10) days' published notice thereof. In lieu of public auction or sale, any of such unclaimed property may be appropriated to the use of the
City upon the affirmative resolution of the City Council. If the property is not sold at public auction or sale and is not deemed appropriate for use by the
City, the City Clerk may then dispose of the property in any manner deemed appropriate. (Ord. XIV.19, 4-20-1999)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 108/324
D. The City Clerk, or his designee, may at any time without notice and in such manner as he determines to be in the public interest, dispose summarily of
any property coming into the City's possession which he determines to be dangerous or perishable. The City Clerk shall make a record of the pertinent
facts of the receipt and disposal of such property. (Ord., 10-16-1984)
7-6-3: DEPOSIT OF NET PROCEEDS:
The net proceeds of the sale of any property, other than a motor vehicle, whether by public auction or sale, shall be deposited in the General Fund of the
City subject to the right of the former owner of the property to the payment of the net sale proceeds from the General Fund upon application and
satisfactory proof of ownership within six (6) months of the sale. (Ord., 10-16-1984)
7-6-4: DISPOSAL OF MOTOR VEHICLES:
Unless otherwise provided by law, motor vehicles impounded by the City and its duly designated agents, or otherwise lawfully coming into its possession
during the course of its Municipal operations, shall be disposed of as follows:
A. Notice of the taking shall be given within five (5) days unless the vehicle is reclaimed prior thereto. (Ord. XIV.19, 4-20-1999)
B. The notice shall set forth the date and place of taking, the year, make, model and serial number of the vehicle, if such information can be reasonably
obtained, and the place where the vehicle is being held.
C. The notice shall inform the owner and any lien holders of the right to reclaim the vehicle.
D. The notice shall state that failure of the owner or lien holders to exercise their right to reclaim shall be deemed a waiver by them of all right, title and
interest in the vehicle and contents and a consent to the sale of the vehicle and contents at a public auction or sale.
E. The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered owner, if any, of the vehicle, and to all readily identifiable lien holders of record. If it is impossible to
determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and all lien holders, the notice shall be published once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the area where the motor vehicle was taken. (Ord., 10-16-1984)
7-6-4-1: RIGHT OF RECLAIM:
The owner or lien holder shall have the right to reclaim the vehicle from the City upon payment of all towing and storage charges resulting from the taking
within fifteen (15) days of the notice required by this Section in the case of abandoned or junk vehicles or forty five (45) days in the case of unauthorized
vehicles, both as defined in Minnesota Statutes, section 168B.011. (Ord. XIV.19, 4-20-1999)
7-6-4-2: PUBLIC SALE:
A. If the vehicle is not reclaimed pursuant to Section 7-6-4-1 of this Chapter, it may be sold to the highest bidder at a public auction or sale. The purchaser
shall be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the registrar of motor vehicles which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle. The receipt shall
entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership. Before such vehicle is
issued a new certificate of title, it must receive a motor vehicle safety check.
B. Proceeds of the sale will be used to reimburse the City for its costs involved in towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, and all administrative, notice
and publication costs. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the previous owner or entitled lien holders for ninety (90) days and
then shall be deposited in the Treasury of the City. (Ord., 10-16-1984)
7-6-4-3: RETENTION BY CITY IN LIEU OF PUBLIC SALE:
The City may, in lieu of public auction or sale as provided in Section 7-6-4-2 of this Chapter, retain possession and use of any motor vehicle not reclaimed
pursuant to Section 7-6-4-1 of this Chapter, subject to the following provisions:
A. The City shall retain possession upon affirmative resolution by the City Council.
B. The City shall given notice as provided in subsections 7-6-4A through E of this Chapter.
C. The City shall register the vehicle and receive acertificate of title as provided for purchasers at public sale in Section 7-6-4-2 of this Chapter.
D. The previous owner or lien holder shall have the right to reclaim the vehicle from the City, upon payment of all towing and storage charges resulting
from the taking, within ninety (90) days of the City Council resolution authorizing the retention of the vehicle by the City. (Ord., 10-16-1984)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 109/324
Chapter 7
GRAFFITI CONTROL
7-7-1: PURPOSE:
A. The council finds that there are incidents of graffiti throughout the city and that these incidents are undesirable for the city. The council finds that quick
removal of the graffiti may assist in preventing encouragement of undesirable elements.
B. The council finds that exposure to the graffiti adversely affects the emotional well being of city youth and creates peer pressure on city youth to join
these undesirable and detrimental acts of vandalism.
C. The council further finds that graffiti creates a condition of blight which can result in the deterioration of property values and is inconsistent with the city's
property maintenance goals and aesthetic standards. In addition, unless graffiti is removed, other properties soon become the targets of graffiti.
D. The council hereby declares its intention to minimize and to quickly remove graffiti to limit its adverse impact on city youth and neighborhoods. Graffiti is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a public health and safety hazard for purposes of Minnesota statutes section 429.101, subdivision 1(c)
and section 429.021, subdivision 1(8). (Ord. XIV.14, 5-2-1995)
7-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the terms defined in this section shall have the following meanings ascribed to them.
GRAFFITI: Any writing, printing, marks, signs, symbols, figures, designs, inscriptions, or other drawings which are scratched, scrawled, painted, drawn, or
otherwise placed on any surface of objects such as buildings, walls, fences, sidewalks, curbs, trees, rocks, or other permanent structures or objects on
public or private property or the interior surfaces of those parts of buildings accessible to the general public and which have the effect of defacing the
property.
GRAFFITI MATERIALS: Paint, aerosol, or pressurized containers of paint, indelible markers, ink, dye, or any other substance capable of defacing
property. (Ord. XIV.14, 5-2-1995)
7-7-3: UNLAWFUL CONDUCT REGARDING CREATION OF GRAFFITI AND POSSESSION OF GRAFFITI MATERIALS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally place graffiti on any surface or the interior surfaces of those parts of buildings accessible to the
general public located on public or private property except with the permission of the person in lawful ownership or possession of such property and
according with the requirements of the city's sign ordinance.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess graffiti materials with the intent to place graffiti on any surface or the interior surfaces of those parts of
buildings accessible to the general public located on public or private property. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
7-7-4: LIMITED ENTRY UPON LAND; INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL DUTIES:
A. Police department personnel that have probable cause to believe a violation of this chapter exists may enter upon private property at any reasonable
time for the purpose of carrying out any of the duties assigned to them under this chapter. However, prior to entry upon private property to verify the
existence of a violation of this chapter, an appropriate warrant authorizing the contemplated search or other necessary actions shall be first obtained
from a court of competent jurisdiction. If a property owner or person in possession of private property consents to entry by police onto the property, no
warrant shall be required.
B. Upon a finding by the council that graffiti exists or with the consent of the property owner, members of other city departments authorized by the council
may enter upon private premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out any of the duties assigned to them under this chapter.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere with representatives of the city police department or other city departments while they
are engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this chapter.
D. A property owner may ask the city to remove graffiti from the owner's property before being ordered to do so following the abatement procedure set
forth in sections 7-7-5 through 7-7-9 of this chapter. If the city agrees to remove the graffiti, the city shall have the property owner or its designated
agent sign a consent form authorizing the city or its agents to enter onto the property and a release of liability form. The property owner shall be liable
for any costs which the city incurs in removing the graffiti. The city may collect the costs as a special assessment pursuant to Minnesota statutes
429.101, subdivision 1(c) if the property owner fails to reimburse the city upon request. (Ord. XIV.14, 5-2-1995)
7-7-5: UNLAWFUL CONDUCT; OWNER RESPONSIBILITY:
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property to allow graffiti to be placed on any surface or the interior surfaces of those parts of buildings
accessible to the general public on the owner's property.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 110/324
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property to allow the graffiti to remain without making reasonable attempts to remove the graffiti within thirty (30)
days. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
7-7-6: CITY POLICE TO IDENTIFY:
A. Based upon information received from the public or upon police observation, the city police shall investigate and identify graffiti. After the police
department has verified the existence of graffiti, the police chief shall send a letter to the property owner by certified mail informing the property owner
about the graffiti and requesting the property owner to remove the graffiti within a reasonable period of time which shall be less than thirty (30) days,
based upon consideration of weather conditions and other relevant factors. The police department shall verify whether the graffiti has in fact been
removed.
B. If the police department finds that the graffiti has not been removed within the time allotted, the department shall contact the city clerk, who shall
schedule a public hearing. The city clerk shall notify the affected property owner of the hearing date, the preliminary findings that graffiti exists on the
owner's property and that the council may after the hearing order the removal of the graffiti by either the property owner or the city's department of
public works, and if said department has to remove the graffiti, the costs will be assessed against the owner's property. (Ord. XIV.14, 5-2-1995)
7-7-7: HEARING:
A. At a hearing before the council, the council shall receive evidence from the police department and from any other persons with knowledge as to the
existence of graffiti. The property owner shall be entitled to be heard on all matters relating to graffiti and the process of removal. The existence of
graffiti must be proven by a preponderance of the evidence.
B. If the council finds that graffiti exists, the council shall notify the department of public works and direct its removal in accordance with section 7-7-8 of
this chapter. The department of public works may authorize private contractors to handle graffiti removal. (Ord. XIV.14, 5-2-1995)
7-7-8: NOTICE TO OWNER:
In the event the council finds that graffiti exists, the police department shall mail a written order to the owner of the subject real property, addressed to the
owner's last known address. The written order shall contain the following:
A. A description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
B. Inform the owner that the council has found graffiti exists on the owner's property.
C. A request that the owner remove or obliterate the graffiti within a reasonable time as determined by the council.
D. Inform the owner that unless corrective action is taken within the time allotted, the department of public works may remove the graffiti and charge all
costs incurred therein against the real estate as a special assessment to be collected in the same manner as taxes against real estate. (Ord. XIV.14, 5-
2-1995)
7-7-9: COSTS TO BE ASSESSED:
A. In the event the city removes and/or abates the graffiti, an accurate record of the costs incurred therein shall be kept by the department of public works
and reported to the department of finance. The total costs of this abatement, including the administrative costs incurred by the department of finance in
processing the abatement and costs incurred by the police department in investigating the graffiti, shall be considered the cost of the project. The city
shall invoice such costs to the property owner and payment therefore shall be due within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date of such invoice. At
any time thereafter, the city council may assess project costs.
B. In the event the person or persons responsible for the graffiti are convicted and the court orders the offenders to pay restitution for the cost of the clean
up, and either thecity or a private property owner have expended funds to clean up the graffiti, the restitution shall be directed to either the city or the
private property owner as reimbursement for the cost of the clean up. (Ord. XIV.14, 5-2-1995)
7-7-10: GRAFFITI ABATEMENT CIVIL IN NATURE:
A violation of this chapter relating to the abatement of graffiti, shall not be treated as misdemeanors nor shall they be criminal in nature. (Ord. XIV.14, 5-2-
1995)
7-7-11: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter is declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be illegal and in conflict with any law, the validity of the remaining
provisions and their application to other persons and circumstances shall not be affected. (Ord. XIV.14, 5-2-1995)
7-7-12: PENALTY:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 111/324
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as described in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
Chapter 8
ALARM SYSTEMS
7-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to preserve and protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Rosemount from the nuisance and negligent
operation of alarm systems while providing the highest level of service to alarm users. (Ord. 2015-09, 11-17-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
7-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ALARM USER: A person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind in control of any building, structure, or facility in
the city of Rosemount in which an alarm system is maintained.
AUTOMATIC ALARM SYSTEM: Any device or system which is designed to be used for the detection of an unauthorized person in any structure, for
alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act, or for the detection of smoke, fire, heat, carbon monoxide, or other hazardous condition within a
structure, and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated. An automobile alarm device shall not be considered to be an alarm
system under the terms of this chapter.
AUTOMATIC NOTIFICATION DEVICE: An automatic alarm which automatically sends to another location, a message or signal indicating the existence of
an emergency situation.
CALENDAR YEAR: The period of January 1 through December 31 of each year.
CENTRAL STATION SYSTEM: Alarm system that functions through a constantly attended location (central station) operated by an alarm company. Alarm
signals from the protected property are received in the central station and are then retransmitted by trained personnel to the city's police or fire
department's alarm communications center for dispatch.
FALSE ALARM: An alarm signal that elicits a response by police or fire personnel when a situation requiring a response does not, in fact, exist and that is
caused by the activation of the alarm system through mechanical failure, alarm malfunction, improper installation or the inadvertence of the owner or
lessee of an alarm system or of his or her employees or agents. A false alarm does not include an alarm caused by utility line mishaps, violent conditions
of nature or other conditions determined to be beyond the control of the alarm manufacturer, installer or user. (Ord. 2015-09, 11-17-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
7-8-3: NOTIFICATION; MULTIPLE FALSE ALARMS:
When any automatic alarm has emitted three (3) false alarms in any calendar year, the city's police department or fire department, as applicable, shall
notify the alarm user and property owner (if not the alarm user) of the three (3) false alarms and the false alarm fee regulations set forth herein. (Ord.
2015-09, 11-17-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
7-8-4: FEES:
A. A fee shall be imposed upon the alarm user of any automatic alarm, and the property owner of the premises on which the automatic alarm is located, for
the fourth false alarm and each false alarm thereafter within a calendar year. The number of false alarms shall be counted and the fee imposed
separately for responses by each the police department and the fire department. The fee shall be in the amount duly adopted by the council resolution.
B. The fee shall be imposed regardless of whether the city's police department or fire department receives the alarm by direct connection or through any
intermediary such as central station. No fee is imposed under this section when notification to either department is made directly by a person not as a
result of or in response to an activated automatic alarm.
C. The property owner and alarm user shall be personally liable for any fee imposed under this section. Payment of fees under this section shall be made
to the city within thirty (30) days after mailing the invoice. Payments not made within thirty (30) days are delinquent. All unpaid fees and penalties,
together with interest, shall become a lien against the property on which the automatic alarm is located, and shall be certified by the city clerk to the
county treasurer-auditor each year as a special assessment in accordance with the statutes of the state. (Ord. 2015-09, 11-17-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
7-8-5: EXCEPTION:
A newly installed automatic alarm shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter for a period of thirty (30) days from the date of installation in order to
allow for proper testing and troubleshooting of the system. (Ord. 2015-09, 11-17-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
7-8-6: RESTRICTIONS:
No person shall install or use, monitor, and possess an automatic alarm that utilizes taped or prerecorded messages that are delivered or otherwise
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 112/324
transmitted directly to the police or fire department or the city's dispatch center, including automatic transmission of the emergency number 911. (Ord.
2015-09, 11-17-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
Chapter 9
SOCIAL HOSTS
7-9-1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
The city council intends to discourage underage possession and consumption of alcohol, even if done within the confines of a private residence, and
intends to hold persons criminally responsible who host events or gatherings where persons under twenty one (21) years of age possess or consume
alcohol regardless of whether the person hosting the event or gathering supplied the alcohol. The city council finds:
A. Events and gatherings held on private or public property where alcohol is possessed or consumed by persons under the age of twenty one (21) are
harmful to those persons and constitute a potential threat to public health requiring prevention or abatement.
B. Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect underage persons, as well as the general public, from injuries related to alcohol consumption, such as
alcohol overdose or alcohol related traffic collisions.
C. Often, events or gatherings involving underage possession and consumption occur outside the presence of parents. However, there are times when the
parents are present and condone the activity, and in some circumstances provide the alcohol.
D. Even though giving or furnishing alcohol to an underage person is a crime, it is difficult to prove, and an ordinance is necessary to help further combat
underage consumption.
E. A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person criminally responsible for hosting an event or gathering where underage possession or
consumption occurs. (Ord. XVI.60, 12-2-2008)
7-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions and mixtures
thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid that contains alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and that contains onehalf
of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and that is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances.
EVENT OR GATHERING: Any group of three (3) or more persons who have assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
HOST OR ALLOW: To aid, conduct, entertain, organize, supervise, control, or permit a gathering or event.
PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
A. As natural, adoptive parent, or stepparent;
B. As a legal guardian; or
C. As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, corporation, or any association of one or more individuals. A person does not include any city,
county, or state agency.
RESIDENCE, PREMISES OR PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or
other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, park, or any other place of assembly, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether
occupied as a dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without permission or
compensation.
UNDERAGE PERSON: Any individual under twenty one (21) years of age. (Ord. XVI.60, 12-2-2008)
7-9-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. It is unlawful for any person(s) to: Host or allow an event or gathering at any residence, premises, or on any other private or public property where
alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present when the person knows that an underage person will or does: 1) consume any alcohol or alcoholic
beverage, or 2) possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage with the intent to consume it; and the person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent
possession or consumption by the underage person(s).
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 113/324
B. A person is criminally responsible for violating subsection A of this section if the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, or conspires with or
otherwise procures another to commit the prohibited act.
C. A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present at the event or gathering to be criminally responsible. (Ord. XVI.60, 12-2-2008)
7-9-4: EXCEPTIONS:
A. This chapter does not apply to conduct solely between an underage person and his or her parents while present in the parent's household.
B. This chapter does not apply to legally protected religious observances.
C. This chapter does not apply to retail intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor licensees, municipal liquor stores, or bottle club permit holders who are
regulated by Minnesota statutes section 340A.503 subdivision 1(a)(1).
D. This chapter does not apply to situations where underage persons are lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course and
scope of employment. (Ord. XVI.60, 12-2-2008)
7-9-5: PENALTY:
Violation of section 7-9-3 of this chapter is a misdemeanor. (Ord. XVI.60, 12-2-2008)
Chapter 10
PREDATORY OFFENDER RESIDENCY REGULATIONS
7-10-1: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
A. Individuals who have been required to register as Level III predatory offenders pursuant to State law present an extreme threat to the public safety,
especially to children and other vulnerable populations. These offenders are extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses.
Many of these offenders also commit other crimes.
B. The City has a compelling interest to take action to promote and protect certain areas within the City from the risks to public safety posed by Level III
predatory offenders. The City's compelling interest is furthered by the creation of a regulatory scheme which establishes areas around locations where
children and vulnerable adults regularly congregate in concentrated numbers. The purpose of this chapter is to create such a regulatory scheme to
further the City's compelling interest in maintaining public safety by prescribing where Level III predatory offenders may reside within the City. (Ord.
2017-03, 5-16-2017)
7-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
CHILDREN: Persons under the age of eighteen (18).
DEDICATED VULNERABLE ADULT HOUSING: A residential facility that specializes in providing housing for vulnerable adults, as defined in Minnesota
Statutes, section 626.5572.
DESIGNATED PREDATORY OFFENDER: Any person who has been categorized as a Level III predatory offender under Minnesota Statutes, section
244.052, a successor statute, or a similar statute from another state in which that person's risk assessment indicates a high risk of re-offense.
LICENSED CHILDCARE FACILITY: A facility licensed by the State of Minnesota in which care, supervision and training for children is provided for part of
a 24-hour period.
PARK: Any land, including improvements, established for the use by the general public as a recreational area, including, but not limited to, playgrounds
and athletic fields.
PERMANENT RESIDENCE: A place where the person abides, lodges or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive days.
PLACE OF WORSHIP: A place where individuals congregate to practice their religious faith including, but not limited to, churches, mosques, synagogues,
and temples.
SCHOOL: Any public, private or parochial educational institution that offers educational instruction to individuals under the age of eighteen (18).
TEMPORARY RESIDENCE: A place where the person abides, lodges or resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more days in the aggregate during any
calendar year, and which is not the person's permanent address or a place where the person routinely abides, lodges or resides for a period of four (4) or
more consecutive or non-consecutive days in any month, and which is not the person's permanent residence. (Ord. 2017-03, 5-16-2017)
7-10-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 114/324
A. No designated predatory offender may establish in the City a permanent residence or temporary residence within two thousand feet (2,000') of any
school, park, licensed childcare facility, place of worship that provides regular educational programs for children (i.e., Sunday school), or dedicated
vulnerable adult housing.
B. No person shall let or rent any place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other dwelling in the City, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent
residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to this
chapter, if such place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other dwelling, is located within a prohibited zone described in subsection A of this section.
1. If a property owner discovers or is informed that a tenant is a designated predatory offender after signing a lease or otherwise agreeing to let the
offender reside on a property within the prohibited zone, the owner or property manager shall take measures to terminate the lease or to evict the
offender.
2. A property owner's failure to comply with provisions of this section shall constitute a violation and shall subject the property owner to the enforcement
provisions and procedures as provided in this chapter and this Code. (Ord. 2017-03, 5-16-2017)
7-10-4: MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCE:
For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line
of the permanent residence or temporary residence to the nearest outer property line of the applicable prohibited location. The City Administrator, or
designee, shall maintain an official map showing prohibited locations as defined by this chapter. (Ord. 2017-03, 5-16-2017)
7-10-5: PENALTIES:
A person who violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), by
incarceration of not more than ninety (90) days, or both. Each day a person maintains a residence in violation of this chapter constitutes a separate
violation. Additionally, the City may seek a court order to enjoin any person in violation of this chapter from taking any prohibited action hereunder. (Ord.
2017-03, 5-16-2017)
7-10-6: EXCEPTIONS:
A. A designated predatory offender residing within a prohibited zone as described in subsection 7-10-3A of this chapter does not commit a violation of this
chapter if any of the following apply:
1. The designated predatory offender established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant
to Minnesota Statutes, sections 243.166, 243.167, or a successor statute, prior to the effective date of this chapter.
2. The school, park, licensed childcare facility, place of worship, or dedicated vulnerable adult housing within two thousand feet (2,000') of the person's
residence was designated or opened after the designated predatory offender established the permanent residence or temporary residence and
reported and registered the residence pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, sections 243.166 or 243.167, or a successor statute.
3. The designated predatory offender is a minor.
4. The designated predatory offender was a minor when he or she committed all offenses leading to his or her status as a designated predatory
offender.
5. The residence is also the primary residence of the designated predatory offender's parents, grandparents, siblings, or spouse. (Ord. 2017-03, 5-16-
2017)
7-10-7: SEVERABILITY:
If any portion of this chapter, or its application to any circumstances, is held invalid, the remaining provisions shall be considered severable, and shall be
given effect to the maximum extent possible. (Ord. 2017-03, 5-16-2017)
Title 8
TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES
Chapter 1
TRAFFIC CODE
8-1-1: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The regulatory provisions of Minnesota statutes, chapter 169, as amended, are hereby adopted as the traffic code regulating the use of highways, streets
and alleys within the city and are incorporated in and made a part of this chapter as completely as if set out here in full. (Ord. XII.1, 9-28-1972)
8-1-2: UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLE:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 115/324
No person shall start or accelerate a motor vehicle with an unnecessary exhibition of speed on any public or private way within the city limits. Prima facie
evidence of such unnecessary exhibition of speed shall be unreasonable squealing or screeching sounds emitted by tires, or the throwing of sand, gravel
or rocks by the tires, or fishtailing by the vehicle. (1983 Code)
8-1-3: PENALTY:
Any violation of the statute adopted by reference herein is a violation of this chapter when it occurs within the city. Any person thus violating any provision
of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. If a minimum fine or imprisonment is
prescribed by the state highway traffic act for an offense, such penalty shall apply to a person convicted of the same offense under this chapter. (Ord.
XII.21, 6-15-2004)
Chapter 2
DRIVING AND PARKING REGULATIONS
8-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: A truck, truck-tractor, semitrailer, van or bus having a licensed gross weight over nine thousand (9,000) pounds.
JUNKED VEHICLE: Any "vehicle", as defined in this section, which is not properly licensed for operation, or the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled,
partially dismantled, used for sale of parts, or as a source of repair or replacement parts for other vehicles, or which is kept for scrapping, or has flat tires
or is otherwise inoperative.
OPERATOR: Includes every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner thereof, or as the agent, employee, or permittee of the owner or any
individual who is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
OVERSIZED RECREATION VEHICLE: A recreation vehicle twenty three feet (23') or more in length or six thousand five hundred (6,500) pounds or more
in empty weight.
PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a street, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in,
receiving or discharging passengers or loading or unloading merchandise, or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or signals or an involuntary stopping
of the vehicle by reason of causes beyond the control of the operator of the vehicle.
PASSENGER VEHICLE: A vehicle which meets the criteria for "passenger" class registration and license plate as established by the Minnesota
department of public safety, and licensed motorcycles.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not "public property" as defined in this section.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any street or highway and includes the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of
vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or facility.
RECREATION VEHICLE: Any vehicle which meets the criteria for "recreation" class registration and license plate, DNR registration, or trailer registration
used for conveyance of recreation vehicles as established by the Minnesota department of public safety, Minnesota department of natural resources, or
this chapter, including, but not limited to: travel trailers, stock car trailers, campers, motor homes, tent trailers, vehicles converted to motor homes, boat
trailers, snowmobiles, snowmobile trailers, boats, personal watercraft, all-terrain vehicles, and all-terrain vehicle trailers.
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS: Zoning districts R-1, RR and RM.
SEMITRAILER: Any vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in conjunction with truck-tractor that a considerable part of its own weight or that of its
load rests upon and is carried by the truck-tractor and includes a trailer drawn by a truck-tractor semitrailer combination.
STREET: Any public street, avenue, road, alley or highway located in the city and established for the use of vehicles.
TRUCK: Any vehicle designed and used for carrying things other than passengers, except pickup trucks and vans included within the definition of
passenger automobile.
TRUCK-TRACTOR: Any vehicle designed or used for drawing other vehicles and not constructed to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the
vehicle and load drawn.
VEHICLE: Any device which is self-propelled or designed to be pushed or pulled and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes,
motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, snowmobiles, personal watercraft, go-carts, golf carts, campers, trailers, boats, planes and gliders. Each
vehicle shall be considered as an individual vehicle whether it is on a trailer or is separate from a trailer. (Ord. XII.11, 11-3-1987; amd. Ord. XII.17, 2-20-
2001; Ord. XII.20, 7-20-2004; Ord. B-197, 10-7-2008)
8-2-2: PARKING PROVISIONS:
A. Parking Designated By Council: The city council is authorized to designate parking and restrict the length of time parking shall be permitted at any place
within the city. In establishing or changing parking zones or parking restrictions, the council shall pass a resolution at a meeting adequately describing
and defining said parking zones or parking restrictions. The chief of police is authorized to erect signs prohibiting or limiting parking at locations he
deems appropriate.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 116/324
B. Parking Generally: No owner of a vehicle shall leave, park or permit the same to stand on any city street or alley for more than twenty four (24) hours.
(Ord. XII.11, 11-3-1987)
C. Seasonal Parking Restrictions: No person shall park a vehicle or permit it to stand upon any public street, highway or alley during the following times:
1. At any time after a snowfall, wind or other weather condition has resulted in an accumulation of snow of two inches (2") or more in depth on the
public street, highway or alley until the street, or highway or alley is plowed curb to curb.
2. Between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. between November 1 and April 1 of each calendar year. (Ord. XII.18, 10-2-
2001)
D. Parking Near Fires: No person except fire department members shall park a car within three hundred feet (300') of a fire1.
E. Violating Parking Signs: No person shall park a vehicle in such a manner or location as to disobey or violate a parking sign which was posted by the
city. The registered owner of a vehicle shall be deemed responsible for the parking of a vehicle under this subsection, along with the person who
actually parks the vehicle.
F. Storing Or Parking Junked Vehicle Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to park, store or leave any junked vehicle, whether attended or not, upon any
public or private property within the city, or for any person, as an owner of or an occupant having control of private property within the city to permit the
parking, storing or leaving of any junked vehicle upon such private property, unless such junked vehicle is within an enclosed building or structure
lawfully situated upon private property or is so parked, stored or left upon private property lawfully zoned and operated as a junkyard. (Ord. XII.11, 11-
3-1987)
G. Unauthorized Parking Of Vehicles: Unauthorized parking of vehicles or display of vehicles for sale shall not be permitted on public property or publicly
zoned property. Vehicles offered for sale shall comply with the following:
1. The vehicles sold in residential areas shall be personal property of the occupant or owner of the premises.
2. Vehicles for sale shall be parked on an approved parking surface. (Ord. XII.17, 2-20-2001)
H. Outdoor Parking Or Storage Of Vehicles In Residential Districts: The following standards apply to the outdoor parking or storage of vehicles in all
residential districts:
1. General: The parking or storage of vehicles in any residential zoning district shall comply with all applicable performance standards for the zoning
district in which they are located as well as the off street parking regulations in title 11, chapter 6, "Off Street Parking, Loading And Landscaping", of
this code.
2. Number: The maximum number of vehicles parked or stored outdoors on any rural residential zoned property (RR) shall not exceed ten (10) vehicles
per dwelling unit and any residential property zoned R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3 or R-4 shall not exceed six (6) vehicles per dwelling unit. These vehicles
must be owned by and for the primary use of the owner or occupant of the dwelling unit. Junk vehicles parked or stored outdoors are prohibited by
subsection F of this section. (Ord. B-197, 10-7-2008)
I. Residential Streets: No commercial vehicles, trailer or equipment shall be parked or stored in a rural residential or residential district except when
loading, unloading, or rendering a service, unless parked in a fully enclosed, authorized structure. No utility trailer, boat trailer, or other recreational
trailers are permitted to be parked on a public street in a rural residential or residential district between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. XII.17, 2-20-2001; amd. Ord. B-197, 10-7-2008)
J. Parking Surface:
1. All parking in RL, R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, C-1, DT, C-3, C-4, GI, PUD and BP districts in areas served by sanitary sewer or where a planned unit
development agreement requires approved surfaces must be on one of the following surfaces: (Ord. XII.20, 7-20-2004; amd. Ord. B-174, 10-17-
2006; Ord. B-197, 10-7-2008; Ord. B-211, 1-4-2011)
a. Concrete;
b. Bituminous; or
c. Brick pavers.
2. In addition to the parking surfaces in subsections J1a through J1c of this section, recreation vehicles may be parked on a decorative rock surface
meeting the following requirements:
a. The decorative rock material is minimum class V(5), and is a minimum depth of four inches (4") with a commercial grade weed preventative mesh
underlayment;
b. Edging must be installed to prevent the rock from spreading from the designated parking area;
c. The parking area must be at least equal in size to the recreation vehicle being stored; and
d. The decorative rock and the required weed preventative mesh underlayment must be continuously maintained to prevent weed growth and
deterioration.
3. All properties with existing rock (class 5) parking surfaces not in compliance with the requirements of subsections J1 and J2 of this section must be
brought into compliance within one year of the effective date hereof. (Ord. XII.20, 7-20-2004; amd. Ord. B-197, 10-7-2008)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 117/324
K. Public Nuisance Declared: The presence of a junked vehicle upon private or public property within the city, except as permitted by the provisions of
subsection F of this section, or the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, is hereby declared to be a hazard to the public health and safety
and a public nuisance which may be abated by the city as such. (Ord. XII.11, 11-3-1987; amd. Ord. B-197, 10-7-2008)
L. In All Commercial Districts: No commercial trucks, truck-tractor, or semitrailer combinations are allowed to be parked and/or stored longer than forty
eight (48) hours in any commercial district, unless parked in designated loading areas. (Ord. XII.17, 2-20-2001; amd. Ord. B-197, 10-7-2008)
8-2-3: TOWING AND STORAGE OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES:
A. Removal And Storage: Members of the police department are hereby authorized and empowered to have removed any vehicle on any street or alley in
violation of section 8-2-2 of this chapter or stalled thereon and to have such vehicle placed in a garage or outdoor area by any person engaged in the
general garage or filling station business.
B. Redemption, Charge: Such vehicle shall not be removed therefrom until reasonable costs of storing and towing the same have been fully paid. The
police shall have the further authority to direct employees of the city to remove any such vehicle and to that event the police chief may impose a charge
to be paid to the city clerk before the said vehicle may be taken or recovered by the owner thereof.
C. Lien Provided: In the event that any vehicle held or stored by the direction of the chief of police upon which there are charges for storage or towing or
both, shall not be reclaimed, recovered or taken by the owner thereof, there shall be deemed to be imposed upon such vehicle a possessory lien in the
amount so charged and unpaid and should the owner thereof fail to pay the same, the possessory lien may be foreclosed in the manner provided for by
law. (Ord. XII.11, 11-3-1987)
8-2-4: DRIVING NEAR FIRES RESTRICTED:
No person shall come within three hundred feet (300') of fire apparatus going to a fire; immediately upon the approach of any fire apparatus or fire officers'
cars sounding proper signals and responding to an alarm, all other vehicles shall draw as near as possible to the curb and remain standing until such
apparatus or vehicle shall have passed2. (Ord. XII.11, 11-3-1987)
8-2-5: PARKING AND STORAGE OF RECREATION VEHICLES:
A. Permitted Districts: Outdoor storage of recreation vehicles is permitted in the RL, R-1, R-1A, R-2, and R-3 Residential Districts, Agricultural, Agricultural
Preserve, and Rural Residential Zoning Districts, subject to the requirements of this section.
B. Conditions On Permitted Storage And Parking: The following conditions apply in all districts in which outdoor storage of recreation vehicles is permitted:
1. Only recreation vehicles owned by an individual residing at the premises may be stored outdoors on the premises.
2. Recreation vehicles must be parked in compliance with applicable setbacks as defined in the City of Rosemount zoning regulations.
3. Recreation vehicles must be parked in compliance with the intersection sight triangle visibility requirements under the City of Rosemount zoning
regulations.
4. Recreation vehicles must be parked on a parking surface in compliance with subsection 8-2-2J of this chapter.
C. Prohibitions On Storage And Parking: The following prohibitions apply to all districts in which outdoor storage of recreation vehicles is permitted:
1. Recreation vehicles may not be stored or parked:
a. On public property, including the public right-of-way and boulevard;
b. On any portion of a front yard, except as follows:
(1) Boats, personal watercraft, all-terrain vehicles, and the trailers used to convey them, campers, and other recreation vehicles less than twenty
three feet (23') in length and less than six thousand five hundred (6,500) pounds (empty weight) may be stored from April 1 to November 1 in a
front yard driveway;
(2) Snowmobiles and the trailers used to convey them may be stored from November 1 to April 1 in a front yard driveway;
(3) In a front yard driveway for temporary loading, not to exceed forty eight (48) hours; or
(4) As allowed by a temporary storage permit.
c. In such a manner as to block public sidewalks or paths;
2. Recreation vehicles may not be used as a temporary residence, shop, or office, except as follows:
a. Recreation vehicles may be used by police, fire, EMS, public works or other similar agencies requested by the City to provide emergency
assistance;
b. Recreation vehicles may be used on a construction job site, or used as temporary offices for development, real estate, or sales shops as
authorized by the Building and Planning Departments; and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 118/324
c. Recreation vehicles may be used for services such as a bloodmobile, bookmobile, or clinic, lab, or other public services as authorized by the
Community Development Department.
D. Conditions For Storage On Residential Property:
1. The following conditions apply to outdoor storage of recreation vehicles in the RL, R-1, R-1A, R-2, and R-3 Residential Districts:
a. Two (2) recreation vehicles may be stored at any time, only one (1) of which may be an oversized recreation vehicle.
b. One (1) additional oversized guest recreation vehicle may be stored in compliance with a temporary storage permit issued under subsection F of
this section.
c. Recreation vehicles parked in a front yard driveway must be parked at least fifteen feet (15') from the curb line.
2. In addition to the requirements in subsection D1 of this section, the requirements in the city of Rosemount zoning regulations apply to storage of
recreation vehicles in R-3 residential districts.
E. Conditions For Storage On Rural Residential And Agricultural Property: The following conditions apply to storage of recreation vehicles in rural
residential and the agricultural and agricultural preserve districts:
1. Three (3) recreation vehicles may be stored outdoors at any time, only one of which may be an oversized recreation vehicle.
2. Boats, personal watercraft, all-terrain vehicles, snowmobiles, and the trailers used to convey them, campers, and other recreation vehicles may be
stored in a front yard driveway and are not subject to the time limitations in subsections C1b(1) and C1b(2) of this section.
3. Oversized recreation vehicles may be stored in a front yard driveway for temporary loading, not to exceed forty eight (48) hours.
F. Permits For Temporary Storage Of Oversized Recreation Vehicles: Storage of oversized recreation vehicles in a front yard driveway area in the RL, R-1,
R-1A, R-2, and R-3 residential districts is permitted only pursuant to a temporary storage permit issued by the city. The following criteria apply to
temporary storage permits:
1. An applicant must meet all of the permit requirements and pay the required fee.
2. The permit will allow the temporary storage of one oversized recreation vehicle for a period of ten (10) days.
3. No more than four (4) permits will be issued for any property in one calendar year.
4. At least fourteen (14) days must elapse after the expiration date of a permit before another permit will be issued.
5. The permit must be displayed on the vehicle at all times and must be visible from the street.
6. A permit is not required for temporary storage of oversized recreation vehicles in the agricultural, agricultural preserve and rural residential districts.
7. A permit is not required for outdoor storage of oversized recreation vehicles in side or rear yards.
G. Screening Requirements:
1. Side and rear yard outdoor storage of oversized recreation vehicles in the RL, R-1, R-1A, and R-2 residential districts is subject to the following
screening requirements:
a. An oversized recreation vehicle must be screened from view of any immediately adjacent neighbor, street, common green space, ponding area,
and public park using plant materials.
b. Plant materials used to screen the vehicle must be eighty five percent (85%) of the height of the vehicle at the time of planting and must
completely screen the vehicle from view when they reach maturity.
c. A fence with a gate may be used only to provide ingress and egress to the storage area, not as a means of providing screening of the vehicle. The
gate must be at least six feet (6') in height; must provide eighty five percent (85%) opacity; and must be constructed in compliance with all
applicable zoning and building code requirements.
d. Plant materials and gates must be maintained as follows:
(1) Plantings that die must be immediately replaced and must comply with the requirements for original plantings;
(2) Original plantings that fail to completely screen the vehicle within three (3) years must be replaced; and
(3) A gate must be maintained at the eighty five percent (85%) opacity level and in compliance with all applicable zoning and building codes
requirements.
2. Oversized recreation vehicles stored outdoors in agricultural, agricultural preserve or rural residential districts must meet the screening requirements
in subsection G1 of this section if the storage area is within three hundred feet (300') of another residence, road, or any lake, pond, or river with
authorized public access.
3. The screening requirements in the zoning regulations of the city must be met for storage of recreation vehicles in R-3 residential districts.
4. The planning, building, and engineering departments of the city must review and approve all site plans for oversize recreation vehicle storage areas.
(Ord. XII.20, 7-20-2004)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 119/324
Chapter 3
SNOWMOBILES
8-3-1: STATE LAW APPLIED, PURPOSE:
It is the intent of this Chapter to supplement the regulatory provisions of Minnesota Statutes, section 84.87, as amended. Said regulatory provisions are
hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of this Chapter as completely as if set out here in full. (Ord. XII.5, 12-28-72)
8-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, terms defined herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
OPERATE: To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile.
OPERATOR: Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile.
OWNER: A person, other than a lien holder, having the property in or title to a snowmobile, or entitled to the use or possession thereof.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, corporation, the State and its agencies and subdivisions, and any body of persons, whether incorporated or not.
SNOWMOBILE: A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice or natural terrain steered by wheels, skis or runners.
STREET: A public thoroughfare, roadway, alley or trail used for motor vehicular traffic which is not an interstate, trunk, County State Aid Road or County
Highway. (Ord. XII.5, 12-28-72)
8-3-3: OPERATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. Unlawful Operation: Except as otherwise herein provided, snowmobiles may be operated within the limits of the City. It is unlawful for any person to
operate a snowmobile within the City limits as follows:
1. Upon any street within a platted area except on the most direct route to the operator's destination.
2. Upon private property of another without specific permission of the owner or person in control of said property.
3. Upon public sidewalk provided for pedestrian travel or on boulevards.
4. Upon the streets within platted areas as permitted by this Chapter, at a speed exceeding ten (10) miles per hour.
5. Upon public bike or walking trail.
6. Upon City park property or public school property.
7. Persons under the age of sixteen (16) may not operate a snowmobile without proof of Minnesota snowmobile safety training certificate.
B. Permitting Unlawful Operation: It is unlawful for the owner of a snowmobile to permit the snowmobile to be operated contrary to the provisions of this
Chapter. (Ord. XII.14, 4-4-95)
8-3-4: YIELDING RIGHT OF WAY:
No snowmobile shall enter any intersection without making a complete stop. The operator shall then yield the right of way to any vehicles or pedestrians at
the intersection, or so close to the intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard. (Ord. XII.5, 12-28-1972)
8-3-5: PENALTIES:
Any violation of the statute adopted by reference in this chapter is a violation of this chapter when it occurs within the city. Any person thus violating any
provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
Chapter 4
LICENSING AND REGISTRATION
8-4-1: VEHICLE LICENSE REQUIRED:
Every motor vehicle used or operated on any highway within the city shall be registered in compliance with the provisions of the Minnesota statutes,
chapter 168, as amended. (Ord. XII.2, 9-28-1972)
8-4-2: DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 120/324
Every person who is required by Minnesota statutes, chapter 171, as amended, to be licensed in order to operate a vehicle or a motor vehicle upon a
highway within the state of Minnesota, shall at all times while operating a vehicle or motor vehicle on any highway within the city have in his immediate
possession a license, issued in compliance with the provisions of Minnesota statutes, chapter 171, as amended. (Ord. XII.2, 9-28-1972)
8-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
The words and phrases "vehicle", "motor vehicle", "highway", "person" and "owner" shall have the meanings ascribed to them by Minnesota statutes,
chapters 168 and 171. (Ord. XII.2, 9-28-1972)
8-4-4: PENALTIES:
The owner and operator of any motor vehicle operated in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as described in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
Chapter 5
EMERGENCY VEHICLE PREEMPTION SYSTEM
8-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose for using the Emergency Vehicle Preemption System (EVPS) in Rosemount is to allow emergency vehicles to perform emergency services in
a safer and more timely manner by temporarily controlling motorized vehicle traffic flow at signalized intersection. The Council deems it advisable to
formulate policies and procedures for the use of the EVPS emitters so that both pedestrians and drivers of motorized vehicles have adequate warning that
emergency vehicles are changing normal traffic control timing at signalized intersections. (Ord. XII.15, 11-7-1995)
8-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: A vehicle equipped and identified according to law and operated by the Police Department and/or Fire Department or any other
vehicle so recognized by State statute.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE PREEMPTION SYSTEM: A traffic control system designed for use by emergency vehicles to improve traffic movement by
temporarily controlling signalized intersections. The EVPS is comprised of four (4) separate components: an emitter, a detector, an indicator, and a phase
selector. The emitter (a high intensity light source) is attached to the emergency vehicle and functions in excess of ten (10) "beats" per second. As an
emergency vehicle approaches the intersection, this pulsating light is received by a detector that is located at or near the traffic signal. The detector relays
the coded message to the phase selector, located in the traffic light control box, which then either holds the existing green light in favor of the approaching
emergency vehicle or accelerates the normal cycle of a signal change to provide green by the time the vehicle reaches the intersection. The indicator is a
light source located near the detector which is directed toward the oncoming emergency vehicle to indicate to the driver whether or not the traffic light has
been preempted in their favor. (Ord. XII.15, 11-7-1995)
8-5-3: CONDITIONS FOR USING THE EVPS:
A. Fire Department: City owned Fire Department vehicles shall use the EVPS while on emergency responses only. Unless otherwise provided for herein,
all other use by the Department is prohibited. Conditions for the use of EVPS hereby become a part of the Fire Department Standard Operating
Procedures.
B. Police Department: City owned Police Department vehicles shall use the EVPS while on emergency responses only. Unless otherwise provided for
herein, all other use by the Department is prohibited. Conditions for the use of the EVPS hereby become a part of the Police Department Standard
Operating Procedures.
C. City, County Or State Maintenance Personnel: County, State or City maintenance personnel, or their contractors under written agreement, may activate
the EVPS only when testing or repairing the system. Sirens and flashing red lights need not be used except when the test vehicle must exceed the
posted speed limits. In such instances, said test must be preapproved and coordinated with the Police Chief or his designee.
D. Emergency Vehicles Not Owned By The City: The use of the EVPS within the City by non-City emergency vehicles is allowed if said emergency vehicle
is one which is recognized by the City in which it is based. The participating organization or unit of government shall be trained and shall follow all
procedures prescribed by the City in utilizing the EVPS.
E. Unlawful Activation: Unless specifically approved herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to activate the EVPS in Rosemount by any means
whatsoever. This clause specifically prohibits the installation of EVPS emitters on any vehicle not identified in subsections A through D of this Section.
(Ord. XII.15, 11-7-1995)
8-5-4: EVPS MAINTENANCE PROCEDURES:
A. It shall be the City's policy to routinely test the EVPS to ensure proper functioning of the system. During such tests, each intersection which is EVPS
equipped shall be checked from all approaches. Test results will be recorded on a standardized form indicating the intersection tested, date of test,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 121/324
person conducting test, and evaluation result. This test is to be completed jointly by the Police, Fire and Public Works Departments, and a copy of the
completed test form shall be sent to the respective department heads.
B. When a traffic signal is found to malfunction during a test, the person conducting the test shall immediately notify the Police Department of the defect
and the location of the defective signal and promptly provide separate written notice to the Police Chief. (Ord. XII.15, 11-7-1995)
8-5-5: EVPS TRAINING:
An explanation of the policies and procedures governing the use of the EVPS in Rosemount shall be included in the basic and in-service training courses
for both the Police and Fire Departments. Appropriate training shall also be mandated for those non-City entities authorized to utilize the EVPS within the
City. (Ord. XII.15, 11-7-1995)
8-5-6: DISCIPLINARY ACTION:
Violation of the policies and procedures set forth above by any authorized person shall be cause for disciplinary action in accordance with adopted City
and Department policies. (Ord. XII.15, 11-7-1995)
8-5-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter is guilty as provided by State law. (Ord. XII.15, 11-7-1995)
Title 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODE
9-1-1: STATE BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
A. Building Code: The Minnesota state building code, in its most current edition, established pursuant to Minnesota statutes, 16B.59 to 16B.75, is hereby
adopted as the building code for the city. The code is hereby incorporated as completely as if fully set out herein. A copy of the state building code shall
be kept available for public use in the office of the city building official. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
B. Optional Appendixes: As authorized by Minnesota rule, part 1300.000, the following appendix chapters of the international building code are hereby
adopted without change and incorporated as part of the building code for the city:
1. Appendix chapter J, excavation and grading.
(Ord. XVIII.13, 6-15-2004)
9-1-2: APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Procedures And Administration: The application, administration and enforcement of the code shall be in accordance with Minnesota rule, chapter 1300.
(Ord. XVIII.13, 6-15-2004)
B. Building Inspections Division: The community development department shall contain the "building inspections division". The building inspections division
shall be the code enforcement agency of the city, under the direction of the community development director. The administrative authority of the
building inspections division shall be the building official. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997; amd. Ord. XVIII.12, 2-5-2002)
C. Building Official: For the purposes of this section, the building official is responsible for the administration and enforcement of all applicable building
codes in the city.
D. Licensed Activities: Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is unlawful for any person or firm to perform any work subject to the provisions of the
building code unless he/she is currently licensed to do so under applicable provisions of this title or state law. Such work includes, but is not limited to,
general residential contracting or roofing or reroofing, general contracting electrical, plumbing, gas appliance installation, high pressure steamfitting and
elevator construction.
E. Certificate Of Occupancy: With the exception of group U occupancies, no building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing
use or occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy
in accordance with the Minnesota building code for said use. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-1-3: PERMITS, FEES AND SURCHARGE:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 122/324
A. Permits Required, General Rule: It is unlawful for any person to perform work subject to the building code for which a permit is required without having
obtained such permit and paid the fees as required and established by the city council by resolution. The building official shall establish a system for
permit issuance, fee collection, permit expiration and/or suspension and fee refunds of said permits in accordance with the building code.
B. Plumbing Permits, Required: It is unlawful for any person to make any installation, alteration, repair or replacement or to remodel any plumbing system
regulated by this code without having obtained a plumbing permit and paid required fees as established by the city council by resolution. The provisions
of this subsection shall not apply to the following:
1. The stopping of leaks in drains, soil, waste or vent pipe, provided, however, that should any concealed trap, drainpipe, soil, waste or vent pipe
become defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, the same shall be considered as new work and a
plumbing permit shall be procured and inspection made as provided in this code.
2. The cleaning of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, or the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such
repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.
Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work done in violation of this code. (Ord.
XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
C. Permit Validity And Expiration: All permits issued in the city in accordance with this code, shall be valid, shall expire or be suspended or revoked in
accordance with Minnesota rule, chapter 1300.0120 subparts 10 and 11.
D. Permit Fees: The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in Minnesota rule, chapter 1300.0160. All permit fees shall be
established and reevaluated by the city council on a periodic basis, and be charged in accordance with the fee schedule, as adopted by resolution.
(Ord. XVIII.13, 6-15-2004)
E. Valuation: The building official shall utilize the "Chart Of Estimated Construction Cost" as annually published by the Minnesota department of
administration, building codes and standards division, to compute building valuations for the purposes of establishing Rosemount permit fees. The
construction cost chart shall be updated annually and adopted by the city council by resolution. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-1-4: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND APPEALS:
A. Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or
maintain any building or structure or portion thereof in the city, or cause the same to be done contrary to or in violation of any provision of the building
code embodied in this chapter. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
B. Penalties: Persons found to be in violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor offense and punished as
described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each day during which a violation of the building code is committed, continued or permitted, constitutes a
separate offense. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
C. Appeals: In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and
interpretation of this chapter, an appellant shall complete the city application for code appeals and submit said application to the city clerk; and, a
hearing shall be scheduled within thirty (30) days of receipt of the complete application. For the purposes of code appeals, the city council shall be
deemed to be the official board of appeals. All decisions and findings shall be rendered final as determined by the board of appeals unless or until
overruled by the commissioner of the Minnesota department of administration, in accordance with Minnesota statutes, section 16B.67. The board shall
render all decisions and findings within thirty (30) days, in writing, to the appellant. The board of appeals shall not have the authority to waive any
requirements of this code. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
Chapter 2
EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING
9-2-1: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Excavation And Grading Conditions And Special Requirements: The building official may impose additional conditions and special requirements,
consistent with the intent and purpose of international building code appendix chapter J, as adopted herein, including, but not limited to, fencing,
screening, erosion control measures relating to the excavation and grading of sites, where protection of public welfare, public interest and property
warrants such action. (Ord. XVIII.13, 6-15-2004)
B. Water Resources Management: In addition to the requirements contained herein, all excavation and grading activities within the city shall be performed
in strict compliance with this code. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
C. As Built Certificate Of Survey: For all new construction for which a building permit has been issued, the permit holder must submit an as built certificate
of survey as a condition of issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The survey must be prepared by a licensed surveyor and it must certify that the lot is
graded in accordance with the approved grading plan. The following conditions also apply:
1. For lots that will be occupied between May 1 and October 31, the as built survey must be submitted to the city two (2) days before a certificate of
occupancy will be issued.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 123/324
2. For lots that will be occupied between November 1 and April 30, the building permit applicant must provide a cash deposit in accordance with the
city's fee schedule. The city will collect the security with the building permit application and retain it until the requirements of this subsection are met.
If the permit holder fails to fulfill the requirements of this subsection by providing a final grade as built survey by the next June 15, the security will be
surrendered to the city and the city will take steps to complete the final grade of the property as approved. The city will return unused security funds
after completion of grading in accordance with the approved grading plan. No interest will accrue on the cash deposit. (Ord. XVIII.14, 11-1-2005, eff.
1-1-2006)
9-2-2: VARIANCES:
Where the city council finds that hardships may result from strict compliance with these regulations or that unusual topographical conditions exist, it may
vary these regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such variation will not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-2-3: VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. Enforcement: The city council may, for failure of any person to comply with any requirements made in writing under the provisions of section 9-2-1 of
this chapter, as promptly as the same can reasonably be done, proceed to cause such requirement to be complied with, and the cost of such work be
taxed against the property whereon the pit, excavation, grading or fill is situated when authorized by law; or the city may at its option proceed to collect
such costs by an action against the person to whom such permit has been issued, and their superiors, if a bond or cash deposit exists. (Ord. XVIII.10,
9-2-1997)
B. Penalties: Any person who shall refuse, neglect or fail to comply with any requirement of this chapter or who shall fail to comply with any order issued
under this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor offense. Violators shall be punished as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each day of violation
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
Chapter 3
ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS, REGULATIONS
9-3-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Electrical Code Applications: The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all installations of electrical conductors, fittings, devices and fixtures
hereinafter referred to as electrical equipment within or on public and private buildings and premises, with the following general exceptions. The
provisions of this Chapter do not apply to installations in mines, ships, railway cars, aircraft or automotive equipment, or the installations or equipment
employed by a railway, electric or communication utility in the exercise of its functions as a utility, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter.
B. Safe Installations: As used in this Chapter, "reasonably safe to persons and property" as applied to electrical installations and electrical equipment
means safe to use in the service for which the installation or equipment is intended without unnecessary hazard to life, limb or property.
C. Electrical Code: For the purposes of interpretation of the provisions of this Chapter, the most recently published edition of the National Electrical Code
shall be prima facie evidence of the definitions, interpretations and scope of words and terms used in this Chapter. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-3-2: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; QUALIFICATIONS AND APPOINTMENT:
A. Electrical Inspector: There is hereby created the office of Electrical Inspector.
B. Appointment: A certified State Electrical Inspector shall be appointed by the City Council and need not be a City employee. Any assistant shall meet the
same requirements as the Electrical Inspector.
C. Inspector Qualifications: The salary of the Electrical Inspector shall be determined by resolution of the City Council. Before commencing duties, and on
a biennial basis, the ElectricalInspector shall provide evidence of State licensing as a State Electrical Inspector and provide proof of required bonding
through the State Board of Electricity to the City Clerk.
D. Duties: It shall be the duty of the Inspector to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. The Electrical Inspector shall, upon application, grant permits for
the installation or alteration of electrical equipment and shall make inspections of electrical installations, all as provided in this Chapter. The Electrical
Inspector shall keep complete records of all permits issued, inspections, and reinspection(s) made and other official work performed in accordance with
the provisions of this Chapter.
E. Inspector Prerequisites: It shall be unlawful for the Inspector or any assistant to engage in the sale, installation or maintenance of electrical equipment,
directly or indirectly, and they shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in such business in the City.
F. Authority Of Electrical Inspector: The Inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building or premises in the discharge of official
duties, or for the purpose of making any inspection, reinspection or test of electrical equipment contained therein or its installation. When any electrical
equipment is found by the Inspector to be dangerous to persons or property because it is defective or defectively installed, the person responsible for
the electrical equipment shall be notified in writing and shall make any changes or repair required in the judgment of the Inspector to place such
equipment in safe conditions. If such work is not completed within fifteen (15) days or any longer period that may be specified by the inspector in said
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 124/324
notice, the inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or order discontinuance of electrical service to said electrical equipment. In cases of
emergency where necessary for safety to persons and property, or where electrical equipment may interfere with the work of the fire department, the
inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or cause disconnection immediately of any electrical equipment.
G. Deputies: The inspector may delegate any of the inspector's powers to any of the inspector's assistants. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
H. Responsibility: The city electrical inspector shall function under the applicable policies of the city building inspections division and the city building
official. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997; amd. Ord. XVIII.12, 2-5-2002)
9-3-3: STANDARDS FOR ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT INSTALLATIONS:
A. Standards: All installations of electrical equipment shall be reasonably safe to persons and property and in conformity with the provisions of this chapter,
the applicable statutes of the state and all orders, rules and regulations issued by the authority thereof.
B. National Electrical Code: Conformity of installations of electrical equipment with applicable regulations set forth in the current national electrical code,
national electrical safety code or electrical provisions of other safety codes which have been approved by the American Standards Association shall be
prima facie evidence that such installations are reasonably safe to persons and property, together with such additions and exceptions contained herein.
Noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be prima facie evidence that the installation is not reasonably safe to persons and property.
C. Alternative Methods And Modifications: When there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the electrical inspector,
with approval of the city building official, may grant modifications or accept alternative methods for individual cases. The electrical inspector shall first
find that a special individual reason makes strict letter of this code impractical and that said alternative or modification is in conformance with the intent
and purpose of this code and that said alternative or modification does not lessen any life safety or fire protection requirements or any degree of
structural integrity. The details of said actions shall be recorded and entered into the permanent files of the department.
D. Moved Buildings And Structures: Buildings or structures moved from without to within and within the limits of the city shall conform to all of the
requirements of this chapter for new buildings or structures.
E. Change Of Use Or Occupancy: Existing buildings or structures hereafter changed in use shall conform in all respects to the requirements of this chapter
for the new use. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-3-4: ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS:
All electrical installations shall be designed and installed in accordance with the most current edition of the Minnesota building code and national electrical
code as adopted by the state. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-3-5: CONNECTIONS TO INSTALLATIONS:
A. Equipment Connections: It shall be unlawful for any person to make connections from a supply of electricity to any electrical equipment for the
installation of which a permit is required or which has been disconnected by the electrical inspector without first securing a permit.
B. Electrical Disconnection Orders: The public or private utility providing services shall disconnect the same upon a written order from the electrical
inspector, if the inspector considers any electrical installation unsafe to life and property or installedcontrary to this chapter.
C. Permit Exemptions: No permit shall be required for minor repair work as defined in Minnesota statutes, section 326.244, meaning the adjustment or
repair and replacement of worn or defective parts of electrical fixtures, switches, receptacles and other equipment; provided, that such minor repairs
are made in compliance with accepted standards of construction for safety to life and property as defined in Minnesota statutes, section 326.243 and
do not require replacement of the wiring to them. The city's inspectors or agents may inspect any such minor repairs at the request of the owner or
person making such repairs. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-3-6: PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS:
A. Permits Required: An electrical permit is required for each installation, alteration or addition of electrical work for light, heat and power within the limits of
the City.
B. Work Exempt From Permit: No permit shall be required for electrical installations of equipment owned, leased, operated or maintained by a public
service corporation which is used by said corporation in the performance of its function as a utility, except that such electrical installations shall conform
to the minimum standards of the National Electrical Code.
C. Public Utilities: Ownership of any transmission or distribution lines or appurtenances thereto, including, but not limited to, transformers, shall not be
transferred by a public service corporation to any person, except another franchised public service corporation dealing in electric energy for distribution
and sale, without a permit first having been issued therefor by the City. Such permit shall be issued only after the facilities to be transferred have been
inspected and approved as provided in this Chapter and upon payment of an inspection fee as set forth in this Section.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 125/324
D. Permit Fees: Before any permit is granted for the installation or alteration of electrical equipment, the person making application for such permit shall
pay the City a fee in such amount as is set by resolution of the City Council and furnish proof of a valid State electrical contractor's license, in
accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code and Minnesota Statutes.
E. Permit Application: Application for such permit, describing the electrical work to be done, shall be made on a State application, in writing, to the City by
the person registered to do such work. The application shall be accompanied by such plans, specifications and schedules as may be necessary to
determine whether the electrical installation described will be in conformity with all legal requirements. The fees for electrical inspection as set forth by
resolution shall accompany such application. If the applicant has complied with all of theprovisions of this Chapter, a permit for such electrical
installation shall be issued.
F. Inspection Scheduling: The electrical inspections process will be in accordance with the following:
1. All electrical installations which involve the concealment of wiring or equipment shall have a "rough in" inspection prior to concealment, wherein the
Inspector shall be duly notified in advance, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
2. When any electrical equipment is to be hidden from view by the permanent placement of parts of the building, the person installing the equipment
shall notify the Electrical Inspector and such equipment shall not be concealed until it has been inspected and approved by the Electrical Inspector or
until twenty four (24) hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, shall have elapsed from the time of such notifications; provided, that on
large installations, where the concealment of equipment proceeds continuously, the person installing the electrical equipment shall give the Electrical
Inspector due notice and inspection shall be made periodically during the progress of the work.
3. At regular intervals the Electrical Inspector shall visit all premises where work may be done under annual permits and shall inspect all electrical
equipment installed under such a permit since the previous inspection, and shall issue a certificate of approval for such work as is found to be in
conformity with the provisions of this Chapter, after the required fee has been paid.
G. Correction Notice Process: If upon inspection the installation is not found to be fully in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter, the Electrical
Inspector shall at once forward to the person making the installation a written notice stating the defects which have been found to exist. (Ord. XVIII.10,
9-2-1997)
9-3-7: INSPECTION FEES:
Inspection fees and inspections of transient projects, including, but not limited to, carnivals and circuses, will be set forth by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-3-8: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
This Chapter shall not be construed to affect the responsibility or liability for any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical equipment
for damages to persons or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the City be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection or
reinspection authorized herein or the certificate of approval or disapproval of any equipment authorized herein. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-3-9: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each act of violation or each day a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. XII.21,
6-15-2004)
Chapter 4
BUILDING AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
9-4-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the BUILDING AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE ORDINANCE or "this chapter" hereafter. (Ord.
XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-4-2: LEGISLATIVE FINDING:
It is hereby found that there exists and may in the future exist in the city, structures used for human habitation which for reasons of their structure,
equipment, sanitation, maintenance, use or occupancy affect or are likely to affect adversely the public health (including the physical, mental, and social
well being of persons and families), safety, and general welfare. To correct and prevent the existence of such adverse conditions, to achieve and maintain
such levels of residential, commercial, and industrial environmental quality as will protect and promote public health, safety, and general welfare, it is found
that the establishment and enforcement of minimum building and property standards are required. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-4-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, preserve and promote the public health, safety, and the general welfare of the people of the city, to prevent
building conditions that adversely affect or are likely to adversely affect the life, safety, general welfare, and health, including the physical, mental and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 126/324
social well being of persons occupying dwellings within the city, to promote and encourage property lawn maintenance, and set standards for an adequate
level of maintenance to preserve the value of land and buildings throughout the city; and to provide for the administration and enforcement thereof. (Ord.
XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-4-4: DISCRIMINATION AND PRIVACY:
This chapter is to be enforced in a nondiscriminatory manner and exclusively for the purpose of promoting public, as opposed to private, welfare. Except
as may be specifically provided herein or incidental to the enforcement hereof, this chapter is not intended to interfere with personal policy or with private
legal rights and liabilities, including, without limitation, landlord/tenant and lessor/lessee relationships, and in enacting and enforcing this chapter, the city
neither expressly nor by implication assumes any obligations or liabilities respecting such private rights or disputes, including those which involve or arise
out of the nonconformity of any premises in the city to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-4-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms defined in this section have the meanings given to them:
BUILDING: A structure erected for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattel, or movable property of any kind.
DWELLING: A building, or portion thereof, designed or used for residential or business occupancy, including one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings,
and multi-family dwellings. Whenever the word "dwellings" is used in this chapter, it shall be construed as though it was followed by the words "or any part
thereof".
DWELLING UNIT: One room or rooms connected together constituting a separate, independent housekeeping unit for owner occupancy, or rental or lease
on a weekly, monthly, or longer basis, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and containing
independent cooking, toilet and sleeping facilities. Whenever the term "dwelling units" is used in this Chapter, it is to be construed as though it was
followed by the words "or any part thereof".
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: A person designated by the City Administrator to administer and enforce this Chapter, or his or her designee.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes, including those resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
HABITABLE: Fit to be lived in.
NUISANCE: A. A public nuisance known as such under common law or in equity or recognized by Minnesota Statutes or the City Code.
B. A public nuisance which may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied lot. This
includes, but is not limited to, any abandoned wells, shafts, basements, or excavations; abandoned refrigerators in a hazardous condition; unlicensed
or inoperable motor vehicles; or any structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, garbage, rubbish, fences, or debris which may become
a hazard for inquisitive minors.
C. Overcrowding a room with occupants.
D. Insufficient ventilation or illumination.
E. Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities.
F. Uncleanliness.
G. Any situation or activity which renders air, food, or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings.
H. Any condition which is offensive or has a blighting influence on the community.
I. Any other activity or situation that is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health.
OCCUPANCY: A taking or possessing of something.
OWNER: A person who, alone, jointly, or severally with others, shall be in actual possession of, or have charge, care, or control of, any dwelling or
dwelling unit within the City as owner, employee, or agent of the owner, or as trustee or guardian of the estate of person of the title holder. A person
representing the actual owner must comply with the provisions of this Chapter to the same extent as the owner.
PUBLIC AREA: Those areas which are normally open to the general public or the occupants of more than one dwelling unit of a multiple-family dwelling.
REFUSE: Putrescible and nonputrescible solids including garbage and rubbish.
RESIDENCE: A place of habitation.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: A. Agent;
B. Designee or collector of rents;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 127/324
C. Holder of a contract for deed;
D. Receiver, executor, or trustee;
E. Lessee;
F. Other person, firm, or corporation exercising control over a party.
RODENT HARBORAGE: A shelter where rodents are liable to live, nest, or seek shelter.
RODENTS: An infestation of vermin such as rats, mice, skunks, snakes, bats, grackles, starlings, pigeons, bees, wasps, cockroaches, or flies.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, grass and
shrubbery clippings, wood, glass, brick, plaster, bedding, crockery, cement, and similar materials.
STRUCTURE: Anything erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground; or attached to something having a permanent
location on the ground. Whenever the word "structure" is used in this Chapter, it shall be construed as though it was followed by the words "or any part
thereof".
YARD: All ground, lawn, court, walk, driveway, or other space constituting part of the same premises. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-4-6: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS:
The owner of a dwelling is responsible for the maintenance of buildings and structures and for meeting the provisions of this Chapter, unless otherwise
noted.
A. Joint Responsibility Of Occupants And Owner:
1. An owner, agent or occupant of a dwelling may not allow the accumulation of dirt or filth on the premises occupied or controlled in a manner that
could create a health hazard to the dwelling occupants or the general public.
2. An owner, agent or occupant of a dwelling may not allow the accumulation of rubbish or garbage on the premises occupied or controlled in a manner
that could create a health hazard to the dwelling occupants or the general public1.
3. An owner, agent or occupant may not allow formation of rodent harborage in or about the premises occupied or controlled.
4. The occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit is responsible for the extermination of rodents, insects or vermin on the premises. Every
occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit is responsible for such extermination whenever the dwelling unit is
the only one infested. However, whenever infestation is caused by the failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a reasonable rodentproof
condition, extermination is the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two (2) or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in
the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units, extermination thereof is the responsibility of the owner. (Ord.
XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-4-7: PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED:
Whoever by an act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally does any of the following is guilty of violating this Chapter:
A. Maintains or permits an unfavorable building or structure appearance or level of maintenance:
1. Adverse Impact: Buildings, structures, fences and retaining walls which have been so poorly maintained that their physical condition and appearance
detract from the surrounding neighborhood are declared to be public nuisances because they: a) decrease adjoining landowners' and occupants'
enjoyment of their property and neighborhood; and b) may adversely affect property values and neighborhood patterns.
2. Standards:
a. Any building, structure, fence or retaining wall is a public nuisance if it does not comply with the following requirements:
(1) No part of any exterior surface shall have deterioration, holes, breaks, gaps, loose or rotting boards or timber.
(2) Every exterior surface which has had a surface finish such as paint applied shall be maintained to avoid noticeable deterioration of the finish.
No wall or other exterior surface shall have peeling, cracked, chipped, or otherwise deteriorated surface finish on more than twenty percent
(20%) of:
(A) Any one wall or other flat surface;
(B) All door and window moldings, eaves, gutters, and similar projections on any one side or surface.
(3) No glass, including windows and exterior light fixtures, shall be broken or cracked and no seams shall be torn or separated from moldings.
(4) All exterior doors and shutters shall be hung properly and have an operable mechanism to keep them securely shut or in place.
(5) All cornices, moldings, lintels, sills, bay or dormer windows, and similar projections shall be kept in good repair and free from cracks and
defects which make them hazardous or unsightly.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 128/324
(6) Roof structures shall be tight and have no defects which admit water. All roof drainage systems shall be secured and hung properly.
(7) Chimney, antennas, air vents, and other similar projections shall be structurally sound and in good repair. Such projections shall be secured
properly, where applicable, to an exterior wall or roof.
B. Maintains or permits buildings or structures which endanger public safety, health or property within the City:
1. Any building, structure, fence or retaining wall in the City which is found by the City Building Inspectors or Fire Marshall, or their designee, to be
dangerous to public safety, health or property by reason of:
a. Damage by fire;
b. Defective chimneys or stovepipes;
c. Dilapidated condition or decay;
d. Defective electrical wiring;
e. Defective gas installations;
f. Defective heating apparatus;
g. Defective sewage disposal system or plumbing;
h. Any other defect endangering the public safety, health, or other property;
are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
2. Any building or structure which is damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, vermin or rodent infested, or which lacks provisions for basic
illumination, ventilation, or sanitary facilities to the extent that the defects create a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare to the occupants or of the
public, may be declared unfit for human habitation. Whenever any building has been declared unfit for human habitation, the enforcement officer
shall order same vacated within a reasonable time and shall post a placard on the property which shall: a) be in writing, b) include a description of
the property sufficient for identification, c) include a statement of a reason or reasons why it is being issued, d) include a description of the repairs
and improvements required to bring the dwelling into compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, and e) include a statement of time allowed to
correct the violations.
C. Maintains or permits garbage or refuse to be placed or stored in yards:
1. To enhance the safety of residents, no garbage, junk or debris shall be placed in yards or properties in the City. The City Zoning Ordinance states
that except as specifically authorized by the Zoning Ordinance, all equipment, merchandise, materials, supplies, unlicensed vehicles, junk vehicles,
trash and junk, and finished and semi-finished products shall be stored within "structures" as defined in the Zoning Ordinance. Violation of such
provisions of the City Zoning Ordinance is a violation of this Chapter.
D. Special provision; lawn maintenance:
1. Preamble: There are a variety of landscapes in the City which diversify and add a richness to the quality of life. Certain areas in the City have been
left, or allowed to go, unmaintained. They have been accepted by the vast majority of the City residents as appropriate and as part of the unique
quality of life in this community. There are community expectations, however, that once an area has been disturbed, landscaped, or otherwise
maintained, that area will continue to be maintained in a consistent manner. When vegetation in that area is not continually maintained, it becomes
aesthetically unpleasing and violates community standards. Property which appears neglected may decrease the value of adjacent properties. In
addition, if vegetation is not properly maintained, there may be the following adverse impacts on public health, safety, and welfare:
a. Undesirable vegetation such as common buckthorn, quack grass, and other weeds may invade and threaten to supplant other more desirable
vegetation.
b. Vegetation which causes allergic reactions, such as ragweed, may develop.
c. Tall vegetation along driveways and public roads may impair visibility when entering or exiting public roads.
2. Definitions: For the purpose of this Section the following words shall have the meanings specified below:
MEADOW VEGETATION: Grasses and flowering and broad leaf plants which are native to, or adopted to, the State, which are commonly found in
meadow and prairie plant communities, except weeds.
NOXIOUS WEEDS: Those plants which are determined from time to time to be noxious weeds pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, section 18.77,
subdivision 8.
REGULARLY CUT: Mowing or otherwise cutting the vegetation so that it does not exceed eight inches (8").
TURF GRASSES: Grasses commonly used in regularly cut lawn areas, such as bluegrass, fescue, and rye grass blends, and nonwoody vegetation
interspersed with them.
WEEDS: Include all noxious weeds buffalobur, common cocklebur, crabgrass, dandelions, jimsonweed, quack grass, common and giant ragweed,
field sandbur, velvetleaf, and wild sunflower. Weeds also include anything that is horticulturally out of place. For example, a tree seedling is a weed in
a vegetable garden. A property owner may establish that a plant or plants are not horticulturally out of place by providing a written landscape plan for
the area in question, complete with a listing and locations of plant species. The plants specifically listed above may not be included within the
landscape plan. Vegetation which does not comply with this plan are weeds.
3. Maintenance Standard: The minimum standard in this Section applies to property which has been developed with a "building" as defined in the
Building Code, including vacant property combined with developed property for this purpose, and a parcel of property which has been completely or
partially disturbed by demolition, grading or other means in preparation for development or redevelopment.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 129/324
a. All turf grasses and weeds must not exceed a height of eight inches (8"), measured from the base at ground level to the tip of each stalk, stem
blade, or leaf.
b. This requirement does not apply to the following:
(1) A wetland or flood plain designated on the Official Zoning Map or any other available wetland inventory maps on file with the City.
(2) A drainage pond or ditch which stores or conveys storm water.
(3) A pasture which is: a) currently being used for the exercise or feeding of domestic hoofed animals, b) physically surrounded by a permanent
fence which separates the pasture from property used for other purposes, c) at least one-half (1/2) acre in size, and d) undeveloped with any
habitable buildings.
(4) An area in which the land and vegetation appear not to have been graded, landscaped, mowed, or otherwise disturbed by human or
mechanical means at any time. Determination of what constitutes this type of area will be based on a reasonable judgment of the present
appearance of the area. The recent history of the area may be relevant to this determination.
(5) An area established with meadow vegetation if:
(A) The prior vegetation is eliminated and the meadow vegetation is planted through transplants or seed by human or mechanical means.
(B) The area is cut at least once per year to a height of eight inches (8"), if weeds cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of the area.
(C) A sign is posted on the property in a location likely to be seen by the public, advising that a meadow or prairie is being established. The sign
is required only if the vegetation is in an area likely to be seen by the public. This sign shall be in addition to any sign permitted by the sign
ordinance but shall be no smaller than ten inches (10") square, no larger than one square foot, and no higher than three feet (3') tall. The sign is
no longer required when weeds cover twenty five percent (25%) or less of the area.
c. See section 5-2-2 of this code for noxious weed control requirements.
E. Special Provision; Parking Maintenance:
1. It shall be the joint responsibility of the operator and owner of any principal use to maintain, in a neat and aesthetic manner, the parking space,
accessway, driveway, landscaping, required fences or walls and retaining walls. Violation of section 5-2-2 of this code is a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-4-8: MANUFACTURED HOME PARK MAINTENANCE STANDARDS:
A. Maintenance Standards: All streets, roadways and sidewalks shall be maintained to a level sufficient to allow free vehicular passage for the residents,
their guests, and emergency service responders under all reasonably anticipated conditions. The existence of a sufficient level of maintenance shall be
determined as follows:
1. Street Surface Condition: The hard surface of the streets shall not be covered by dirt, sand, gravel or other materials to the extent that traction
between the street surface and vehicle tires is substantially diminished. The street shall be maintained in a manner that horizontal or vertical
separations or cracks of the traveled surface are not of a magnitude which will jar a passing motor vehicle operating within the speed limit. Street
repair and patching shall also occur whenever a pothole with exposed base material exists, when a separation of crack results in crumbling
pavement, or when any dip or settlement is pronounced enough to cause storm water to collect and not drain away.
2. Snow Removal And Ice Control: Snow removal operations shall occur as necessary to provide safe and unimpeded vehicular passage of the streets,
and shall provide for curb to curb snow removal. At a minimum, snow removal operations shall be completed within twelve (12) hours after the end of
a snowfall event which deposits more than two inches (2") of snow upon the street surface. Snow removal operations shall be conducted in a
manner to achieve as close to a bare pavement surface as possible. To mitigate slippery street surfaces, sand and salt shall be applied to control ice
where necessary, but especially at street intersections, sharp curves and other locations where motorists are likely to brake or turn.
B. Trash Collection; Recycling: Trash containers stored outside of manufactured home units must be placed behind the front entry stoop and be provided
with additional screening if necessary so as not to be visible from the street, except that on the day of collection the containers may be placed at
curbside along the private manufactured home park street. If contract trash removal is provided through the park owner with a master contract rather
than contracted by individual manufactured home unit owners, the master contract must provide recycling opportunities for each manufactured home
owner.
C. Accessory Structure Removal: Upon the removal of any manufactured home from a manufactured home park, it shall be the responsibility of the park
owner to see that all freestanding or attached accessory structures, fences and debris left on the mobile home lot are removed within forty eight (48)
hours after the removal of the unit. The city zoning administrator may approve the retention of all or part of the accessory structures, if the park owner
requests same in writing, can demonstrate that they will meet the required setbacks from any replacement manufactured home unit to be placed on the
lot, and if they are shown to be in sound condition. The park owner must also provide a written commitment to remove or relocate the accessory
structure(s) permitted to remain if the required setbacks fail to be verified after the replacement manufactured home is placed. (Ord. XXI.15, 12-5-2006)
9-4-9: VIOLATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. For the purpose of safeguarding the health and safety of the general public and of the occupants of dwellings, it is the duty of the appropriate city
official, or his or her designee, to enforce this chapter, and, this official is hereby authorized and directed to conduct inspections to determine the
condition of dwellings, residences, and premises located within the city. For the purpose of making such inspections, the appropriate city official is
hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey, between the hours of seven thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M., all dwellings,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 130/324
residences, and premises. The appropriate city official, prior to making such inspection, shall inform the occupant of the dwelling by letter postmarked
not less than seventy two (72) hours prior to the time such inspection is made. After such written notice is given, the owner or occupant of such
dwelling shall allow entry, during such time, for the purpose of such inspection, examination or survey; provided that such inspection, examination or
survey shall not have for its purpose the harassment of such owner or occupant and that such inspection, examination, or survey shall be made so as
to cause the least amount of inconvenience to the owner or occupant, consistent with an efficient performance of the duties of the appropriate city
official; provided that the purpose of such inspection, examination, or survey shall not be for the procurement of evidence to be used in any criminal
proceeding; provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the entry of the appropriate city official. The required notice is waived
when:
1. At any time when in the opinion of the appropriate city official an actual emergency tending to create an immediate danger to public health and safety
exists; or
2. At any time when such inspection, examination, or survey may be requested by the owner or tenant. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997; amd. Ord. XXI.15, 12-
5-2006)
9-4-10: ENFORCEMENT:
A. It shall be the duty of the city council to enforce the provisions of this chapter and the city council may delegate to other officers or agencies power to
enforce particular provisions of this section, including the power to inspect private premises, and the officer charged with the enforcement, or his or her
designee, of this chapter shall take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance of public nuisances. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-
1997; amd. Ord. XXI.15, 12-5-2006)
9-4-11: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
A. Abatement:
1. Notice: Whenever the officer charged with enforcement determines that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on property within the city,
the officer shall notify the property owner and occupant or other responsible party in writing of that fact and order the nuisance terminated and
abated. Notice shall be served in person or by certified mail. Notice to the owner shall be satisfied by return receipt from the person listed as the
taxpayer on the county's tax record. If the property is not occupied, the owner is unknown, or no other responsible party can be reasonably identified,
notice may be served by posting said notice on the property. The posted notice shall specify the steps to be taken to abate the nuisance and the
maximum time period allowed for compliance. The posted notice shall also state that the city may, after notice to the owner and occupant or other
responsible party, provide for abating the nuisance by the city. Three (3) separate notices shall be written and delivered or posted as outlined above.
The first notice shall specify compliance within twenty (20) days. The second consecutive notice shall reference the first notice and specify an
additional ten (10) days for compliance. The third consecutive notice shall reference the first two (2) notices, specify that it is the last notice prior to
the city council's hearing for abating the matter by the city, and allow for an additional five (5) days for final compliance with the written order(s). In
cases where any or all of the notices are posted, at least forty five (45) days shall elapse between the day of the first posting and the council hearing.
2. Summary Abatement: The enforcement officer, or his or her designee, may provide for abating a public nuisance without following the procedures
required in subsection A1 of this section when:
a. There is an immediate threat to the public health or safety.
b. There is an immediate threat of serious property damage.
c. A public nuisance has been caused by private parties on public property.
If the enforcement officer abates the nuisance pursuant to this section, the officer must reasonably attempt to notify the owner, occupant, or other
responsible party of the intended action and the right to appeal the abatement and any cost recovery at the next regularly scheduled city council
meeting.
3. Hazardous And Substandard Buildings Or Structures: In appropriate cases the city may elect to enforce the provisions of this chapter pursuant to
Minnesota statutes, sections 463.15 through 463.26.
4. Cost Recovery: The owner of property on which a nuisance has been abated by the city, or a person who has caused a public nuisance on property
not owned by that person, shall be personally responsible to the city for the cost of abatement, including administrative costs and any other expenses
incurred by the city while performing the work. As soon as the work has been completed and the cost determined, the city clerk or other official
designated by the council shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner or other responsible party. Thereupon, the amount shall be
immediately due and payable at the office of the city clerk.
5. Assessment: If the cost, or any portion of it, has not been paid under subsection A4 of this section within thirty (30) days after the date of the bill, the
unpaid cost may be certified against the property to which the cost is attributable in accordance with Minnesota statutes, chapter 429. Before the
unpaid costs are certified against the property, the property owner must be given notice and hearing as required by Minnesota statutes, 429.061.
(Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997; amd. Ord. XXI.15, 12-5-2006)
6. Penalty: Any person in violation of any of the provisions in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as described in title 1, chapter
4 of this code. Each day on which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004; amd. Ord. XXI.15, 12-5-2006)
7. Hindrance: Any person hindering the efforts of city officials to investigate possible violations of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
8. Conflict Of Chapter: In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or
health ordinance or code in this city, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of
the people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the
city existing on the effective date of this chapter which established a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the
people, the provision of this chapter shall be deemed to prevail. The determination of the applicability of this chapter in light of the above rules of
interpretation shall be made by the city and its determination shall be final. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997; amd. Ord. XXI.15, 12-5-2006)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 131/324
Chapter 5
MOVED BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
9-5-1: MOVED BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
All buildings or structures moved within, into or out of the city shall be subject to the following rules and regulations as promulgated by the city building
official. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
CITY INSPECTOR: The designated city official charged with the authority to administer and enforce this code.
OSHA: The federal occupational safety and health act.
STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined
together in some definite manner. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-5-3: ADMINISTRATION AND APPLICATION:
A. Permit Required: Any person desiring to move a building or structure into, within or out of the city must apply for a moving permit with the city building
inspections division and pay the appropriate moving permit fee as adopted by the city council. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997; amd. Ord. XVIII.12, 2-5-2002)
Exception: Garages, sheds and utility buildings limited to one story in height and which will require no special traffic signage or lighting for safe road
transfer, in accordance with Minnesota statutes, chapter 169.
B. Construction Regulations: All buildings or structures proposed to be moved within or into the city limits of Rosemount shall be constructed so as to be in
compliance with all city and state building and zoning codes and ordinances in effect at the time of permit issuance. All buildings or structures shall be
in good repair and condition. (Ord.XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
C. Preinspection: Prior to moving buildings or structures within or into the city limits, a preinspection of said structures may be required. The requirements
for this inspection are at the discretion of the city building official. A special inspection application form and the appropriate fee, as approved by the city
council, must also be applied for and paid, for said preinspection. The applicant shall make such buildings or structures available and accessible for
preinspection and shall schedule a preinspection in accordance with the city building inspections division's policy. Upon completion of the
preinspection, the city inspector shall compile a report outlining code deficiencies and/or violations which would be required to bring said buildings or
structures into compliance with current codes. Upon notification of deficiencies and/or code violations, the applicant may be issued a conditional
moving and building permit as set forth in the city inspector's report. It shall be further required that the applicant shall, at the time of permit issuance,
sign a statement acknowledging acceptance of said conditions. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997; amd. Ord. XVIII.12, 2-5-2002)
D. Construction Guarantee: When a permit is required to move a building or structure into or within the city limits, it shall be further required that the
applicant post a penal bond in the sum of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) in favor of the city. The penal bond shall guarantee compliance with
said conditions outlined in the city inspector's report and that the building or structure will be placed on a foundation, and connected to the municipal
sewer and water service or a complying septic system and well (if required) and that the final grading and a driveway will be completed within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the permit issuance date.
E. Additional Permits: In addition to the moving and special inspection permits and fees, all other permits as required by city and state codes must be
obtained to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, remodel or improve the building or structure and any components related to the project.
F. Structure Placement: Except as provided under the exception of subsections A and H of this section, all buildings and structures moved within or into
the city limits must be placed on a permanent foundation and/or slab within fifteen (15) working days after the building or structure has been moved
within or into the city limits.
G. Aesthetic Conditions: Except for buildings and structures specifically exempted in subsection A of this section, all buildings or structures moved within
or into the city limits shall have all exterior wall surfaces completely resided or repainted and the roof reroofed with new materials complying with the
Rosemount zoning code. Said requirements shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days of permit issuance.
H. Building Storage: Moved buildings or structures shall be prohibited from being either temporarily or permanently stored or set for the purposes of
transport, transfer or sale within the city unless the structure is a prefabricated building or structure of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet, in
conformance with the Rosemount zoning code, and the building or structure is in a commercial district allowing such uses.
I. Licensing And Coordination: All buildings or structures shall be moved by licensed building movers in accordance with Minnesota statutes, sections
221.81 and 160.26. All building movers shall file a moving plan with the permit application indicating the proposed route within the city and the
proposed date and the time of the move. The building mover shall notify and coordinate the building move with the city police and public works
departments. Should the moving plan change, the building mover shall notify the Rosemount police and public works departments a minimum of twelve
(12) hours in advance of the original scheduled moving time and reschedule said move as required. The Rosemount police and/or public works
personnel have the right to deny, reschedule or reroute any building or structure move on jurisdictional roadways at any time.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 132/324
J. Site Conditions: Upon moving any building or structure from its existing location, all public utilities shall be terminated at the property line per code. Any
remaining concrete or other miscellaneous debris including slabs, foundations, sidewalks or footings must be removed and disposed of at an approved
construction demolition landfill in accordance with state law and Dakota County ordinance 110. All existing wells and/or septic systems must be sealed
and abandoned per code. If an excavation hole or pit is formed dueto the removal or cleanup of the moved building or structure, the excavation must
be filled with clean fill to match existing and surrounding finished grade conditions. No open and/or unsafe excavation(s) shall remain open overnight
unless secure fencing and safety signage is provided and installed in accordance with OSHA regulations. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
K. Age Of Building: Prior to moving any single-family building into or within the city limits, proof of the age of the building must be verified to the city
building inspections division. No moved single-family building which is more than five (5) years of age older in comparison to the oldest single-family
building(s) located within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed site shall be permitted. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997; amd. Ord. XVIII.12, 2-5-2002)
9-5-4: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person to move a building or structure into, within or out of the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in
violation of any provision embodied in this chapter or the Minnesota state building code. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
B. Penalties: Persons found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor offense and punished as described
in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each day during which a violation of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted, constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
Chapter 6
SUBSURFACE SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS
9-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum requirements for regulation of SSTS for the treatment and dispersal of sewage within the city of
Rosemount to protect public health and safety, groundwater quality, and to prevent or eliminate the development of public nuisances. It is intended to
serve the best interest of the city's citizens by protecting its health, safety, general welfare and natural resources.
A. The protection of lakes, rivers and streams, wetlands, and groundwater in the city essential to the promotion of public health, safety, welfare,
socioeconomic growth and development of the city in perpetuity.
B. The regulation of proper SSTS construction, reconstruction, repair and maintenance to prevent the entry and migration of contaminates, thereby
protecting the degradation of surface water and groundwater quality.
C. The establishment of minimum standards for SSTS placement, design, construction, reconstruction, repair and maintenance to prevent contamination
and, if contamination is discovered, the identification and control of its consequences and the abatement of its source and migration.
D. The appropriate utilization of privy vaults and other nonwater carried sewage collection and storage facilities.
E. The provision of technical assistance and education, plan review, inspections, SSTS surveys and complaint investigations to prevent and control
waterborne diseases, lake degradation, groundwater related hazards, and public nuisance conditions.
F. This chapter is adopted pursuant to Minnesota statutes chapters 115, 145A, 375, or successor statutes, and Minnesota rules chapters 7080, 7081 and
7082 or successor rules. (Ord. 2012-01, 1-17-2012)
9-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section. Unless specifically
defined herein, terms used in this chapter shall have the same definition as provided in Minnesota statutes section 115.55 and Minnesota rules chapters
7080, 7081, 7082, and 7083 and if not defined there, shall have common usage meaning. For purposes of this chapter, the words "must" and "shall" are
mandatory and not permissive unless a different definition appears in this chapter.
AS BUILTS: "Record drawings" as defined herein.
CITY: The city of Rosemount, Minnesota.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The administrator of the city of Rosemount.
CITY COUNCIL: City council of the city of Rosemount.
CLASS V INJECTION WELL: A shallow well used to place a variety of fluids directly below the land surface, which include a domestic SSTS serving more
than twenty (20) people. The United States environmental protection agency and delegated state groundwater programs permit these wells to inject
wastes below the ground surface provided they meet certain requirements and do not endanger underground sources of drinking water. Class V motor
vehicle waste disposal wells and large capacity cesspools are specifically prohibited (see 40 CFR parts 144 and 146).
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 133/324
CLUSTER SYSTEM: A wastewater collection and treatment system under some form of common ownership that collects wastewater from two (2) or more
dwellings or buildings and conveys it to a treatment and dispersal system located on an acceptable site near the dwelling or buildings.
DEPARTMENT: The city of Rosemount community development department.
DESIGN FLOW: The daily volume of wastewater for which an on site/cluster system is designed to treat and discharge.
FAILURE TO PROTECT GROUNDWATER: An SSTS that does not protect groundwater such as a seepage pit, cesspool, drywell, leaching pit, or other
pit; an SSTS with less than the required vertical separation distance described in Minnesota rules part 7080.1500, subparts 4(3) and 4(E); and a system
not abandoned in accordance with Minnesota rules part 7080.2500. The determination of the threat to groundwater for other conditions must be made by a
qualified employee or a licensed inspection business.
ISTS: An individual sewage treatment system as defined in Minnesota rules part 7080.1100, subpart 42.
IMMINENT THREAT TO PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY: An SSTS with a discharge of sewage or sewage effluent to the ground surface, drainage
systems, ditches, or stormwater drains or directly to surface water; SSTS that cause a reoccurring sewage backup into a dwelling or other establishment;
SSTS with electrical hazards; sewage tanks with unsecured, damaged, or weak maintenance access covers; or any other situation with the potential to
immediately and adversely affect or threaten public health or safety. The determination of protectiveness for other conditions must be made by a qualified
employee inspector or a licensed inspection business.
MPCA: The Minnesota pollution control agency.
MSTS: A midsized subsurface sewage treatment system as defined in Minnesota rules part 7081.0020, subpart 4.
MINOR REPAIR: The repair or replacement of an existing damaged or faulty component/part of an SSTS that will return the SSTS to its operable
condition. The repair shall not alter the original area, dimensions, design, specifications or concepts of the SSTS.
MUNICIPALITY: Any incorporated city or township within the boundaries of Dakota County, Minnesota.
PERSON: Any human being, any municipality or other governmental or political subdivision, or other public agency, any public or private corporation, any
partnership, firm, association, or other organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent, or other legal representative or any of the foregoing or any
other legal entity.
RECORD DRAWINGS: A set of drawings that reasonably document the final in place location, size, and type of all SSTS components including the results
of any materials testing performed and a description of conditions during construction of the system. Record drawings were previously known as "as
builts".
SSTS: A subsurface sewage treatment system as defined in Minnesota rules part 7080.1100, subpart 82.
SHORELAND/FLOODPLAIN AREA: Those areas covered by Dakota County ordinance 50, shoreland and floodplain management.
STATE: The state of Minnesota.
TREATMENT LEVEL: Treatment system performance levels as defined in Minnesota rules part 7083.4030, table III for testing or proprietary treatment
products.
TYPE I SYSTEM: An SSTS designed according to Minnesota rules parts 7080.2200 to 7080.2240, as may be amended.
TYPE II SYSTEM: An SSTS designed according to Minnesota rules parts 7080.2250 to 7080.2290, as may be amended.
TYPE III SYSTEM: An SSTS designed according to Minnesota rules part 7080.2300, as may be amended.
TYPE IV SYSTEM: An SSTS designed according to Minnesota rules part 7080.2350, as may be amended.
TYPE V SYSTEM: An SSTS designed according to Minnesota rules part 7080.2400, as may be amended. (Ord. 2012-01, 1-17-2012)
9-6-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Scope: This chapter regulates the siting, design, installation, alterations, operation, maintenance, monitoring, and management of all SSTS within the
city's jurisdiction including, but not limited to, individual SSTS and cluster or community SSTS, privy vaults, and other nonwater carried SSTS. All
sewage generated in unsewered areas of the city shall be treated and dispersed by an approved SSTS that is sited, designed, installed, operated, and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or by a system that has been permitted by MPCA.
B. Jurisdiction: This chapter applies to all land area within the city. (Ord. 2012-01, 1-17-2012)
9-6-4: ADMINISTRATION:
A. City: The department shall administer the SSTS program and all provisions of this chapter. At appropriate times, the city shall review, revise and update
this chapter as necessary. The city shall employ or retain under contract qualified and appropriately licensed professionals to administer and operate
the SSTS program.
B. State Of Minnesota: When a single SSTS or group of SSTS under single ownership within one-half (1/2) mile of each other have a design flow greater
than ten thousand (10,000) gallons per day, the owner or owners shall make application for and obtain a state disposal system permit from the MPCA
in accordance with Minnesota rules chapter 7001. If the measured daily flows for a consecutive seven (7) day period exceed ten thousand (10,000)
gallons per day, a state disposal system permit is required.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 134/324
A state disposal system permit is also required for any SSTS or group of SSTS that the MPCA commissioner determines has the potential or an
increased potential to cause adverse public health or environmental impacts if not regulated under a state permit. Conditions for these permits include
systems in environmentally sensitive areas, unsubstantiated or unexpected flow volumes, and systems requiring exceptional operation, monitoring, and
management. (Ord. 2012-01, 1-17-2012)
9-6-5: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Retroactivity:
1. All SSTS: Except as provided in subsection A2 of this section, all provisions of this chapter shall apply to any SSTS regardless of the date it was
originally permitted.
2. Existing Permits: Unexpired permits that were issued prior to the effective date hereof shall remain valid under the terms and conditions of the
original permit until the original expiration date or until a change in system ownership.
3. SSTS On Lots Created After January 23, 1996: All lots created after January 23, 1996, must have a minimum of two (2) soil treatment and dispersal
areas that can support systems as described in Minnesota rules parts 7080.2200 through 7080.2230 or site conditions described in Minnesota rules
part 7081.0270, subparts 3 through 7.
B. Upgrade, Repair, Replacement, And Abandonment:
1. Failure To Protect Groundwater: An SSTS that is determined not to be protective of groundwater in accordance with Minnesota rules part 7080.1500,
subpart 4(B) shall be upgraded, repaired, replaced or abandoned by the owner in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within ten (10)
months of receipt of notice of noncompliance from the department.
2. Imminent Threat To Public Health Or Safety: An SSTS that is determined to be an imminent threat to public health or safety shall be upgraded,
repaired, replaced or abandoned by the owner in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice of
noncompliance from the department.
3. Abandonment: Any SSTS, or any component thereof, that is no longer intended to be used must be abandoned in accordance with section 9-6-8 of
this chapter and Minnesota rules part 7080.2500.
C. SSTS In Floodplains: SSTS shall not be located in a floodway and wherever possible, location within any part of a floodplain should be avoided. If no
option exists to locate an SSTS outside of a floodplain, location within the flood fringe is allowed if the requirements of Minnesota rules part 7080.2270
and all relevant local requirements are met.
D. Class V Injection Wells: All owners of new or replacement SSTS that are considered to be class V injection wells as defined in the code of federal
regulations, title 40, part 144, are required to submit SSTS inventory information to the United States environmental protection agency and the MPCA.
Owners are also required to identify all class V injection wells in property transfer disclosures.
E. SSTS License Required: All design, installation, alteration, repair, maintenance, operation, pumping and inspection activities for SSTS located in the city
must be completed by a business licensed by the state under Minnesota rules chapter 7083, an appropriately certified qualified employee, or a person
exempted under Minnesota rules part 7083.0700, subparts 1(A), (C), (D), (F), (G), (H), and (I). Individuals exempt from a state SSTS license under
Minnesota rules part 7083.0700, subparts 1(A), (C), (D), (F), (G), (H), and (I) must follow all applicable local, state and federal requirements. Property
owners that employ a business to perform this work must hire a business that is licensed in accordance with Minnesota rules chapter 7083.
No person shall engage in site evaluation, inspection, design, installation, construction, alteration, extension, repair, maintenance, or pumping of SSTS
without an appropriate and valid license issued by the MPCA in accordance with Minnesota rules chapter 7083, except as exempted in Minnesota rules
part 7083.0700, subparts 1(A), (C), (D), (F), (G), (H), and (I).
F. Prohibitions:
1. Occupancy Or Use Of Building Without A Compliant SSTS: It is unlawful for any person to maintain, occupy, or use any building intended for
habitation to dispose of wastewater in a manner that does not comply with the provisions of this chapter.
2. Sewage Discharge To Ground Surface Or Surface Water: It is unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, or use any wastewater treatment
system regulated under this chapter that results in raw or partially treated wastewater seeping to the ground surface or flowing into any surface
water. Any surface discharging system must be permitted by the MPCA under the national pollutant discharge elimination system program.
3. Sewage Discharge To A Well Or Boring: It is unlawful for any person to discharge raw or treated wastewater into any well or boring as described in
Minnesota rules part 4725.2050, or any other excavation in the ground that is not in compliance with this chapter.
4. Discharge Of Hazardous Or Deleterious Materials: It is unlawful for any person to discharge into any treatment system regulated under this chapter
any hazardous or deleterious material that adversely affects the treatment or dispersal performance of the system or groundwater quality.
G. Required Submission Of Maintenance Reports: Licensed maintenance businesses must abide by the requirements described in Minnesota rules part
7083.0770, subpart 2. All written reports required by Minnesota rules part 7083.0770, subpart 2 must be provided to the homeowner and the
department within thirty (30) days after any maintenance work is performed. (Ord. 2012-01, 1-17-2012)
9-6-6: SSTS STANDARDS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 135/324
A. Standards Adopted By Reference: Minnesota statutes section 115.55 and Minnesota rules chapters 7080, 7081, 7082 and all other reference laws and
rules, as may be amended, are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter.
B. Amendments To The Adopted Standards:
1. Determination Of Hydraulic Loading Rate And SSTS Sizing: Table IX from Minnesota rules part 7080.2150, subpart 3 entitled loading rates for
determining bottom absorption area for trenches and seepage beds for effluent treatment level C and absorption ratios for determining mound
absorption areas using detail soil descriptions and table IXa from Minnesota rules part 7080.2150, subpart 3(E) entitled loading rates for determining
bottom absorption area for trenches and seepage beds for effluent treatment level C and absorption ratios for determining mound absorption areas
using percolation tests and herein adopted by reference shall both be used to size SSTS infiltration areas using the larger sizing factor of the two for
SSTS design.
2. Holding Tanks: A holding tank may be used for the following application only after it can be shown conclusively by the property owner that an SSTS
permitted under this chapter cannot be feasibly installed:
a. As a replacement for an existing failing SSTS;
b. For an SSTS that poses an imminent threat to public health or safety; or
c. For use with buildings with limited water use.
3. Compliance Inspections: Compliance inspections shall be required when any of the following conditions occur:
a. Anytime there is an expansion of use of the building being served by an existing SSTS that may impact the performance of the system.
C. Compliance Criteria For Existing SSTS:
1. SSTS built before April 1, 1996, outside of areas designated as shoreland areas, wellhead protection areas, or SSTS providing sewage treatment for
food, beverage, or lodging establishments must have at least two feet (2') of vertical separation between the bottom of the dispersal system and
seasonal saturation or bedrock. The vertical separation measurement shall be made outside the area of system influence in an area of similar soil.
2. SSTS built after March 31, 1996, or SSTS located in a shoreland area, wellhead protection area, or serving a food, beverage, or lodging
establishment as defined under Minnesota rules part 7080.110, subpart 84 must have a three foot (3') vertical separation between the bottom soil
infiltrative surface and the periodically saturated soil and/or bedrock. Unless otherwise determined by the department, existing systems that have no
more than a fifteen percent (15%) reduction to the minimum required thirty six inch (36") separation distance are considered compliant (i.e., a
separation distance no less than 30.6 inches). This reduction is to account for settling of sand or soil, normal variation of separation distance
measurements and interpretation of limiting layer characteristics. The vertical separation measurement shall be made outside the area of system
influence in an area of similar soil.
D. Highest Standards Prevail: Where the conditions imposed by a provision of this chapter are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable
conditions imposed by a provision of this chapter or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule, or regulation, the provision that establishes the higher
standard for the promotion and protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare shall prevail. (Ord. 2012-01, 1-17-2012)
9-6-7: SSTS PERMITTING:
A. Permits Required:
1. Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, modify, or replace an SSTS in the city without the appropriate permit from the
department.
2. Permitting Not Exclusive: The obtaining of a permit shall not be deemed to exclude the necessity of obtaining other appropriate permits or approvals.
Compliance with the provision of this chapter shall not relieve any person of the need to comply with any and all other applicable rules, regulations
and laws.
B. Construction Permit:
1. Activities Requiring A Construction Permit: A construction permit is required for installation of a new SSTS, for replacement of an existing SSTS, or
for any repair or replacement of components that will alter the original function of the system, change the treatment capacity of the system, change
the location of the system, or otherwise change the original system's design, layout, or function.
2. Activities Not Requiring A Construction Permit: A construction permit is not required for minor repairs or replacements of system components that do
not alter the original function of the system, change the treatment capacity of the system, change the location of the system, or otherwise change the
original system's design, layout, or function.
3. Application For Permit: Permit applications shall be submitted to the department on forms provided by the department. Applicants shall provide all
information as required for the administration of this chapter.
4. Contents Of Permit Application: The permit application shall include the following:
a. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant and permittee;
b. The property identification number and address or other description of the real property on which the systems will be located;
c. A site evaluation report as described in Minnesota rules part 7080.1730;
d. A design report as described in Minnesota rules part 7080.2430;
e. The infield verification as described in Minnesota rules part 7082.00500, subpart 3(A);
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 136/324
f. A management plan as described in Minnesota rules part 7082.0600 and subsection C of this section; and
g. Copies of any required municipal, county, state, or federal permits or approvals.
5. Application Fee: The application fee shall accompany the permit application.
6. Application Review: The department shall review a permit application and supporting documents to determine whether the application is complete.
Upon satisfaction that the proposed work will conform to the provisions of this chapter, the department shall issue a written permit authorizing
construction of the SSTS as designed. If the applicant changes the proposed work to be conducted under an approved permit application, the
applicant must file an amended application with the department detailing the changed conditions prior to initiating or continuing construction,
modification, or operation. The department shall review the amended application and either approve or deny the application.
7. Approval Of Permit Required: The department must review and approve the permit application and management plan before issuing a permit.
Construction must not be initiated until the department grants a construction permit.
8. Permit Expiration: The construction permit is valid for a period of no more than one year from its date of issue, unless it is extended in accordance
with this section or construction has been completed satisfactorily, whichever is shorter. Satisfactory completion of construction shall be determined
by receipt of final record drawings and a signed certification that the construction or installation of the systems was completed in substantial
conformance to the approved design documents by a qualified employee of the department or a licensed inspection business that is authorized by
the department and independent of the owner and the SSTS installer.
9. Extensions And Renewals: The department may grant an extension of the construction permit if the construction has commenced prior to the original
expiration date of the permit. The permit may be extended for a period of no more than six (6) months.
10. Permit Not Transferable: A construction permit shall not be transferable to a new owner. The new owner must apply for a new construction permit in
accordance with this section.
11. Posting: The construction permit shall be posted on the property in such a location and manner so that the permit is visible and available for
inspection until construction is completed and certified.
12. Conflict Of Interest:
a. A licensed inspection business that inspects an existing SSTS is allowed to subsequently design and install a new SSTS for that property provided
the inspection business is also licensed to design and install.
b. A licensed inspection business working on behalf of the department must not design or install systems that the business will be responsible for
permitting or inspecting as part of its contract with the city.
13. Denial And Right To Appeal: If the department denies a permit to an applicant, the applicant shall be notified of such denial in writing. The applicant
may appeal the permit denial by filing a request for a hearing consistent with the appeals process in section 9-8-11 of this title.
C. Management Plan:
1. Purpose: The purpose of management plans is to describe how a particular SSTS is intended to be operated and maintained to sustain the
performance required. The plan is to be provided by the certified designer to the system owner when the treatment system is commissioned.
2. SSTS Requiring Management Plans: Management plans are required for all new or replacement SSTS. The management plan shall be submitted to
the department with the construction permit application for review and approval. The department shall be notified of any system modifications made
during construction and the management plan revised and resubmitted at the time of final construction certification.
3. Required Contents: Management plans shall include:
a. Operating requirements describing tasks that the owner can perform and tasks that a licensed service provider or maintainer must perform;
b. Monitoring requirements;
c. Maintenance requirements including maintenance procedures and a schedule for routine maintenance;
d. Statement that the owner is required to notify the department when the management plan requirements are not being met;
e. Disclosure of the location and condition of the additional soil treatment and dispersal area on the owner's property or a property serving the
owner's residence; and
f. Other requirements as determined by the department.
D. Operating Permit:
1. Permit Required: An operating permit is required for all treatment systems installed under Minnesota rules part 7080.2290 (holding tanks), Minnesota
rules part 7080.2350 (type IV system), and Minnesota rules chapter 7081 (MSTS). Sewage shall not be discharged to a treatment system requiring
an operating permit until the department certifies that the treatment system was installed in substantial conformance with the approved plans,
receives the final record drawings of the MSTS, and a valid operating permit is issued to the owner.
2. Application For Permit: Permit applications shall be submitted to the department on forms provided by the department. Applicants shall provide all
information as required for administration of this chapter.
3. Contents Of Permit Application: The permit application shall include the following:
a. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant and permittee;
b. The construction permit reference number and date of issue;
c. The final record drawings of the treatment systems; and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 137/324
d. Owners of holding tanks must submit a copy of a valid executed monitoring and disposal contract with a licensed maintenance business.
4. Application Fee: The application fee shall accompany the permit application.
5. Monitoring And Disposal Contract: Owners of holding tanks shall provide to the department a copy of a valid monitoring and disposal contract
executed between the owner and a licensed maintenance business that guarantees the removal of the holding tank contents in a timely manner that
prevents an illegal discharge in accordance with Minnesota rules part 7082.011, subpart 3(G). The owner must hold a valid contract with a licensed
maintenance business at all times until such time the holding tank is abandoned or the property sold. This contract requirement is waived if the
owner is a farmer who is exempt from licensing under Minnesota statutes section 115.56, subdivision 3(b)(3).
6. Application Review: The department shall review the application, the record drawings, operation and maintenance manual, management plan,
maintenance and servicing contract, and any other pertinent documents as appropriate for accuracy and completeness. If any deficiencies are
identified, the operating permit shall be denied until the deficiencies are corrected to the satisfaction of the department. If the submitted application
and documents fulfill the requirements, the department shall issue an operating permit within ten (10) working days of receipt of the permit
application.
7. Permit Terms And Conditions: The operating permit shall include the following:
a. System performance requirements;
b. System operating requirements;
c. Monitoring locations, procedures and recording requirements;
d. Maintenance requirements and schedules;
e. Compliance limits and boundaries;
f. Reporting requirements;
g. Department notification requirements for noncompliance conditions;
h. Valid contract between the owner and licensed maintenance business;
i. Disclosure, location, and condition of acceptable soil treatment and dispersal system site; and
j. Descriptions of acceptable and prohibited discharges.
8. Permit Expiration And Renewal:
a. Operating permits shall be valid for a specific term stated on the permit as determined by the department.
b. An operating permit must be renewed prior to its expiration. If not renewed the department may require the system to be removed from service or
operated as a holding tank until such time as the permit is renewed. If not renewed within sixty (60) calendar days of the expiration date, the
department may require that the system be abandoned.
c. The department shall notify the holder of an operating permit of the permit renewal requirement at least ninety (90) calendar days prior to
expiration of the permit. The owner must apply for renewal at least thirty (30) calendar days before the permit expiration date.
d. Application for permit renewal shall be made on a form provided by the department including:
(1) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant and permittee;
(2) Reference number of previous operating permit;
(3) Any outstanding compliance monitoring reports as required by the operating permit;
(4) Certified treatment system inspection signed and/or sealed by a certified designer, maintenance contractor, or operator at the discretion of the
department;
(5) Any revisions made to the operation and maintenance manual; and
(6) Any applicable fees.
9. Permit Not Transferable: The operating permit may not be transferred. A new owner shall apply for an operating permit in accordance with this
subsection D. The department shall not terminate the current permit until sixty (60) calendar days after the date of sale unless an imminent threat to
public health and safety exists. To consider the new owner's application, the department may require a performance inspection of the treatment
systems certified by a licensed inspector or qualified employee.
10. Compliance Monitoring:
a. Performance monitoring of an SSTS shall be performed by a licensed inspection business or licensed service provider hired by the holder of the
operating permit in accordance with the monitoring frequency and parameters stipulated in the permit.
b. A monitoring report shall be prepared and certified by the licensed inspection business or licensed service provider. The report shall be submitted
to the department on or before the compliance reporting date stipulated in the operating permit. The report shall contain a description of the
maintenance and servicing activities performed since the last compliance monitoring report as described below:
(1) Owner name and address;
(2) Operating permit number;
(3) Average daily flow since last compliance monitoring report;
(4) Description of type of maintenance and date performed;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 138/324
(5) Description of sample taken (if required), analytical laboratory used, and results of analyses;
(6) Problems noted with the system and actions proposed or taken to correct them; and
(7) Name, signature, license and license number of the licensed professional who performed the work.
E. Duty To Comply With Permit Conditions: The permittee shall comply with all conditions stated in any permit issued by the department under this chapter.
Failure of the permittee to do so is a violation of this chapter and is subject to the penalties provided herein.
F. Systems Not Operated Under Management Plan: Owners of SSTS that are not operated under a management plan or operating permit must inspect
treatment tanks and remove solids if needed every three (3) years. Solids must be removed when their accumulation meets the limit described in
Minnesota rules part 7080.2450. (Ord. 2012-01, 1-17-2012)
9-6-8: ABANDONMENT CERTIFICATION:
A. Purpose: The purpose of the system abandonment certification is to ensure that a treatment system no longer intended to be used is abandoned
following decommissioning and in a manner that protects public health, safety, and water quality. It also terminates all permits associated with the
system.
B. Abandonment Requirements:
1. Whenever the use of an SSTS or any system component is discontinued as the result of a system repair, modification, replacement or
decommissioning following connection to a municipal or private sanitary sewer, or condemnation or demolition of a building served by the system,
further use of the system or any system component for any purpose is prohibited.
2. Abandonment shall be completed in accordance with Minnesota rules part 7080.2500.
3. An abandonment certificate shall be submitted to the department. The report shall include:
a. Owner's name and contact information;
b. Property address;
c. System construction permit and operating permit;
d. The reason(s) for abandonment; and
e. A brief description of the abandonment methods used, description of the system components removed or abandoned in place, and disposition of
any materials or residuals. (Ord. 2012-01, 1-17-2012)
9-6-9: VARIANCES:
A. Variances Allowed: With the exception below, in any case where it appears by the reason of exceptional circumstances the strict enforcement of any
provision of the standards would cause unnecessary hardship or that strict conformity with the standards would be unreasonable, impractical or not
feasible under the circumstances in order to promote the effective and reasonable application and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, the city
may permit a variance upon such conditions as it may prescribe consistent with the general purposes of this chapter and the intent of this and all other
applicable state and local regulations.
B. Procedure For Variance: See section 11-12-2 of the zoning code.
C. Prohibited Variances: The city may not grant variances from the following standards:
1. Minnesota rules part 7080.2150, subpart 2.
2. Minnesota rules part 7081.0080, subparts 2 to 5, however, variances may be granted to Minnesota rules part 7081.0080, subpart 4(D)(1) for the
replacement of MSTS serving existing dwellings or other establishments.
3. Flow determinations under Minnesota rules part 7081.0110 if the deviation reduces the average daily flow from more than ten thousand (10,000)
gallons to ten thousand (10,000) gallons per day or less. (Ord. 2012-01, 1-17-2012)
9-6-10: VIOLATIONS:
A. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. Inspections: For the purpose of safeguarding the health and safety of the general public and of the occupants of dwellings, it is the duty of the
appropriate city official, or his or her designee, to enforce this chapter, and, this official is hereby authorized and directed to conduct inspections to
determine the condition of dwellings, residences, and premises located within the city. For the purpose of making such inspections, the appropriate city
official is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey, between the hours of seven thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M., all
dwellings, residences, and premises. The appropriate city official, prior to making such inspection, shall inform the occupant of the dwelling by letter
postmarked not less than seventy two (72) hours prior to the time such inspection is made. After such written notice is given, the owner or occupant of
such dwelling shall allow entry, during such time, for the purpose of such inspection, examination or survey; provided that such inspection, examination
or survey shall not have for its purpose the harassment of such owner or occupant and that such inspection, examination, or survey shall be made so
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 139/324
as to cause the least amount of inconvenience to the owner or occupant, consistent with an efficient performance of the duties of the appropriate city
official; provided that the purpose of such inspection, examination, or survey shall not be for the procurement of evidence to be used in any criminal
proceeding; provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the entry of the appropriate city official. The required notice is waived
when:
1. At any time when in the opinion of the appropriate city official an actual emergency tending to create an immediate danger to public health and safety
exists; or
2. At any time when such inspection, examination, or survey may be requested by the owner or tenant.
C. Abatement: If an SSTS constitutes a public health nuisance, the department may enter the property and abate the nuisance and recover the costs of
the same from the property owner by following procedures listed in section 9-4-11 of this title.
D. Penalty: Any person in violation of any of the provisions in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as described in title 1, chapter 4
of this code. Each day on which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
E. Hindrance: Any person hindering the efforts of city officials to investigate possible violations of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
F. Conflict Of Chapter: In any case in which a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or
health ordinance or code in this city, the provision that establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the
people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the city
existing on the effective date of this chapter that established a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people,
the provision of this chapter shall be deemed to prevail. The determination of the applicability of this chapter in light of the above rules of interpretation
shall be made by the city and its determination shall be final.
G. Unsafe Buildings Or Structures: A building or structure regulated by this code is unsafe, for purposes of this section, if it is structurally unsafe, not
provided with adequate egress, a fire hazard, or otherwise dangerous to human life.
Building service equipment that is regulated by this code is unsafe, for purposes of this subsection, if it is a fire, electrical, or health hazard; an
unsanitary condition; or otherwise dangerous to human life. Use of a building, structure, or building service equipment constituting a hazard to safety,
health, or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage, or abandonment is, for the
purposes of this subsection, an unsafe use. Parapet walls, cornices, spires, towers, tanks, statuary, and other appendages or structural members that
are supported by, attached to, or a part of a building and that are in deteriorated condition or otherwise unable to sustain the design loads that are
specified in this code are unsafe building appendages.
The building official may order any building or portion of a building to be vacated if continued use is dangerous to life, health, or safety of the
occupants. The order shall be in writing and state the reasons for the action.
All unsafe buildings, structures, or appendages are public nuisances and must be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal according to
Minnesota statutes sections 463.15 to 463.26.
H. Stipulation Agreement: The department and a person alleged to have violated provisions of this chapter may voluntarily enter into a stipulation
agreement whereby the parties to the agreement: identify conditions on the property that require corrective action; agree on the corrective actions that
must be performed by the person; and agree on the time frames in which the corrective actions must be completed. If the person fails to fulfill the
requirements of the agreement, the city may seek compliance with the terms of the agreement through a court of competent jurisdiction or pursue other
enforcement action allowed by this chapter.
I. Suspension And Revocation Of Permit: The building official may suspend or revoke a permit issued under this chapter if the permit is issued in error; on
the basis of incorrect, inaccurate, or incomplete information; or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or this code.
J. Commencement Of Civil Court Action: In the event of a violation or threat of violation of this chapter the city may institute appropriate civil actions or
proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction requesting injunctive relief to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violations or threatened
violations. The city may recover all costs, including reasonable attorney fees, incurred for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-01, 1-17-2012)
9-6-11: HEARINGS:
Hearings requested under this chapter shall be held before the city or a hearing examiner as provided below, and shall be open to the public.
A. Time Frame For Hearing: Unless an extension of time is requested by the appellant in writing directed to the city and is granted, the hearing will be held
no later than forty five (45) calendar days after the date of service of request for a hearing, exclusive of the date of such service. In any event, such
hearing shall be held no later than ninety (90) calendar days after the date of service of request for a hearing exclusive of the date of such service.
B. Notice Of Hearing: The city shall mail notice of the hearing to the appellant, with a copy to the department and the city attorney's office, at least fifteen
(15) city working days prior to the hearing. Such notice shall include:
1. A statement of time, place and nature of the hearing.
2. A statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held.
3. A reference to the particular section of the code and rules involved.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 140/324
C. Hearing Examiner: The city may by resolution appoint an individual, to be known as the hearing examiner, to conduct the hearing and to make findings
of fact, conclusions and recommendations to the city. The hearing examiner shall submit the findings of fact, conclusions and recommendations to the
city in a written report and the city may adopt, modify, or reject the report.
D. Conduct Of The Hearing: The appellant and the department may be represented by counsel. The department, the appellant and additional parties, as
determined by the city or hearing examiner, in that order, shall present evidence. All testimony shall be sworn under oath. All parties shall have full
opportunity to respond to and present evidence, cross examine witnesses, and present argument. The city or hearing examiner may also examine
witnesses.
E. Burden Of Proof: The department shall have the burden of proving its position by a preponderance of the evidence, unless a different burden is
provided by substantive law, and all findings of fact, conclusions, and decisions by the city shall be based on evidence presented and matters officially
noticed.
F. Admission Of Evidence: All evidence that possesses probative value, including hearsay, may be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which prudent
persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of their serious affairs. Evidence that is incompetent, irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious may be
excluded. The hearing shall be confined to matters raised in the department's written notice of suspension, summary suspension, revocation or denial
of a permit, or in the written request for a hearing.
G. Failure To Appear: If the appellant fails to appear at the hearing, appellant shall forfeit any right to a hearing before the city or hearing examiner.
Appellant's failure to appear shall also be deemed as a waiver of appellant's right to appeal the department's decision and the department's decision
shall stand.
H. Appeal Of City Decision: Any appellant aggrieved by the decision of the city may appeal that decision to any court with appropriate jurisdiction. (Ord.
2012-01, 1-17-2012)
Chapter 7
CONSTRUCTION OPERATIONS AND EXCESSIVE NOISE
9-7-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
For the purposes of general prohibition relating to construction activities, no person shall make or cause to be made any distinctly and loudly audible noise
that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, safety or welfare of any person which impairs their right of
enjoyment of property or affects their property's value. This general prohibition is not limited by the specific restrictions of the following sections. (Ord.
XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-7-2: CONSTRUCTION HOURS:
A. Specific Prohibitions: Construction activities described below shall be restricted to the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. through ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. Monday through Friday, seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on Saturdays and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
on Sundays. Except for emergencies or conditions for which the city has granted approval, the following activities are prohibited outside of said
regulated working hours:
1. Construction activities related to buildings and structures, excavations and grading projects and roadways and utilities. See Rosemount zoning code
for regulations on mineral extraction and mining activities.
2. Construction activities involving the operation of appliances, tools, generators, compressors, or chainsaws powered by electric, electric motors,
internal combustion engines or compressed air. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-7-3: EXCEPTION FOR EMERGENCY WORK:
Noise created exclusively in the performance of emergency work to preserve the public health, safety, or welfare, or in the performance of emergency work
necessary to restore a public service or eliminate a public hazard shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter for a period to be established by the
administrative authority. Persons responsible for such work shall inform the issuing authority of the need toinitiate such work, or if the work is commenced
during nonbusiness hours of the city, at the beginning of business hours of the first business day thereafter. Any person responsible for such emergency
work shall take all reasonable actions to minimize the amount of noise. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-7-4: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. Enforcement Duties: The Rosemount police department and the building inspections division of the community development department shall enforce
the provisions of this chapter. Representatives of said departments shall make all reasonable efforts to prevent violations of this chapter. (Ord. XVIII.10,
9-2-1997; amd. Ord. XVIII.12, 2-5-2002)
B. Penalties: Every person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor offense and punished as described in title
1, chapter 4 of this code. Each act of violation or each day a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 141/324
Chapter 8
RENTAL LICENSING AND INSPECTION
9-8-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to assure that rental housing in the city is decent, safe and sanitary and is so operated and maintained as not to become a
nuisance to the neighborhood or to become an influence that fosters blight and deterioration or creates a disincentive to reinvestment in the community.
The operation of rental dwelling units is a business enterprise that entails certain responsibilities. Operators are responsible to take such reasonable steps
as are necessary to assure that the citizens of the city who occupy such units may pursue the quiet enjoyment of the normal activities of life in
surroundings that are: safe, secure and sanitary; free from crimes and criminal activity, nuisances or annoyances. (Ord. XI.32, 1-2-2008)
9-8-2: SCOPE:
This chapter applies to all dwellings and dwelling units that are leased in whole or in part for residential purposes. This chapter does not apply to retail,
commercial, or industrial rental activities; nursing homes as licensed by the state department of health and human services; assisted living facilities as
licensed by the state department of health and human services; and manufactured home parks where the owner of the building is the primary occupant of
the structure. (Ord. XI.32, 1-2-2008)
9-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise provided herein, the definitions in section 9-4-5 of this title apply to the terms in this chapter.
CITY: The city of Rosemount.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Rosemount.
PREMISES: A lot, plot, or parcel of land including the building or structures thereon.
RENTAL DWELLING: A building or premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for residential rental purposes.
RENTAL DWELLING UNIT: A single unit within a rental dwelling that provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. (Ord. XI.32, 1-2-2008)
9-8-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall lease any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit for residential purposes without first obtaining a license and paying a license fee.
A. License Application: An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the city. The application must include all information requested on
the form. An incomplete application may lead to delay of processing the application or could lead to denial of the license.
B. Action On License: The city council or designee may approve or deny the license upon completion of review of the application. If the city council denies
the license, it will notify the applicant of the denial and appeal rights under section 9-8-11 of this chapter. (Ord. XI.32, 1-2-2008)
C. Term: All licenses are issued for a period of two (2) years from the date of issuance. (Ord. 2011-10, 12-20-2011)
D. Transfers: A license may not be transferred to another location or another person without the prior approval of the city council or designee.
E. Renewals: A license renewal will be handled in the same manner as the original application.
F. Denials: The city council may deny the issuance or renewal of a license for the following reasons:
1. The applicant has had previous rental license revocations;
2. The applicant fails to provide any information required on the city's form, or provides false or misleading information;
3. The applicant has outstanding fines, penalties, or property taxes owed to the city;
4. The rental dwelling or any rental dwelling unit fails the initial property inspection in the opinion of the city's building official.
G. Crime Free Multi-Housing Program: Within twelve (12) months of obtaining a license, licensees operating four (4) or more rental dwelling units in the
city must attend, or require a property manager to attend, an approved training program in the Minnesota crime free multi-housing program as a
condition of continued licensure. The city may also require such training as a penalty, in addition to the penalties described in section 9-8-10 of this
chapter. (Ord. XI.32, 1-2-2008)
9-8-5: LICENSE FEE:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 142/324
The city council will determine the license fee by resolution. Applicants must pay the fee at the time of application. (Ord. 2011-10, 12-20-2011)
9-8-6: APPLICABLE CODES:
The city of Rosemount building and property maintenance ordinance and the state building code, which adopts by reference the international building and
residential codes and the international fire code in their entirety, except as modified or amended in this code, are adopted by reference and are made a
part of this chapter as if fully set out at length. (Ord. XI.32, 1-2-2008)
9-8-7: MAINTENANCE:
The owner of rental property must maintain all rental dwellings and rental dwelling units, including common areas, in compliance with the applicable codes
identified in section 9-8-6 of this chapter. (Ord. XI.32, 1-2-2008)
9-8-8: CITY INSPECTIONS:
All rental dwelling units are subject to city inspections. The owner or property manager must permit access to the city for the following inspections:
A. An initial inspection upon application for a license. The city will not issue a license until each rental dwelling unit on the premises for which a license is
sought complies with the applicable codes in section 9-8-6 of this chapter. The city may issue a license if, in the city administrator's or designee's
judgment, an owner or licensee is diligently remedying violations within individual rental dwelling units that do not comply with the applicable codes.
B. Any follow up inspections required due to noncompliant items.
C. Inspections scheduled in response to complaints to the city.
D. Biennial inspection of each rental dwelling. (Ord. XI.32, 1-2-2008)
9-8-9: CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES:
It is the responsibility of the licensee to see that persons occupying the licensed premises and their guest(s) conduct themselves in such a manner as not
to cause the premises to be disorderly.
A. Disorderly Premises: For purposes of this section, a premises is disorderly at which any of the following activities occur:
1. Violation of section 7-1-1, "Disorderly Conduct", of this code or violation of laws relating to disorderly conduct as defined in Minnesota statutes
section 609.72;
2. Violation of section 7-1-5, "Noisy Parties Or Gatherings", of this code;
3. Violation of laws relating to prostitution or acts relating to prostitution as defined in Minnesota statutes section 609.321;
4. Violation of laws relating to unlawful use or possession of a dangerous weapon as defined in Minnesota statutes section 609.66;
5. Violation of laws relating to nuisances as defined in Minnesota statutes section 617.81;
6. Violation of laws relating to controlled substances as defined in Minnesota statutes sections 152.021-152.027;
7. Violation of laws relating to drug paraphernalia as defined in Minnesota statutes sections 152.092-152.095.
B. First Instance Of Disorderly Conduct: Upon determination that a licensed premises was used in a disorderly manner, the city administrator or designee
will give notice to the licensee of the violation and direct the licensee to take steps to prevent further violations.
C. Second Instance Of Disorderly Conduct: If another instance of disorderly conduct occurs within three (3) months of the first instance in the same rental
dwelling unit, the city administrator or designee will notify the licensee of the violation and require the licensee to submit a written report of the actions
taken, or proposed to be taken, to prevent further instances of disorderly conduct. The licensee must submit the written report to the city administrator
within fifteen (15) days of the notice of the disorderly use of the premises.
D. Third Instance Of Disorderly Conduct: If another instance of disorderly conduct occurs within three (3) months of any two (2) previous instances in the
same rental dwelling unit, the city may revoke, suspend, or not renew the rental license for all or any part or parts of the licensed premises that it
deems necessary, following notice to the licensee and a hearing before the city council.
E. Adverse License Action: Following a hearing, the city council may revoke, suspend, or not renew the license for all or any part or parts of the licensed
premises that it deems necessary, or impose a penalty pursuant to section 9-8-10 of this chapter. The city council may postpone or discontinue adverse
action against a licensee if it appears that the licensee has taken appropriate measures to prevent further instances of disorderly use. A licensee may
appeal the city council's decision pursuant to section 9-8-11 of this chapter.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 143/324
F. Eviction Proceedings: No adverse license action shall be imposed where the instance of disorderly use of the licensed premises occurred during the
pendency of eviction proceedings (unlawful detainer) or within thirty (30) days of notice given by the licensee to a tenant to vacate the premises where
the disorderly use was related to conduct by that tenant or by other occupants or guests of the tenant's unit. Eviction proceedings are not a bar to
adverse license action, however, unless they are diligently pursued by the licensee. Further, an action to deny, revoke, suspend, or not renew a license
based upon violations of this section may be postponed or discontinued at any time if it appears that the licensee has taken appropriate measures
which will prevent further instances of disorderly use. (Ord. XI.32, 1-2-2008)
9-8-10: PENALTIES:
The city may revoke a license or impose a civil fine for violations of this chapter.
A. Revocation: The city may revoke a license for the following reasons:
1. Violation of the applicable codes described in section 9-8-6 of this chapter.
2. Failure to maintain the property in compliance with the applicable codes.
3. Leasing any rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit without a license.
4. Failure of the owner to take action to evict or otherwise prevent a recurrence when a felony is committed on the licensed property by the tenant(s) or
person affiliated with the tenant(s).
5. The applicant has outstanding fines, penalties, or property taxes owed to the city.
B. Fines: The following fines may be imposed for violation of this chapter:
Violation Fine
First violation $100.00
Second new violation (based upon complaint) within 12 months or failure to comply with initial order 200.00
Third or more new violations (based upon complaint) within 12 months or failure to comply with initial order 300.00
(Ord. XI.32, 1-2-2008)
9-8-11: APPEALS:
The following appeal process will apply in the case of a license denial or revocation or if a property owner objects to a penalty imposed under section 9-8-9
or 9-8-10 of this chapter.
A. Hearing: Following receipt of notice of a license denial or revocation or a notice of a violation and fine, an owner may request a hearing before the city
council. An owner must request a hearing in writing and file the request with the city administrator or city administrator's designee within ten (10) days
of the mailing of the notice of the license denial or revocation or the alleged violation and fine. Following receipt of a written request for hearing, the
owner will have an opportunity for a hearing before a committee consisting of the city administrator or city administrator's designees.
B. Findings: After the committee conducts the hearing, it will report its findings and make a recommendation to the city council. If the committee finds that
the license denial or revocation is proper or the owner has violated this chapter, the council may affirm the license denial, revocation, or the fine given
to the owner. The city council may also conclude that the license denial or revocation or the fine is not warranted and dismiss the penalty.
C. Default: If the owner does not request a hearing within the ten (10) day period, then the license denial, revocation or civil fine imposed will take
immediate effect by default. In that case, the city administrator or designee will mail notice of the license denial or revocation or fine to the owner. The
owner must pay the fine within thirty (30) days of this notice. (Ord. XI.32, 1-2-2008)
Chapter 9
COAL TAR BASED SEALER PRODUCTS
9-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ASPHALT BASED SEALER: A petroleum based sealer material that is commonly used on driveways, parking lots, and other surfaces and that does not
contain coal tar.
COAL TAR: A byproduct of the process used to refine coal.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 144/324
MPCA: The Minnesota pollution control agency.
PAHs: Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. A group of organic chemicals formed during the incomplete burning of coal, oil, gas, or other organic substances
present in coal tar and believed harmful to humans, fish, and other aquatic life.
UNDILUTED COAL TAR BASED SEALER: A sealer material containing coal tar that has not been mixed with asphalt and that is commonly used on
driveways, parking lots and other surfaces. (Ord. 2012-04, 4-17-2012)
9-9-2: PROHIBITIONS:
A. No person shall apply any undiluted coal tar based sealer to any driveway, parking lot, or other surface within the city of Rosemount.
B. No person shall contract with any commercial sealer product applicator, residential or commercial developer, or any other person for the application of
any undiluted coal tar based sealer to any driveway, parking lot, or other surface within the city.
C. No commercial sealer product applicator, residential or commercial developer, or other similar individual or organization shall direct any employee,
independent contractor, volunteer, or other person to apply any undiluted coal tar based sealer to any driveway, parking lot, or other surface within the
city. (Ord. 2012-04, 4-17-2012)
9-9-3: EXEMPTION:
Upon the express written approval from both the city and the MPCA, a person conducting bona fide research on the effects of undiluted coal tar based
sealer products or PAHs on the environment shall be exempt from the prohibitions provided in section 9-9-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-04, 4-17-2012)
9-9-4: ASPHALT BASED SEALER PRODUCTS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to use of undiluted coal tar based sealer in the city and shall not affect the use of asphalt based sealer products
within the city. (Ord. 2012-04, 4-17-2012)
Title 10
WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
Chapter 1
SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT
10-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to Minnesota statutes, section 462.351 (1990). (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015)
10-1-2: FINDINGS:
The city hereby finds that uncontrolled and inadequately planned use of wetlands, woodlands, natural habitat areas, areas subject to soil erosion and
areas containing restrictive soils adversely affects the public health, safety and general welfare by impacting water quality and contributing to other
environmental problems, creating nuisances, impairing other beneficial uses of environmental resources and hindering the ability of the city to provide
adequate water, sewage, flood control, and other community services. In addition, extraordinary public expenditures may be required for the protection of
persons and property in such areas and in areas which may be affected by unplanned land usage. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015)
10-1-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote, preserve and enhance the natural resources within the city and protect them from adverse effects occasioned
by poorly sited development or incompatible activities: by regulating land disturbing or development activities that would have an adverse and potentially
irreversible impact on water quality and unique and fragile environmentally sensitive land; by minimizing conflicts and encouraging compatibility between
land disturbing and development activities and water quality and environmentally sensitive lands; and by requiring detailed review standards and
procedures for land disturbing or development activities proposed for such areas, thereby achieving a balance between urban growth and development
and protection of water quality and natural areas. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015)
10-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall have the meanings stated below. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the
singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directive.
APPLICANT: Any person who wishes to obtain a building permit, zoning or subdivision approval.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 145/324
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): The most effective and practicable means of erosion prevention and sediment control, and water quality
management practices that are the most effective and practicable means to control, prevent, and minimize degradation of surface water, including
avoidance of impacts, construction phasing, minimizing the length of time soil areas are exposed, prohibitions, pollution prevention through good
housekeeping, and other management practices published by state or designated area wide planning agencies.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: A person who has received training and is given authority by the city of Rosemount to inspect and maintain erosion and
sediment control practices.
CITY: The city of Rosemount.
CITY ENGINEER: The professional engineer designated by the city as city engineer or a representative thereof.
CLEARING: Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT: Legal land preservation agreement between a landowner and a municipality or a qualified land protection organization.
The easement confers the transfer of usage rights from one party to another.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: A disturbance to the land that results in a change in the topography, existing soil cover (both vegetative and nonvegetative),
or the existing soil topography that may result in accelerated stormwater runoff, leading to soil erosion and movement of sediment into surface waters or
drainage systems. Examples of construction activity may include clearing, grading, filling and excavating. Construction activity includes the disturbance of
less than one acre of total land area that is a part of a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb one acre
or more.
CONTROL MEASURE: A practice or combination of practices to control erosion, sediment transport and attendant pollution.
CONTROL PLAN: A plan indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used to control grading, sediment and erosion on a development site
during and after construction.
DETENTION FACILITY: A permanent natural or manmade structure, including wetlands, for the temporary storage of runoff which contains a permanent
pool of water.
DEVELOPER: Any person, group, firm, corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership, state agency, or political subdivision thereof engaged in a land
disturbance activity.
DEVELOPMENT: Any land disturbance activity that changes the site's runoff characteristics in conjunction with residential, commercial, industrial or
institutional construction or alteration.
DEWATERING: The removal of water for construction activity. It can be a discharge of appropriated surface or ground water to dry and/or solidify a
construction site. It may require Minnesota department of natural resources permits to be appropriated and if contaminated may require other MPCA
permits to be discharged.
DRAINAGEWAY: Any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the site.
EROSION: Any process that wears away the surface of the land by the action of water.
EROSION CONTROL: Refers to methods employed to prevent erosion. Examples include soil stabilization practices, horizontal slope grading, temporary
or permanent cover, and construction phasing.
EROSION PREVENTION: Any measures employed to prevent erosion. Examples include, but are not limited to: soil stabilization practices, limited
grading, mulch, temporary or permanent cover, and construction phasing.
EXPOSED SOIL AREAS: All areas of the construction site where the vegetation (trees, shrubs, brush, grasses, etc.) or impervious surface has been
removed, thus rendering the soil more prone to erosion. This includes topsoil stockpile areas, borrow areas and disposal areas within the construction site.
FINAL GRADE: Excavation or fill of material to final smooth condition. Final grade completed as part of individual site development.
FINAL STABILIZATION: A. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and a uniform (e.g., evenly distributed, without large bare areas)
perennial vegetative cover with a density of seventy percent (70%) of the native background vegetative cover for the area has been established on all
unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, or
geotextiles) have been employed;
B. For individual lots in residential construction by either: 1) the homebuilder completing final stabilization as specified above, or 2) the homebuilder
establishing temporary stabilization including perimeter controls for an individual lot prior to occupation of the home by the homeowner and informing
the homeowner of the need for, and benefits of, final stabilization (Homeowners typically have an incentive to put in the landscaping functionally
equivalent to final stabilization as quick as possible to keep mud out of their homes and off sidewalks and driveways.); or
C. For construction projects on land used for agricultural purposes (e.g., pipelines across crop or range land) final stabilization may be accomplished by
returning the disturbed land to its preconstruction agricultural use. Areas disturbed that were not previously used for agricultural activities, such as
buffer strips immediately adjacent to surface waters and drainage systems, and areas which are not being returned to their preconstruction
agricultural use must meet the final stabilization criteria in subsection A or B of this definition.
FLOOD FRINGE: The portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway.
FLOODPLAIN: The areas adjoining a watercourse or water basin that have been or may be covered by a regional flood.
FLOODWAY: The channel of the watercourse, the bed of water basins, and those portions of the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry
and discharge floodwater and provide water storage during a regional flood.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 146/324
GRADING: Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof.
GRADING, EROSION AND SEDIMENT PLANS: A set of plans prepared by or under the direction of a licensed professional engineer. Plans are required
to meet the specifications as detailed in the city of Rosemount "Plan Requirements And Design Guidelines".
HYDRIC SOILS: Soils that are saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part.
HYDROPHYTIC VEGETATION: Macrophytic plant life growing in water, soil or on a substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of
excessive water content.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: A constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil and causes water to run off the surface
in greater quantities and at an increased rate of flow than prior to development. Examples include rooftops, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking lots,
storage areas, and concrete, asphalt, or gravel roads.
LAND DISTURBING OR DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES: Any change of the land surface including removing vegetative cover, excavating, filling, grading,
and the construction of any structure.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES): The program for issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating,
monitoring, and enforcing permits under the clean water act (sections 301, 318, 402, and 405) and United States code of federal regulations title 33,
sections 1317, 1328, 1342, and 1345.
PERIMETER CONTROL: A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site by filtering sediment laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin.
PERMANENT COVER: Final site stabilization. Examples include grass, gravel, asphalt, and concrete. See also the definition of Final Stabilization.
PERMIT: A permit issued by the municipality for the construction or alteration of ground.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, franchisee, association or governmental entity.
PHASING: Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase completed before the clearing of the next.
PLAN REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN GUIDELINES: Manual detailing city specifications for all plan requirements.
PUBLIC WATERS: Waters of the state as defined in Minnesota statutes, section 103G.005, subdivision 15.
ROUGH GRADE: Excavation or fill of material to a condition suitable for general maintenance.
SEDIMENT: The product of an erosion process; solid material both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved by
water, wind, or ice, and has come to rest on the earth's surface either above or below water level.
SEDIMENT CONTROL: Measures and methods employed to prevent sediment from leaving the site. Sediment control practices include silt fences,
sediment traps, earth dikes, drainage swales, check dams, subsurface drains, pipe slope drains, storm drain inlet protection, and temporary or permanent
sedimentation basins.
SEDIMENTATION: The process or action of depositing sediment.
SITE: A parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT: Improvements and structures for the control of erosion, runoff, and grading.
SOIL: The unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the immediate surface of the earth. For the purposes of this chapter temporary stockpiles of
clean sand, gravel, aggregate, concrete or bituminous materials (which have less stringent protection) are not considered "soil" stockpiles.
STABILIZED: The exposed ground surface has been covered by appropriate materials such as mulch, staked sod, riprap, wood fiber blanket, or other
material that prevents erosion from occurring. Grass seeding is not stabilization.
STANDARD PLATES: General drawings having or showing similar characteristics or qualities that are representative of a construction practice or activity.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: The first land disturbing activity associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading, and
filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers, or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation of
accessory buildings such as garages.
STORMWATER: Defined under Minnesota rules 7077.0105, subp. 41(b), and includes precipitation runoff, stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and any
other surface runoff and drainage.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN: A plan for stormwater discharge that includes erosion prevention measures and sediment controls
that, when implemented, will decrease soil erosion on a parcel of land and decrease off site nonpoint pollution.
STRUCTURE: Anything manufactured, constructed or erected which is normally attached to or positioned on land, including portable structures, earthen
structures, roads, parking lots, and paved storage areas.
SURFACE WATER OR WATERS: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, wetlands, reservoirs, springs, rivers, drainage systems, waterways, watercourses,
and irrigation systems whether natural or artificial, public or private.
TEMPORARY EROSION PROTECTION: Methods employed to prevent erosion. Examples of temporary cover include straw, wood fiber blanket, wood
chips, and erosion netting.
WATERCOURSE: Any body of water, including, but not limited to, lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, and bodies of water delineated by Rosemount.
WATERWAY: A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the public storm drain.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 147/324
WETLAND OR WETLANDS: Defined in Minnesota rules 7050.0130, subp. F and includes those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Constructed wetlands designed for
wastewater treatment are not waters of the state. Wetlands must have the following attributes:
A. A predominance of hydric soils;
B. Inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation
typically adapted for life in a saturated soil condition; and
C. Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such vegetation. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 2015-05, 7-7-2015)
10-1-5: SCOPE AND EFFECT:
A. Applicability:
1. Every applicant for a subdivision approval or a permit to allow land disturbing activities must submit a stormwater management plan to the city
engineer. No subdivision approval, or grading permit to allow land disturbing activities, shall be issued until approval of the stormwater management
plan or a waiver of the approval requirement has been obtained in strict conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
2. Every applicant for a subdivision approval or a grading permit to allow wetland disturbing activities must submit a wetland assessment report to the
city engineer. No subdivision approval, or grading permit to allow wetland disturbing activities shall be issued until approval of the wetland
replacement plan application or a certificate of exemption has been obtained in strict conformance with the provisions of this chapter and the
Minnesota wetland conservation act. This chapter applies to all land, public or private, located within the city.
3. Every applicant for a building permit, subdivision approval, or a grading permit to allow land disturbing activities must adhere to erosion control
measure standards and specifications in strict conformance with the provisions of this chapter and the specifications and be consistent with national
pollution discharge elimination permit (NPDES general construction permit) or as approved by the city engineer or designated representative. (Ord.
2015-01, 2-17-2015)
B. Exemptions: The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:
1. Any part of subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved by the city council on or before the effective date hereof;
2. Any land disturbing activity for which plans have been approved by the Vermillion River Watershed Management Organization within six (6) months
prior to the effective date hereof;
3. Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles;
4. Excavations and/or land moving activities involving less than thirty eight (38) cubic meters (50 cubic yards) of soil;
5. Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property.
C. Waiver: The city council may waive any requirement of this chapter upon making a finding that compliance with the requirement will involve an
unnecessary hardship and the waiver of such requirement will not adversely affect the standards and requirements set forth in this chapter. The city
council may require as a condition of the waiver such dedication or construction, or agreement to dedicate or construct, as may be necessary to
adequately meet said standards and requirements. (Ord. 2015-05, 7-7-2015)
10-1-6: INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE:
The following are incorporated into this chapter by reference:
A. The Rosemount comprehensive wetland management plan.
B. The Rosemount surface water management plan.
C. The Rosemount stormwater utility policy.
D. The Minnesota wetland conservation act.
E. The national pollutant discharge elimination system permit, MN R100001 (NPDES general construction permit) issued by the Minnesota pollution
control agency, August 1, 2013, as amended. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015)
10-1-7: DEVELOPMENT SITE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN APPROVAL PROCEDURES:
A. Application: A written application for stormwater management plan approval, along with the proposed stormwater management plan and grading plan,
shall be filed with the city engineer and shall include a statement indicating the grounds upon which the approval is requested, that the proposed use is
permitted by right or as an exception in the underlying zoning district, and adequate evidence showing that the proposed use will conform to the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 148/324
standards set forth in this chapter. Prior to applying for approval of a stormwater management plan, an applicant may have the stormwater
management and grading plans reviewed by the appropriate departments of the city.
Five (5) sets of clearly legible blue or black lined copies of all drawings on bond paper are required. Required information shall be submitted to the city
engineer and shall be accompanied by a receipt from the finance department evidencing the payment of all required fees for processing and approval
as set forth in section 10-1-9 of this chapter, and security when required by subsection 10-1-8D of this chapter in the amount to be calculated in
accordance with that subsection.
Stormwater management and grading plan drawings shall be prepared to a scale appropriate to the site of the project and suitable for the review to be
performed. At a minimum the scale shall be one to six hundred (1:600) (1 inch = 50 feet). Drawing sheets shall be twenty two by thirty four inches
(22 x 34").
B. Stormwater Management Plan: At a minimum, the stormwater management plan shall contain the following:
1. Existing Site Map: A map of existing site conditions showing the site and immediately adjacent areas within two hundred feet (200'), and including:
a. The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and fax numbers of the applicant, owner, developer, surveyor, engineer and contact person.
b. The section, township and range, north point oriented either up or to the right, date and scale of drawing and number of sheets.
c. Plat names and block, lot and outlot boundaries for adjacent platted property and full property identification numbers for adjacent unplatted
property.
d. Location of the tract by an insert map at a scale sufficient to clearly identify the location of the property and giving such information as the names
and numbers of adjoining roads, railroads, utilities, subdivisions, towns and districts or other landmarks.
e. Location and indication of demolition, relocation, or abandonment of existing structures, driveways, septic systems, alternate septic systems and
wells.
f. Existing underground and overhead utilities, easements and rights of way.
g. Existing topography with a contour interval appropriate to the topography of the land but in no case having a contour interval greater than two feet
(2').
h. Existing topographic contours extending beyond the site two hundred feet (200') or enough to completely show the limits of drainage basins not
fully contained within the proposed plat limits.
i. A delineation of all streams, rivers, ponds, public waters and wetlands located on and immediately adjacent to the site, including depth of water, a
statement of general water quality and any classification given to the water body or wetland by the Minnesota department of natural resources
(include MNDNR number and ordinary high water level), the Minnesota pollution control agency, the U.S. fish and wildlife service, and/or the
United States army corps of engineers.
j. The city's most recent stormwater management plan district number along with normal and high water levels for ponds.
k. Location and dimensions of existing stormwater drainage systems and natural drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the site
delineating in which direction and at what rate stormwater is conveyed from the site, identifying the receiving stream, river, public water, or wetland,
and setting forth those areas of the unaltered site where stormwater collects.
l. A description of the soils of the site, including a map indicating soil types of areas to be disturbed as well as a soil report containing information on
the suitability of the soils for the type of development proposed and for the type of sewage disposal proposed and describing any remedial steps to
be taken by the developer to render the soils suitable.
m. Vegetative cover such as brush, grass and trees, including tree diameters, and clearly delineating any vegetation proposed for removal.
n. The 10-year and 100-year floodplains, flood fringes and floodways.
2. Site Grading Plan: Drawings shall be prepared to a scale appropriate to the site of the project and suitable for the review to be performed. At a
minimum the scale shall be one to six hundred (1:600) (1 inch = 50 feet). Drawing sheets shall be twenty two by thirty four inches (22 x 34"). A site
grading plan shall include:
a. The section, township and range, north point oriented either up or to the right, date, revision number, scale of drawing and number of sheets.
b. Signature and Minnesota license number of the professional land surveyor or professional engineer under whose supervision the plan was
prepared.
c. Proposed septic systems, alternative septic systems and wells.
d. Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing activities and any phasing of those activities.
e. Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt stockpiles.
f. Existing topography with a contour interval appropriate to the topography of the land but in no case having a contour interval greater than two feet
(2').
g. Existing topographic contours extending beyond the site two hundred feet (200') or enough to completely show the limits of drainage basins not
fully contained within the proposed plat limits.
h. Finished grading shown at contours at the same interval as provided above or as required to clearly indicate the relationship of proposed changes
to existing topography and remaining features.
i. All lot corner elevations and bench marks utilized.
j. The proposed footprint and intended use of any structures or driveways to be constructed on the site.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 149/324
k. A delineation of all streams, rivers, ponds, public waters and wetlands located on and immediately adjacent to the site, including depth of water, a
statement of general water quality and any classification given to the water body or wetland by the Minnesota department of natural resources
(include MNDNR number and ordinary high water level), the Minnesota pollution control agency, the U.S. fish and wildlife service, and/or the
United States army corps of engineers.
l. The city's most recent stormwater management plan district number along with pond storage volume and normal and high water levels for ponds.
m. Emergency overflow routes from all low points, elevation of high point along overflow route and directional flow arrows.
n. A drainage plan of the developed site delineating 10-year and 100-year design drainage area/watershed and hydrologic/hydraulic calculations
verifying location and capacity of all overland drainage routes.
o. Access routes for maintenance to all inlets, outlets, manholes, and lift stations at ponding areas proposed.
p. A clear delineation and tabulation of all areas which shall be paved or surfaced, including a description of the surfacing material to be used.
q. A landscape plan, drawn to an appropriate scale, including dimensions and distances and the location, type, size and description of all proposed
landscape materials which will be added to the site as part of the development.
r. Any other information pertinent to the particular project which in the opinion of the applicant or the city engineer is necessary for the review of the
project.
s. Within thirty (30) days after completion of site development as per the approved grading plan, and prior to the approval of individual building
permits, the developer shall provide the city with an as built grading plan.
3. Erosion And Sediment Control Plans: At a minimum, a separate erosion control plan is required that will accompany the grading plan. No land shall
be disturbed until the plan is approved by the city engineer and conforms to the standards set forth herein. All plans shall be consistent with national
pollutant discharge elimination permit (NPDES construction general permit) requirements, and the filing or approval requirements of relevant
watershed districts, watershed management organizations, ditch authorities, soil and water conservation districts, or other regulatory bodies.
a. The erosion and sediment control plan shall include the following:
(1) A project description of the nature and purpose of the land disturbing activity and the amount of grading involved.
(2) All existing site conditions, including existing soils, topography, vegetation (including size and type cover), natural resources and drainage.
(3) All critical erosion areas for areas on the site that have potential for serious erosion problems.
(4) A description of how the site will be stabilized after construction is completed, including specifications.
(5) A schedule of regular inspections and repair of erosion and sediment control structures.
(6) A project schedule describing the projected time line for completion of all site activities and the sequence of construction of the development
site, including stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and landscaping.
Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, phasing of clearing or grading, the estimated duration of exposure of
cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation.
(7) All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the objectives of this local regulation and state and federal regulations
throughout all phases of construction and after completion of development of the site. Depending upon the complexity of the project, the drafting
of intermediate plans may be required at the close of each season. All of the following requirements shall be adhered to during the construction
of the site:
(A) Stabilize all soils and soil stockpiles within the shortest feasible period of time, and according to the time lines established in the NDPES
construction general permit.
(B) Prevent sediment damage to adjacent properties and other designated areas.
(C) Develop land in increments of workable sizes so that adequate erosion and sediment controls can be provided as construction progresses.
(D) Coordinate erosion and sediment control measures with the different stages of construction. Install appropriate control measures prior to
development when necessary to control erosion.
(E) Engineer the construction of steep slopes.
(F) Use of temporary sediment basins is encouraged when construction projects will impact steep slopes or when highly erodible soils are
present. Temporary sediment basins must be designed according to NPDES construction general permit requirements.
(G) Protect storm sewers and paved roads from the entrance of sediment.
(H) Manage solid and hazardous wastes on site and properly dispose of wastes.
(I) When working in or crossing water bodies, take precautions to contain sediment.
(J) Ensure that a trained person will regularly inspect the construction site, according to the time lines established in the NPDES construction
general permit.
(K) Maintain all temporary or permanent erosion and sediment control practices, according to the time lines established in the NPDES
construction general permit.
(L) Establish permanent vegetation upon completion of the construction activity.
(M) Dispose of temporary erosion and sediment control measures following final stabilization.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 150/324
(N) Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer
application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures. Required specifications are
detailed in the city of Rosemount general specifications and "Plan Requirements And Design Guidelines" manual.
(O) Use methods of dewatering to reduce the discharge of turbid or sediment laden waters and prevent nuisance conditions.
(P) Use methods to manage solid and hazardous wastes, and limit the exposure of stormwater to any products, materials, and wastes and to
prevent the contamination of stormwater.
4. Stormwater Management For Permanent Facilities: Stormwater control facilities included as part of the final design for a permanent development
shall be addressed in section 10-1-13 of this chapter. Postconstruction stormwater management BMPs must be submitted to the city for review and
approval before construction activity may begin.
5. Waiver: Any or all of the above plan requirements in this subsection B may be waived by the city engineer. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015)
10-1-8: PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURE:
A. Process: Stormwater management plans meeting the requirements of section 10-1-7 of this chapter shall be submitted to the city engineer for review in
accordance with the standards of section 10-1-9 of this chapter.
B. Duration: Approval of a plan submitted under the provisions of this chapter shall expire one year after the date of approval unless construction has
commenced in accordance with the plan. However, if prior to the expiration of the approval, the applicant makes a written request to the city engineer
for an extension of time to commence construction setting forth the reasons for the requested extension, the city engineer may grant one extension of
not greater than one single year. Receipt of any request for an extension shall be acknowledged by the city engineer within fifteen (15) days. The city
engineer shall make a decision on the extension within thirty (30) days of receipt. Any plan may be revised in the same manner as originally approved.
C. Conditions: A stormwater management plan may be approved subject to compliance with conditions reasonable and necessary to ensure that the
requirements contained in this chapter are met. Such conditions may, among other matters, limit the size, kind or character of the proposed
development, require the construction of structures, drainage facilities, storage basins and other facilities, require replacement of vegetation, establish
required monitoring procedures, require turf is established in specified areas, require erosion control measures have been removed and their removal
area inspected, and landscaping is completed, stage the work over time, require alteration of the site design to ensure buffering, and require the
conveyance to the city or other public entity of certain lands or interests therein.
D. Security: Prior to approval of any stormwater management plan, the applicant shall submit an agreement to construct such required physical
improvements, to dedicate property or easements, or to comply with such conditions as may have been agreed to. Such agreement shall be
accompanied by irrevocable, automatically renewing letter of credit, performance bond or other improvement security in the amount specified by the
current city ordinance for fee schedule. The security shall cover all costs of engineering and inspection, site improvements, street sweeping, repairs to
erosion control measures, and maintenance of improvements for such period as specified by the city. Such security shall be provided prior to the
release of the grading permit. The security shall be released after final stabilization is complete, erosion control measures have been removed and their
removal area inspected. The agreement shall guarantee completion and compliance with conditions within a specific time, which time may be extended
in accordance with subsection B of this section.
The adequacy, conditions and acceptability of any agreement and security shall be determined by the city council or any official of the city as may be
designated by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015)
10-1-9: APPROVAL STANDARDS:
No stormwater management plan which fails to meet the standards contained in this section shall be approved by the city engineer.
A. Surface Water Management Plan: See the most recent version of the city's surface water management plan. All stormwater management plans shall be
consistent with it.
B. Site Erosion And Sediment Control: Erosion control measures specified in grading plans must meet all requirements of section 10-1-12 of this chapter.
C. Wetlands: Plans must meet all requirements for wetlands contained in section 10-1-11 of this chapter.
D. Comprehensive Wetland Management Plan: See the most recent version of the city's comprehensive wetland management plan. All stormwater
management plans shall be consistent with it.
E. Stormwater Management Criteria For Permanent Facilities: Plans must meet all requirements for permanent facilities contained in section 10-1-13 of
this chapter. See the most recent version of the city's surface water management plan. All stormwater management plans shall be consistent with it.
F. Design Standards: See the most recent version of the city's surface water management plan. All stormwater management plans shall be consistent with
it.
G. Steep Slopes: No land disturbing or development activities shall be allowed on slopes of twenty five percent (25%) or more.
H. Retaining Walls: Retaining walls shall not be allowed in any city drainage, ponding or utility easement.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 151/324
I. Catch Basins: Newly installed and rehabilitated catch basins shall be provided with a sump area for the collection of coarse grained material as specified
by the city engineer. Such basins shall be cleaned when they are half filled with material or as resources allow.
J. Drain Leaders: All newly constructed and reconstructed buildings will route drain leaders to pervious areas wherein the runoff can be allowed to
infiltrate. The flow rate of water exiting the leaders shall be controlled so no erosion occurs in the pervious areas.
K. Structures: See the most recent version of the city's surface water management plan. All stormwater management plans shall be consistent with it.
L. Inspection And Maintenance: All stormwater management facilities shall be designed to minimize the need of maintenance, to provide access for
maintenance purposes and to be structurally sound. All stormwater management facilities shall have a plan of operation and maintenance that assures
continued effective removal of pollutants carried in stormwater runoff. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain any necessary easements
or other property interests to allow access to the stormwater management facilities for inspection and maintenance purposes. The city may require a
developer to enter into a contract providing for access to perform maintenance and inspection to public or private stormwater management facilities.
M. Models/Methodologies/Computations: Hydrologic models and design methodologies used for the determination of runoff and analysis of stormwater
management structures shall be approved by the city engineer. Plans, specification and computations for stormwater management facilities submitted
for review shall be sealed and signed by a registered professional engineer. All computations shall appear on the plans submitted for review, unless
otherwise approved by the city engineer.
N. Watershed Management Plans/Groundwater Management Plans: Stormwater management plans shall be consistent with adopted watershed
management plans and groundwater management plans prepared in accordance with Minnesota statutes, sections 103B.231 and 103B.255,
respectively, and as approved by the Minnesota board of water and soil resources in accordance with state law.
O. Easements:
1. If a stormwater management plan involves direction of some or all runoff off of the site, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain from
adjacent property owners any necessary easements or other property interests concerning flowage of water.
2. Easements are required for all ponding areas to the basin's 100-year storm high water level elevation.
3. Easements are required for all outlet swales and ditches, and for overland overflow routes located downstream of basins located on site.
4. If the storm sewer is to be installed less than ten feet (10') deep within private property, the easement shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') wide. If
the storm sewer is ten feet (10') or greater, the easement shall be twice as wide as the depth.
5. Easements necessary for maintenance vehicle access are required for all of the above where not directly available on a public road. (Ord. 2015-01,
2-17-2015)
10-1-10: SURFACE WATER RELATED FEES:
A. Stormwater Utility:
1. Utility Established: The city does hereby establish the Rosemount stormwater utility for the purpose of managing city owned stormwater facilities, the
collection of stormwater connection charges, utility user fees and expenditures necessary to own and operate this utility as expressly allowed under
Minnesota statutes, sections 412.321 through 412.391.
2. Operation And Administration: The operation and administration of the Rosemount stormwater utility will be the responsibility of the utilities
commission as established in title 2, chapter 4 of this code.
3. Rules And Regulations: Establishment of operational standards, user fees and other rules and regulations established for the purpose of operating
this utility are established in the "stormwater utility policy" adopted herein by reference and may be amended by city council resolution as is deemed
necessary by the council.
4. Effect, User Fees: The Rosemount stormwater utility will be established on April 1, 1992, with the first user fees collected in July 1992.
B. Processing And Approval Fee: All applications for stormwater management plan approval shall be accompanied by a processing and approval fee
determined by the city council. An applicant may also be required to pay a stormwater trunk area charge and/or stormwater connection charge in order
to fund the development and maintenance of community stormwater management facilities designed to serve multiple land disturbing and development
activities undertaken by one or more persons, including the applicant. (Ord. 2015-05, 7-7-2015)
10-1-11: WETLANDS:
A. Assessment Report Required: Every applicant for a subdivision approval or a grading permit to allow wetland disturbing activities must submit a wetland
assessment report to the city engineer. No subdivision approval, or grading permit to allow wetland disturbing activities shall be issued until approval of
the wetland replacement plan application or a certificate of exemption has been obtained in strict conformance with the provisions of this chapter and
the Minnesota wetland conservation act. This section applies to all land, public or private, located within the city.
B. Consistency With Comprehensive Wetland Management Plan: Utilization and development impacts to wetlands shall be consistent with the city's
comprehensive wetland management plan.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 152/324
C. Impacts To Wetland:
1. Concentrated runoff discharge into wetlands shall be consistent with the stormwater management guidelines within the Rosemount comprehensive
wetland management plan.
2. A protective buffer strip of natural vegetation of width prescribed by the Rosemount comprehensive wetland management plan shall surround all
wetlands.
3. Wetlands must not be drained or filled, wholly or partially, unless replaced by restoring or creating wetland areas of at least equal public value.
Replacement must be guided by the following principles in descending order of priority:
a. Avoiding the direct or indirect impact of the activity that may destroy or diminish the wetland;
b. Minimizing the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the wetland activity and its implementation;
c. Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected wetland environment;
d. Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the activity; and
e. Compensating for the impact by replacing or providing approved substitute wetland resources or environments. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015; amd.
Ord. 2015-05, 7-7-2015)
10-1-12: EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL:
A. Design Criteria: At minimum erosion control practices, sediment control practices, and waterway crossings shall meet the design criteria set forth below
and shall be consistent with city of Rosemount general specifications and "Plan Requirements And Design Guidelines" manual.
1. Cut and fill slopes shall be no greater than four to one (4:1), except as approved by the city engineer.
2. Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have
been stabilized.
3. Phasing may be required on all sites based on site specifics, with the size of each phase to be established at plan review and as approved by the
city engineer/city of Rosemount.
4. Proposed erosion control measures may be approved by the city engineer as part of a grading plan review toward grading or building permit
approval. Erosion control may be specified by the city engineer as part of a site survey for individual building permits. Erosion control may also be
specified by the city engineer as needed and deemed appropriate during the construction and postconstruction periods separate from the process
described below.
B. Specifications: At a minimum, applicants shall meet the specifications set forth below and observe the standards established in NPDES construction
general permit requirements and the city's surface water management plan.
1. Soil Stabilization: Soil stabilization shall be completed in a time period as specified by the NPDES construction general permit and the city's general
specifications and standards. The city of Rosemount may require the site to be reseeded or a nonvegetative option employed.
2. Seeding: Seeding shall be in accordance with seeding specifications. All seeded areas shall be fertilized, mulched, and disc anchored as necessary
for seed retention.
3. Special Techniques: Special techniques that meet the design criteria outlined in "Plan Requirements And Design Guidelines" shall be in place on
steep slopes or in drainageways and shall be used to ensure stabilization. Special techniques may include: temporary sediment basins, slope
draining and terracing.
4. Soil Stockpiles: Soil stockpiles which shall be inactive for a period of seven (7) or more days must be stabilized or covered at the end of each
workday. Stockpiles shall include perimeter sediment controls and must not be placed in natural buffers or surface waters, including stormwater
conveyances.
5. Ninety Percent Coverage: The entire site must be stabilized at a ninety percent (90%) coverage, using a heavy mulch layer or another method that
does not require germination to control erosion, at the close of the construction season.
6. Site Development Sediment Controls: Site development sediment controls practices shall include those identified in the city's general specifications
including, but not limited to:
a. Settling basins, sediment traps, or tanks.
b. Protection for adjacent properties by the use of a vegetated buffer strip in combination with perimeter controls.
c. Perimeter control including machine sliced silt fence or other city approved BMP, which shall be in place before, during and after grading of the
site. Fencing shall be removed only after seventy percent (70%) stabilization. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 2015-05, 7-7-2015)
d. Designated as a concrete washout area. (Ord. 2015-05, 7-7-2015)
e. Designated as a temporary construction staging area.
7. Temporary Sediment Basins: For sites that have more than ten (10) acres of disturbed soil that drains to a common location (or 5 or more acres for
special or impaired waters), one or more temporary sediment basins shall be constructed. Use of temporary basins is encouraged when construction
projects will impact steep slopes or when highly erodible soils are present. The basin shall provide treatment to the runoff before it leaves the
construction site or enters surface waters. The temporary sediment basins must be designed and constructed as follows:
a. Provide live storage for a calculated volume of runoff from a 2-year, 24-hour storm from each acre drained to the basin. All basins shall provide at
least one thousand eight hundred (1,800) cubic feet of live storage from each acre drained or more.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 153/324
b. For basins where the calculation in subsection B7a of this section has not been performed, a temporary sediment basin providing three thousand
six hundred (3,600) cubic feet of live storage from each acre drained to the basin shall be provided for the entire drainage area of the temporary
basin.
c. The outlet structure must be designed to withdraw water from the surface in order to minimize the discharge of pollutants.
d. The basin outlet shall be designed to prevent short circuiting and the discharge of floating debris.
e. Ensure the basin can be completely drawn down to conduct maintenance activities.
f. Include energy dissipation on the outlet of the basin and a stabilized emergency overflow to prevent failure of pond integrity.
g. Be located outside of surface waters or any buffer zone, and be designed to avoid draining water from wetlands unless appropriate approval from
the U.S. army corps of engineers and the Minnesota department of natural resources is obtained.
h. If installation of a temporary sediment basin is not feasible, equivalent sediment controls such as smaller sediment basins, and/or sediment traps,
silt fences, vegetative buffer strips, or any appropriate combination of measures are required for all down slope boundaries of the construction area
and for side slope boundaries where appropriate. Determination of feasibility shall be documented in the erosion and sediment control plan.
8. Individual Construction Site Sediment Controls: Individual construction site sediment controls shall be installed as specified in the city's "Plan
Requirements And Design Guidelines" and shall include:
a. Rock construction entrance (driveway);
b. Perimeter controls including silt fence in place before, during and after grading of the site. Fencing shall be removed only after proper turf
establishment.
9. Waterway And Watercourse Protection: Waterway and watercourse protection requirements shall include stabilization of the watercourse channel
before, during and after any in-channel work consistent with the city's general specifications.
a. A temporary stream crossing must be installed and approved by the local government unit and regulating agency if a wet watercourse will be
crossed regularly during construction.
b. The watercourse channel shall be stabilized before, during, and within twenty four (24) hours after any in-channel work.
c. No in-water work shall be allowed in public waters during the MNDNR'S work exclusion dates.
d. Prior to placement of any equipment into any waters, all equipment must be free of aquatic plants and nonnative animals.
All on site stormwater conveyance channels shall be designed according to the criteria outlined in this document. Stabilization adequate to prevent
erosion located at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels is required.
10. Site Dewatering: Site dewatering shall be conducted pursuant to the city's general specifications document. Water pumped from the site shall be
treated by temporary sediment basins, grit chambers, sand filters, or other controls as appropriate to ensure adequate treatment is obtained and that
nuisance conditions will not result from the discharge. Discharges from the site shall not be released in a manner that causes erosion, scour,
sedimentation or flooding of the site, receiving channels or wetlands.
11. Waste And Material Disposal: All waste and unused building materials (including garbage, debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater, toxic materials or
hazardous materials) shall be properly disposed of off site and not allowed to be carried by runoff into a receiving channel or storm sewer system.
a. Solid Waste: All unused building materials and waste (including, but not limited to: collected sediment, asphalt and concrete millings, floating
debris, paper, plastic, fabric, etc.) must be disposed of accordingly and shall comply with disposal requirements set forth by the MPCA.
b. Hazardous/Toxic Waste: Paint, gasoline, oil and any hazardous materials must be properly stored, including secondary containment, to prevent
spills, leaks or other discharges. Access to the storage areas must be restricted to prevent vandalism. Storage and disposal of hazardous or toxic
substance must be in compliance with the requirements set forth by the MPCA.
c. Liquid Waste: All other nonstormwater discharges (including, but not limited to, concrete truck washout, vehicle washing or maintenance spills)
produced during the construction activity shall not be discharged to any surface waters.
d. External Washing Of Equipment And Vehicles: All external washing activities shall be limited to a designated area of the site. All runoff must be
contained and wastes from external washing activities must be disposed of properly. No engine degreasing shall be allowed on the site.
e. Wastes Generated By Concrete And Other Washout Operations: All liquid and solid wastes generated by any concrete or other washout
operations must be contained in a leakproof facility or impermeable liner. Concrete waste must not come into contact with the ground. Concrete
waste must be disposed of properly and in compliance with applicable MPCA regulations.
12. Drain Inlet Protection: All storm drain inlets shall be protected during construction until control measures are in place with a straw bale, silt fence or
equivalent barrier meeting accepted design criteria, MPCA standards and specifications.
13. Energy Dissipation: Pipe outlets must have temporary or permanent energy dissipation within twenty four (24) hours of connection to a surface
water.
14. Tracking: Vehicle tracking BMPs (including, but not limited to: rock pads, mud mats, slash mulch, concrete or steel wash racks, or similar systems)
must be installed to minimize track out of sediment from the construction site. If vehicle tracking BMPs are not actively preventing sediment from
being tracked into the street, the applicant must utilize street sweeping to contain sediment.
15. Final Stabilization: Final stabilization is not complete until the following criteria are met:
a. All land disturbing activities must be finished and all soils shall be stabilized by a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of seventy
percent (70%) or greater of its expected final growth density over the entire pervious surface area, or other equivalent means necessary to prevent
soil failure under erosive conditions.
b. The permanent stormwater management system is constructed, meets all of the required design parameters and is operating as designed.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 154/324
c. All temporary synthetic and structural erosion prevention and sediment control BMPs (such as silt fence) have been removed. BMPs designed to
decompose on site may be left in place.
d. For residential construction only, individual lots are considered finally stabilized if the structure(s) are finished and temporary erosion protection
and down gradient perimeter control has been completed and the residence has been sold to the homeowner.
e. For construction projects on agricultural land the disturbed land has been returned to its preconstruction agricultural use.
C. Inspection:
1. Notification: The city engineer, chief building official or designated agent shall make inspections as hereinafter required and either shall approve that
portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the erosion and sediment control plan as approved.
2. Procedure: To obtain inspections, the permittee shall notify the city of Rosemount at least two (2) working days before the following:
a. Start of construction.
b. Installation of sediment and erosion measures.
c. Completion of site clearing.
d. Completion of rough grading.
e. Completion of final grading.
f. Close of the construction season.
g. Completion of final landscaping.
h. Removal of erosion control measures.
i. Final project compliance and acceptance closeout.
3. Permittee Inspection: The applicant shall be responsible at all times for the maintenance and proper operation of all erosion prevention and sediment
control practices.
a. Inspections: The permittee or his/her agent shall ensure that a trained person will regularly inspect the construction site at least once every seven
(7) days until final stabilization, and within twenty four (24) hours of a rainfall event of one-half inch (1/2") or greater in a twenty four (24) hour
period.
b. Recordkeeping: All inspection and maintenance activities conducted on the site during construction must be recorded in writing and retained with
the erosion and sediment control plan. Records of each inspection and maintenance activity shall include the following:
(1) Date and time of inspection;
(2) Name(s) of persons conducting the inspection;
(3) Findings of inspections, including recommendations for corrective actions;
(4) Corrective actions taken, including the dates, times and the name of the party completing the corrective action;
(5) Date and the amount of rainfall events that are greater than one-half inch (1/2") in a twenty four (24) hour period; and
(6) Documentation of any changes made to the erosion and sediment control plan.
D. Site And BMP Maintenance:
1. Responsibilities: Prior to any construction in the plat, the developer shall provide the city engineer with a schedule for erosion and sediment control
inspection and maintenance, including schedules for street cleaning, and street sweeping. All site and BMP maintenance activities must comply with
the requirements of the NPDES construction general permit. The applicant shall investigate and comply with the following BMP maintenance
requirements:
a. Silt Fence: All silt fences must be repaired, replaced or supplemented when they become nonfunctional or the sediment reaches one-half (1/2) of
the height of the fence. Repairs shall be made by the end of the next business day after discovery or as soon as field conditions allow access.
b. Temporary Sediment Basins: Temporary sedimentation basins must be drained and the sediment must be removed when the depth of the
sediment collected in the basin reaches one-half (1/2) the storage volume. Drainage and removal must be completed within seventy two (72) hours
of discovery or as soon as field conditions allow access.
c. Surface Waters And Conveyance Systems: Surface water, including drainage ditches and conveyance systems, must be inspected for visible
signs of sediment being deposited by erosion. The applicant must remove all sediment deposited in surface waters, including drainageways, catch
basins, and other drainage systems and must restabilize the areas of exposed soil as a result of sediment removal. The removal and stabilization
must take place within seven (7) days of discovery unless legal, regulatory or physical access constraints prevent remediation. In the event of an
access constraint, the applicant shall use all reasonable efforts to obtain access. If access is precluded, removal and stabilization must take place
within seven (7) calendar days of obtaining access. The applicant is responsible for contacting all local, regional, state and federal authorities and
obtaining any required permits prior to conducting any work.
d. Streets And Paved Surfaces: Where vehicle traffic leaves any part of the site, the exit locations must be inspected for visible signs of off site
sediment tracking onto paved surfaces. Tracked sediment must be removed from all off site paved surfaces as soon as possible or within twenty
four (24) hours of discovery.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 155/324
e. General Maintenance: The applicant shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of temporary and permanent water quality
management BMPs, as well as erosion prevention and sediment control BMPs for the duration of the construction work on the site. The applicant
remains responsible until another party has assumed control over all areas of the site that have not established final stabilization and a notice of
termination (NOT) has been submitted to the Minnesota pollution control agency.
f. Off Site Deposition: If sediment escapes the construction site, off site accumulations of sediment must be removed in a manner and at a frequency
sufficient to minimize off site impacts.
g. Infiltration Areas: All infiltration areas must be inspected to ensure that no sediment from ongoing construction activities is reaching the infiltration
area and these areas are protected from compaction caused by construction equipment driving across the infiltration area.
2. Lapse: If the site development permittee repeatedly fails to meet or maintain sediment and erosion control measures per the approved grading,
sediment and erosion control plan, the city may, in its discretion, perform the work or contract to have the work completed and drawn down on the
escrow deposit, letter of credit or bond to pay any costs.
a. The city will attempt to notify the developer in advance of any proposed action, but failure of the city to do so will not affect the developer's and
city's rights or obligations hereunder.
b. If the developer does not reimburse the city for any cost the city incurred beyond that covered by the deposit, for such work within ten (10) days
from the date notice of the amount owed to the city is mailed, the city may draw on the security to reimburse city for such costs. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-
17-2015; amd. Ord. 2015-05, 7-7-2015)
10-1-13: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR PERMANENT FACILITIES:
A. Specifications: All postconstruction stormwater management plans must be submitted to the city engineer prior to the start of construction activity. At a
minimum, applicants shall meet the specifications set forth below and observe the standards established in NPDES construction general permit
requirements, the city's surface water management plan, and the city's "Plan Requirements And Design Guidelines".
B. Design Criteria:
1. Volume Control: Volume control measures are required on projects to meet the water quality criteria of the city's surface water management plan and
the standard for the general permit authorization to discharge stormwater associated with construction activity under the NPDES construction
general permit.
2. Rate Control:
a. For newly developing areas, no discharge or infiltration can be assumed for purposes of establishing the 100-year, 24-hour storm event high water
elevation. For events with longer duration, a maximum peak stormwater discharge rate will be limited to 0.05 cfs per acre. Redeveloping areas will
be required to meet these standards to the maximum reasonable extent practical.
b. In the event that the city will not be providing a regional system, storage of the runoff from the 100-year, 24-hour storm event is required on site.
c. Landlocked depressions that presently do not have a defined outlet and do not typically overflow may be allowed a positive overflow to prevent
damage to adjacent properties. Any overflows from landlocked depressions will comply with the city's rate control, runoff volume control, and low
floor requirements including storing runoff from the 100-year, 24-hour storm event for new development and restricting discharge to 0.05 cfs per
acre for longer duration storm events.
d. New storm sewer systems shall be designed to accommodate discharge rates from a 10-year storm event.
3. Flood Control: The city requires that for any new or redevelopment, at least three feet (3') of freeboard between the anticipated critical 100-year high
water elevation and the minimum building opening be maintained. Any deviation from the three feet (3') freeboard requirement is subject to the
following conditions and may be approved by the city engineer if the following can be demonstrated:
a. That within the two foot (2') freeboard area, stormwater storage is available which is equal to or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the stormwater
storage currently available in the basin below the 100-year high water elevation.
b. That a twenty five percent (25%) obstruction of the basin outlet over a twenty four (24) hour period would not result in more than one foot (1') of
additional bounce in the basin.
c. An adequate overflow route from the basin is available that will provide assurance that one foot (1') of freeboard will be maintained for the
proposed low building opening.
4. Design Criteria Of Permanent Facilities: All permanent stormwater facilities must meet the design criteria as provided in the city's surface water
management plan.
C. Limitations And Restrictions:
1. Stormwater control facilities shall not receive discharges from or be constructed in areas where:
a. Industrial facilities are not authorized to infiltrate industrial stormwater under an NPDES industrial stormwater permit issued by the MPCA.
b. Vehicle fueling or maintenance activities occur.
c. There is less than three feet (3') of separation between the bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of the seasonally saturated soils or the
top of bedrock.
d. There are known groundwater contaminants or groundwater will be mobilized by the construction of infiltration BMPs.
2. For areas where infiltration is prohibited the applicant shall consider alternative volume reduction BMPs and the water quality volume must be
treated by a wet sedimentation basin, filtration system, regional ponding or similar method prior to the release of stormwater to surface water.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 156/324
3. For linear projects with lack of right of way, easements or other permissions from property owners to install treatments systems that are capable of
treating the total water quality volume on site, the project must maximize treatment through other methods or combination of methods before runoff is
released to nearby surface waters. Alternative treatment options include: grassed swales, filtration systems, smaller ponds, or grit chambers. In all
circumstances, a reasonable attempt must be made to obtain right of way during the project planning and all attempts of infeasibility must be
recorded.
4. The city may restrict the use of infiltration features to meet postconstruction requirements for stormwater management, without higher engineering
review, if the infiltration techniques will be constructed in the following areas where:
a. Soils are predominately hydrologic soil group D (clay) soils.
b. Within one thousand feet (1,000') up gradient, or one hundred feet (100') down gradient of active karst features.
c. Drinking water supply management areas are present, as defined by Minnesota rules 4720.51000, subp. 13, unless precluded by a local unit of
government with an MS4 permit.
d. Soil infiltration rates are more than 8.3 inches per hour unless soils are amended to flow the infiltration rate below 8.3 inches per hour.
D. Exceptions: The city may authorize lesser volume control for the following situations:
1. If the project meets one of the limitations outlined above; and
2. If the owner/operator implements to the maximum extent possible other volume reduction practices, besides infiltration, on the site but may not meet
the requirements for postconstruction stormwater management.
E. Mitigation Provisions:
1. Under certain circumstances some construction projects cannot meet the total suspended solids (TSS) and/or total phosphorus (TP) reduction
requirements for new or redevelopment projects on the site of the original construction. When this occurs, the owner/operator will be required to
identify alternative locations where TSS and TP treatment standards can be achieved. Mitigation project locations are chosen in the following order
of preference:
a. Locations that yield benefits to the same receiving water that receives runoff from the original construction activity.
b. Locations within the same department of natural resource (DNR) catchment area as the original construction activity.
c. Locations in the next adjacent DNR catchment area upstream.
d. Locations anywhere within the city of Rosemount.
2. Mitigation projects shall also meet the following criteria:
a. Mitigation projects shall involve the establishment of new structural stormwater BMPs or the retrofit of existing structural stormwater BMPs, or the
use of a properly designed regional structural stormwater BMP.
b. Previously required routine maintenance of structural stormwater BMPs cannot be considered mitigation.
c. Mitigation projects must be finished within twenty four (24) months after the original construction activity begins.
d. Monies received for mitigation purposes in lieu of meeting conditions for postconstruction stormwater management shall be applied to a public
stormwater project and shall comply with this subsection.
e. A maintenance agreement specifying the responsible party for long term maintenance shall be identified.
F. Maintenance Agreement: The applicant shall enter into a maintenance agreement with the city that documents all responsibilities for operation and
maintenance of private long term stormwater treatment BMPs. Such responsibility shall be documented in a maintenance plan and executed through a
maintenance agreement. All maintenance agreements must be approved by the city and recorded at the Dakota County recorder's office prior to final
plan approval. At a minimum, the maintenance agreement shall describe the inspection and maintenance obligations:
1. The responsible party who is permanently responsible for maintenance of the structural and nonstructural measures.
2. Pass responsibilities for such maintenance to successors in title.
3. Allow the city and its representatives the right of entry for the purposes of inspecting all permanent stormwater management systems.
4. Allow the city the right to repair and maintain the facility, if necessary maintenance is not performed after proper and reasonable notice to the
responsible party of the permanent stormwater management system.
5. Include a maintenance plan that contains, but is not limited to, the following:
a. Identification of all structural permanent stormwater management systems.
b. A schedule for regular inspections, monitoring, and maintenance for each practice. Monitoring shall verify whether the practice is functioning as
designed and may include, but is not limited to, quality, temperature, and quantity of runoff.
c. Identification of the responsible party for conducting the inspection, monitoring and maintenance for each practice.
d. Include a schedule and format for reporting compliance with the maintenance agreement to the city.
6. The issuance of a permit constitutes a right of entry for the city, its contractors, and agents to enter upon the construction site. The applicant shall
allow the city, its contractors, agents and any authorized representatives, upon presentation of credentials, to:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 157/324
a. Enter upon the permitted site for the purpose of obtaining information, examination of records, conducting investigations or surveys.
b. Bring such equipment upon the permitted development as is necessary to conduct such surveys and investigations.
c. Examine and copy any books, papers, records, or memoranda pertaining to activities or records required to be kept under the terms and
conditions of the permit.
d. Inspect the stormwater pollution control measures.
e. Sample and monitor any items or activities pertaining to stormwater pollution control measures.
f. Correct deficiencies in stormwater and erosion and sediment control measures. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 2015-05, 7-7-2015)
10-1-14: LAWN FERTILIZER REGULATIONS:
A. Use Of Impervious Surfaces: No person shall apply fertilizer to or deposit grass clippings, leaves, or other vegetative materials on impervious surfaces,
or within stormwater drainage systems, natural drainageways, or within wetland buffer areas.
B. Lawn Fertilizer Content: Except for the first growing season for newly established turf areas, no person shall apply liquid fertilizer which contains more
than one-half percent (0.5%) by weight of phosphorus, or granular fertilizer which contains more than three percent (3%) by weight of phosphorus,
unless the single application is less than or equal to one-tenth (0.1) pound of phosphorus per one thousand (1,000) square feet. Annual application
amount shall not exceed one-half (0.5) pound of phosphorus per one thousand (1,000) square feet of lawn area.
C. Buffer Zone: Fertilizer applications shall not be made adjacent to any water body or wetland to a distance which is the larger of 16.5 feet or any buffer
width as specified for individual wetlands in the Rosemount comprehensive wetland management plan. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 2015-05,
7-7-2015)
10-1-15: PENALTY:
A. Notice Of Violation: When the city determines that an activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, it shall issue a
written notice of violation to the owner of the property. The notice of violation shall contain:
1. The name and address of the owner or applicant;
2. The address when available or a description of the land upon which the violation is occurring;
3. A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
4. A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the development activity into compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for the
completion of such remedial action;
5. A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and
6. A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within fifteen (15) days of service of the
notice of violation. Service may be accomplished by mail or by personal delivery of the notice.
B. Stop Work Order/Revocation Of Site Development Permit: In the event that any person holding a site development permit pursuant to this chapter
violates the terms of the permit or implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, environment, or
safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or development site so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to
property or improvements in the neighborhood, the city of Rosemount may suspend or revoke the site development permit through the issuance of a
stop work order or the revocation of site development or building permit. No development, utility or street construction will be allowed and no building
permits will be issued unless the development is in full compliance with the requirements of this subsection.
C. Restoration Of Lands: Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a
reasonable time after notice, the city may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which may, after notice and opportunity for hearing, be specially
assessed against the property and collected along with the ordinary taxes by the county.
D. Violation And Penalties:
1. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation
of any terms of this chapter. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject to the
penalty as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code and each day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed,
continued, or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense.
2. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership, or corporation shall be punished by a fine as specified by the city ordinance for fee
schedule for each offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to bear the expense of such restoration. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 2015-05, 7-7-
2015)
10-1-16: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by an action relating to the enforcement of this chapter, including the disapproval of a properly filed application for approval,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 158/324
issuance of a written notice of violation, or an alleged failure to properly enforce this chapter in regard to a specific application, may appeal the action to
the city. The following conditions apply to all appeals:
A. The applicant shall submit the appeal in writing to the city clerk and include supporting documentation. The city must receive the written appeal within
ten (10) days of the notice of violation.
B. City staff shall make a decision on the appeal within fifteen (15) business days of receipt of a complete appeal application.
C. The applicant may appeal the decision of city staff to the city council. This appeal must be filed with the city clerk within thirty (30) days of city staff's
decision. Subject to any applicable state law, the decision of the city council is final. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 2015-05, 7-7-2015)
10-1-17: OTHER CONTROLS:
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any other city ordinance adopted by the city council, the more
restrictive standard prevails. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 2015-05, 7-7-2015)
Chapter 2
STORMWATER SYSTEM
10-2-1: PURPOSE; INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city of Rosemount through the regulation of
nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the
national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process.
The objectives of this chapter are:
A. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user.
B. To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
C. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. (Ord.
XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009)
10-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: The city of Rosemount.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention
and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly
to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to
control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC section 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one
acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, that because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property,
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in this chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: An illicit connection is defined as any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows an illegal discharge
to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to, any conveyances that allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of
whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency or, any drain or conveyance
connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system that has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and
approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26(b)(14).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: A permit issued by MPCA that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide basis.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 159/324
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and action as either the owner or as the
owner's agent.
POLLUTANT: Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or
offensive matter of any kind, that, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property or the environment, or that may degrade, impair or pollute ground
or surface waters.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAIN SYSTEM: Publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and humanmade or altered
drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN: A document that describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a
person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater,
stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009)
10-2-3: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed or undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an
authorized enforcement agency. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009)
10-2-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
The authorized enforcement agency shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon
the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the city administrator to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the
employ of the agency. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009)
10-2-5: ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY:
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff.
5-19-2009)
10-2-6: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
A. Prohibition Of Illegal Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any
materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality
standards, other than stormwater.
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
1. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this chapter: water line flushing or other potable water sources,
landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped
groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation,
springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated to less than 0.1 ppm
chlorine), firefighting activities, any other water source not containing pollutants, and the use of fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides for agricultural or
landscaping purposes when applied for their intended purpose in accordance with label directions and with all applicable local, state and federal
ordinances, laws and regulations.
2. Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
3. Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test.
4. The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the federal environmental protection agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance
with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted
for any discharge to the storm drain system.
B. Prohibition Of Illicit Connections:
1. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 160/324
2. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible
under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection.
3. A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to
continue. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009)
10-2-7: SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS:
A. Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations: The city council may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person
when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order
issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or
waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension Due To The Detection Of Illicit Discharge: Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4 access
terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed
termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for reconsideration and a hearing. A person commits an
offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement
agency. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009)
10-2-8: INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES:
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of
compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city council prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-
2009, eff. 5-19-2009)
10-2-9: MONITORING OF DISCHARGES:
A. Applicability: This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity.
B. Access To Facilities:
1. The authorized enforcement agency shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized
enforcement agency.
2. Facility operators shall allow the authorized enforcement agency ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of
any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
3. The authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.
4. The authorized enforcement agency has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used
to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
5. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the authorized enforcement agency and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be
borne by the operator.
6. Unreasonable delays in allowing the authorized enforcement agency access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and
of this chapter. A person who is the operator of the facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits
an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any
activity authorized or required by this chapter.
7. If the authorized enforcement agency has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city is able
to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court
of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009)
10-2-10: POLLUTANTS:
The city will adopt requirements identifying best management practices (BMPs) of any activity, operation, or facility that may cause or contribute to
pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain
system or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premises that is, or
may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent
the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliant with the provisions of this
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 161/324
section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
(Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009)
10-2-11: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that
such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009)
10-2-12: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials that are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment,
and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of
the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement
agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the city within three (3) business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial
or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to
prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009)
10-2-13: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Notice Of Violation: Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the authorized
enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
1. The performance of monitoring, analysis, and reporting;
2. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
3. That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
4. The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
5. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice
shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail
to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense
thereof shall be charged to the violator.
6. The notice shall state that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city administrator by filing with the city clerk a written notice of
appeal within seven (7) calendar days of service of the notice of violation. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009)
10-2-14: APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received by
the city clerk within seven (7) calendar days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the city administrator or the city
administrator's designee shall take place within seven (7) calendar days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the city
administrator or city administrator's designee shall be final. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009)
10-2-15: ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL:
If the violation had not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within fifteen (15) days
of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized enforcement
agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the
property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or
designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009)
10-2-16: COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION:
Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. If
the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority, the enforcement agency may levy the charges
as a special assessment against the property, which assessments shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009)
10-2-17: LEGAL ACTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated and
continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 162/324
person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation, or seek any
other available remedy in law or equity. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009)
10-2-18: COMPENSATORY ACTION:
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency and violator may agree on
alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-
19-2009)
10-2-19: NUISANCE:
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's
expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009)
10-2-20: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION:
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this chapter shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to
a criminal penalty in accordance with section 1-4-1 of this code. The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney fees, court costs, and other
expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009)
Title 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION
11-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known as the CITY OF ROSEMOUNT ZONING ORDINANCE except as referred to herein as "this title". (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
11-1-2: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this title to protect and promote public health, safety and general welfare, which may be met through the following objectives:
A. To assist in the implementation of the city of Rosemount comprehensive guide plan upon which this title is based.
B. To promote the orderly development and compatibility of residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational and public uses.
C. To promote the orderly transition of rural to urban uses.
D. To prevent the premature extension of city utilities and services.
E. To prevent overcrowding of the land and structures.
F. To prevent congestion in public rights of way.
G. To protect natural resources in the city and promote reforestation and the replacement of other replenishable resources.
H. To promote agricultural preservation.
I. To promote a safe, effective pedestrian and vehicular circulation system. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
11-1-3: INTERPRETATION; RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
Clarification on the provisions of this title or questions on the procedures or applicability of this title should be directed to the community development
department or other city departments as may be appropriate. Further clarification or interpretation of this title shall be accomplished according to the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 163/324
procedures of the board of appeals and adjustments as set forth in section 11-12-2 of this title.
For additional clarity and consistency in the understanding and application of this title the following shall apply:
A. Use of the masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders unless otherwise specifically noted.
B. Grammatical use or references made in the singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the singular, unless such use or reference is
otherwise specifically stated.
C. Sentence construction or phraseology in the present tense, and similarly, references in the future tense may include the present.
D. The word "shall" is used to mean mandatory; whereas, the word "may" is permissive and does not imply obligation.
E. Whenever in any zoning district a use is neither specifically allowed nor specifically prohibited, the use shall be considered prohibited unless the city
council determines that the proposed use is very similar to an allowed use in which case the proposed use shall be deemed allowed.
F. The catchlines of this title are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such
sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any division or section hereof,
nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (Ord. B, 9-
19-1989)
11-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain words contained herein shall be defined as follows:
AM RADIO ANTENNA: That portion of any communication equipment located on the exterior or outside of any structure used for continuous or standby
transmission or reception of AM radio waves.
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS: A subordinate building or structure on the same lot with a principal or main building.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure, with or without a roof and/or walls, detached from a principal building located on the same lot and customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal building.
ACCESSORY USE: A use of land or a building or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and
located on the same lot with the principal use.
AGRICULTURAL STAND: A booth or stall located on a farm from which farm products raised exclusively on that farm are sold to the general public.
AGRICULTURE: The use of the land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, horticulture, storage, animal and poultry husbandry
and accessory uses and buildings. The care and keeping of agricultural animals is also subject to the regulations for the care and keeping of animals
within the city contained in title 7, chapter 4 of this code.
ALLEY: A public right of way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property.
ALTERATIONS: Any modification, additions, or change in construction or type of occupancy; any enlargement of a building, either horizontally or vertically;
or the moving of a structure from one location to another.
APARTMENT: One or more rooms with private bath and kitchen facilities for lease comprising an independent, self-contained dwelling unit in a building
containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
APARTMENT, ACCESSORY: An apartment that is secondary and incidental to a principal use or building.
ATTORNEY: The city attorney of Rosemount, Minnesota, or his designated representative.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR: Repair garages and specialty establishments for motorcycles, passenger automobiles and trucks of all sizes, such as
machine, body and fender, auto glass, painting, radiator, transmission, and vehicle upholstery services. May also include repair of machinery and
equipment.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR: Minor automotive servicing and replacement of parts, usually in the same day, for passenger automobiles and/or
motorcycles not in excess of seven thousand (7,000) pounds gross weight. Services include, but are not limited to, engine tune up, lubrication, and tire,
muffler, brake, and electrical services but shall not include any operation specified under "automobile repair, major".
BARN: The largest accessory building on a property, constructed before 1940, for the exclusive storage of agricultural products and/or farm animals and
larger than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet, with a gabled or gambrel roof.
BASEMENT: A portion of a building located partly underground, having more than fifty percent (50%) of its floor to ceiling height below the average grade
of the adjoining ground. Split level, split entry and earth sheltered homes shall be construed to satisfy basement requirements.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a motel or hotel, where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals and lodging are
provided for not less than three (3) nor more than eight (8) persons.
BREW ON PREMISES STORE: A facility that provides the ingredients and equipment for a customer to use to brew malt liquor at the store as regulated
by Minnesota statutes, as may be amended.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 164/324
BREWERY: A facility that produces more than twenty thousand (20,000) barrels of malt liquor in a calendar year as regulated by Minnesota statutes, as
may be amended.
BREWERY, MICRO: A facility that produces not more than three thousand five hundred (3,500) barrels of malt liquor in a calendar year as regulated by
Minnesota statutes, as may be amended.
BREWERY, SMALL: A facility that produces not more than twenty thousand (20,000) barrels of malt liquor in a calendar year as regulated by Minnesota
statutes, as may be amended.
BREWPUB: A restaurant with a microbrewery use operated on the same premises as the restaurant.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or enclosure for persons, animals or chattel, and when said structure is divided by party
walls without openings, each portion of such building so separated shall be deemed a separate building.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from finished grade to the top of the highest roof beams on a flat or shed roof, the deck level on a mansard roof,
and the average distance between the eaves and ridge level for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING LINE: That line measured across the width of the lot at the point where the main structure is placed in accordance with setback provisions.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the main or primary use of the lot on which it is located.
CAR WASH, FULL SERVICE: A car wash wherein operating functions are performed primarily by an operator owner through the use of washing, waxing,
and drying equipment supplemented with manual detailing by the operator owner.
CAR WASH, SELF-SERVICE OR DRIVE-THROUGH: A car wash wherein the customer provides labor and where only limited self-propelled wash racks
are provided.
CEMETERY: A parcel of land intended for the burial of human dead. A marker or memorial is erected at each gravesite for permanent remembrance of the
deceased. Cemeteries may include columbariums, crematories, mausoleums, mortuaries, and chapels when operated in conjunction with and within the
boundary of such cemetery.
CERTIFIED ENGINEER: An engineer who is licensed by the Minnesota board of architecture, engineering, land surveying, landscape architecture and
interior design.
CHURCH: A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which building, together
with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship.
CITY: The city of Rosemount, Dakota County, Minnesota.
CITY ENGINEER: The professional engineer employed by the city of Rosemount.
CLEAR CUTTING: The removal of an entire stand of trees.
CLUB, LODGE: A nonprofit organization catering exclusively to members and their guests.
CLUSTER HOUSING: The grouping of housing units which results in higher density clusters while maintaining approximately the same overall allowable
site density. Cluster housing shall include townhouses, zero lot line houses, row houses and similar housing types.
CLUSTER HOUSING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED: Single-family detached dwellings that are placed on lots that are smaller than district requirements in
order to achieve environmental protection or other public objectives. The net density of the cluster area may be higher, provided that the gross density of
the total site is within applicable standards.
COCKTAIL ROOM: An area within a microdistillery, or a premises adjacent to the microdistillery and under the same ownership as the microdistillery, that
provides the on-sale of the distilled liquor produced by the microdistillery.
COLUMBARIUM: A building or structure designed with niches for the location of urns to hold the ashes of cremated persons.
COMBINED HEAT AND POWER PLANT: A facility that generates electricity and useful thermal energy in a single, integrated system. Also known as
cogeneration, or cogen, plants.
COMMERCIAL EVENT CENTER: A facility located on private property that primarily functions to provide a facility for any type of social gathering that is
available for use by various groups for such activities as public assemblies, meetings, private meetings, parties, weddings, receptions and dances.
COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSE: A structure in which vegetables and flowers are grown indoors from seed exclusively for sale at wholesale to retailers and
jobbers. Exterior storage is prohibited. Accessory sales are prohibited.
COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR RECREATION: A commercial recreational use available to the general public that depends upon a natural, relatively
undeveloped setting.
COMMERCIAL USE ANTENNA: A device used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based
structures directly or indirectly related to wireless personnel communication services and cellular services.
COMMERCIAL USE ANTENNA TOWER: Any pole, spire, or lattice structures, or combination thereof, to which an antenna is attached, or which is
designed for an antenna to be attached, and all supporting materials.
COMMISSION: The Planning Commission of the City of Rosemount.
COMMISSIONER: The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.
COMPOSTING: The controlled biological decomposition and management of selected solid waste to produce an innocuous, humuslike material, which
can be used as a soil conditioner.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 165/324
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A compilation of policy statements, goals, standards and maps for guiding the physical, social and economic development of
the City and including a land use plan, a community facilities plan and a transportation plan which has been prepared and adopted by the City of
Rosemount.
CONDOMINIUM: A building or group of buildings in which dwelling units, offices, or floor area are owned individually, and the structure, common areas,
and facilities are owned on a proportional, undivided basis.
CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION: The community association which administers and maintains the common property and common elements of a
condominium.
CONGREGATE HOUSING: Apartments with communal dining facilities and services, such as housekeeping, organized social and recreational activities,
and transportation.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS: Waste building materials, packaging, asbestos and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition of
buildings and roads.
CONSTRUCTION DEMOLITION WASTE FACILITY: A facility that accepts and disposes of construction debris and industrial waste in accordance with
permits and plans approved by the State of Minnesota, Dakota County, and all other applicable local, State, and Federal laws.
CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS: Materials that are commonly used in the construction, repair, remodeling or landscaping of a building or building site.
Examples of such materials include, but are not limited to, plywood, brick, concrete, tools, roofing materials, dumpsters, and landscaping items.
CONVENIENCE STORE, MOTOR FUEL STATION: A motor fuel station that offers for sale a limited amount of food and household products, which are in
addition to those typically supplied at a motor fuel station.
COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Rosemount.
CREMATORIUM/CREMATORY: Where bodies are consumed by incineration and the ashes of the deceased are collected for permanent burial or storage
in urns.
DAYCARE CENTER: A use defined by Minnesota statutes, chapter 462, which is operated for profit for the daytime only care of children and adults.
DECORATIVE FENCE: A fence made of high quality, long lasting and ornamental materials including finished aluminum, wrought iron, brick and the like,
but not including wood, unfinished metal, vinyl, PVC, chainlink, wire, barbed wire or like materials.
DENSITY: The number of dwelling units per acre of land. Gross density is based on the total land area of the development site excluding existing public
streets or highways. Net density is based on the total land area of the development site excluding wetlands, parks, existing public streets or highways,
other land that will remain permanently undeveloped, but including newly platted streets.
DISTILLERY: A facility that produces distilled spirits as regulated by Minnesota statutes, as may be amended.
DISTILLERY, MICRO: A facility that produces not more than forty thousand (40,000) proof gallons of distilled spirits in a calendar year as regulated by
Minnesota statutes, as may be amended.
DISTRICT: An area of land for which there are uniform regulations governing the use of the buildings and premises.
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof, which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes but not including rooms in motels, hotels,
nursing homes, boarding houses, nor trailers, tents, cabins or trailer coaches.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A residential building, or portion thereof, containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or walls, each unit on a
separate lot, and each unit having at least two (2) walls exposed to the outdoors, such as duplexes, twin homes, triplexes, quad homes, and townhomes.
This definition shall not include units which are joined to one another by floor or ceiling.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED: A dwelling on a single lot with street frontage that is not attached to any other dwelling by any means,
including roof, wall, or floor.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building on a single lot containing two (2) dwelling units, each which is totally separated from the other by an unpierced wall
extending from ground to roof.
EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT: A method of determining the location of floodway boundaries so that the hydraulic capacity of floodplain lands
on each side of a stream are calculating proportionate increases in flood stages.
ESSENTIAL SERVICE FACILITIES: Underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water distribution systems; collection, communication, supply or
disposal systems including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, water pumping or storage facilities, gas regulation stations, sewer
lift or pumping facilities, traffic signals, hydrants, electrical substations and switching stations, or other associated equipment and accessories in
conjunction therewith, including associated equipment enclosure buildings (but not including any other buildings or commercial use antenna towers), which
systems are owned and operated by public utilities or by municipal or other governmental agencies for the purpose of providing an essential service to the
public.
FAMILY: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group of not more than five (5) persons not so related, living
together as a single housekeeping unit using common cooking and kitchen facilities.
FARM WINERY: A winery operated by the owner of a Minnesota farm with a majority of the ingredients produced on the premises as regulated by
Minnesota statutes, as may be amended.
FENCE: Any partition, structure or wall, or gate erected as a dividing marker, barrier or enclosure and located along the boundary or within the required
yard. All fences are subject to building permit review and approval.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 166/324
FINISHED PRODUCT: The end result of a manufacturing process that is ready for utilization or consumption by the ultimate consumer.
FLOOD: A temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in inundation of areas adjacent to the channel.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: The frequency for which it is expected that a specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
FLOODPLAIN: The areas adjoining a watercourse, which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.
FLOODPLAIN CONDITIONAL USE: A specific type of structure or land use that may be allowed in the floodplain, but only after an in depth review
procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the official zoning controls or building codes and upon a finding that: a) certain
conditions as detailed in the zoning ordinance exist and b) the structure and/or land use conform to the comprehensive land use plan if one exists and are
compatible with the existing neighborhood.
FLOODPROOFING: A combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages.
FLOODWAY: The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains which are reasonably
required to carry and/or store the regional flood discharge.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors of a building or dwelling unit, measured from the exterior walls, or from the centerline of
party walls separating buildings, excluding basements.
FUNERAL HOME: A building that provides facilities for funerals; a chapel for funeral services; rooms for viewing the remains in caskets (slumber rooms,
reposing rooms, viewing rooms, visitation rooms) before final services or cremation; rooms for preparation of bodies (embalming, cosmetic treatment and
clothing of the deceased); display rooms and storage for caskets; garages for hearses and other equipment; and administrative offices. A funeral home
may include family living quarters for the funeral director/owner.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or an accessory portion of a principal building designed or used solely for the storage of noncommercial motor
vehicles, boats and similar vehicles which are owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory.
GARAGE/YARD SALE: The temporary display and sale of goods within the garage and/or driveway of a residence.
GASOLINE STATION, FULL SERVICE: A structure plus an area of land that is used or designed for the supply of motor vehicle fuels. For the purpose of
this title, this term shall also mean an area or structure used for greasing, changing the oil, washing or repairing automobiles when such uses are
accessory to the principal gasoline station use.
GASOLINE STATION, SELF-SERVICE: A structure plus an area of land that is designed for the supply of motor vehicle fuels, where no other automobile
services are provided and the fuel is pumped only by the customer.
GROSS FLOOR AREA (GFA): For the purpose of computing required parking, gross floor area is the floor area for the building excluding accessory
garages, underground parking, areas not enclosed by exterior walls, mechanical rooms, patios, decks, restrooms, elevator shafts, or stairwells.
GROUP USABLE OPEN SPACE: Open space associated with a multiple-family development that is not part of a required yard, is relatively free of
buildings and is available for recreational usage by the residents.
GUESTROOM: A room or group of rooms occupied, arranged or designed for occupancy by one or more guests for compensation.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Substances listed as "hazardous" or "toxic" in the comprehensive environmental response compensation act, 42 USC section
9601 et seq., the resource conservation and recovery act, 42 USC section 6901 et seq., and regulations interpreting such acts, Minnesota statute section
116.06, subdivision 13 and regulations interpreting such statute or any other federal, state or local law regulating toxic or hazardous substances.
HEAVY MANUFACTURING: The refinement and storage of raw or unprocessed materials into a finished product which may be combustible or explosive
as well as chemical or fertilizer blending, storage, and distribution. Such uses may include large unscreened outdoor structures such as conveyor belt
systems, cooling towers, cranes, storage silos, or similar equipment that cannot be integrated into a building design or large scale outdoor storage. These
uses typically generate noise, odor, vibration, illumination, or particulate that may be offensive or obnoxious to adjacent land uses and require a significant
amount of on site chemical storage.
HOME OCCUPATION: A gainful occupation conducted in a residential building which is clearly secondary and incidental to the principal residential use of
said building and generates no appreciable increase in traffic at any time over that customarily associated with a residential use. This occupation shall be
carried on only by the dwelling's occupants. There shall be no stock in trade stored on the premises or over the counter retail sales.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION: A community association, other than a condominium association, which is organized in a development in which
individual owners share common interests in open space or facilities.
HOTEL: A building containing eight (8) or more guestrooms in which lodging is provided with or without meals for compensation and which is open to
transient or permanent guests or both, and where no provision is made for cooking in any guestroom, and in which ingress and egress to and from all
rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: A surface that allows very little or no penetration of water or moisture into the soil or ground. Examples include concrete,
asphalt, and various compacted materials including aggregate, limestone and recycled bituminous. Buildings, rooftops, patios and driveways and any
other structure shall be included for the purpose of calculating maximum lot coverage. Exception: Decks will not be considered when calculating lot
coverage percentage.
INTERIM USE: A temporary use of property until a particular date, until the occurrence of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no longer permit it.
JUNKED VEHICLE: Any vehicle, as defined in this section, which does not have lawfully affixed or attached thereto an unexpired state registration or
license plate or plates, or the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded.
LANDSCAPE NURSERY: Land or greenhouses used to grow from seed or seedlings flowers, trees and shrubs exclusively for sale at wholesale to
contractors, jobbers and retailers. Flowers, trees and shrubs grown outdoors must be grown bare root in the ground and may not be grown aboveground in
planters and the like. Exterior storage is prohibited. Accessory sales are prohibited.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 167/324
LIGHT MANUFACTURING: The compounding, processing, packaging, treatment, or assembly of certain materials or products where no process involved
will produce noise, vibration, air pollution, fire hazard, or noxious emission which will disturb or endanger neighboring properties.
LOT: A separate parcel, tract, or area of land undivided by any public street or approved private road, which has been established by plat, metes and
bounds subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, and which is occupied by or intended to be developed for and occupied by a principal building or
group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, including such open spaces and yards as are
designed and arranged or required by this title for such building, use or development.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side or rear lot lines, but not including any area occupied by the waters of lakes or rivers
or by street rights of way.
LOT, CORNER: A lot which has at least two (2) contiguous sides abutting upon a street for their full length.
LOT COVERAGE: The percent of the lot covered with structures, paved and other impervious surfaces.
LOT DEPTH: The mean distance between the front and rear lot lines. In order to allow flexibility in determining lot depth for parcels of unusual
configuration, lot depth can be measured by averaging side property lines or by measuring a straight perpendicular line extending from the front line to the
rear lot line and passing through the building zone, subject to determination by the community development director or the director's designee. In no case
would the perpendicular line passing through the building zone be less than the minimum lot depth standard.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE: The lines bounding a lot as herein described.
LOT LINE, REAR: Any boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet (10') in length, the rear lot line shall be a
line ten feet (10') in length within the lot, connecting the side lot lines and parallel to the front lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision or plat, an auditor's subdivision or a registered land survey; or a parcel of land not so platted, for
which a deed has been recorded in the Dakota County recorder's office prior to October 19, 1972.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot where opposite lot lines abut two (2) parallel streets and which is not a corner lot.
LOT WIDTH: The width measured along the front yard setback line.
MSW INCINERATOR ASH: Ash from combustion of mixed municipal solid waste (MSW) or refuse derived fuel at a waste combustor.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty
(40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on the site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities; except that the term herein
includes any structure which meets all the requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the state of
Minnesota and complies with the standards established under this title.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: Any premises on which two (2) or more occupied manufactured homes are located.
MANUFACTURING, CUSTOM: The production and sale on the premises of hand manufactured products involving only the use of hand tools and
domestic mechanical equipment.
MANUFACTURING, LIMITED: All uses which include the compounding, processing, packaging, treatment or assembly of products and materials provided
such use will not generate offensive odors, glare, smoke, dust, noise, vibrations, or other objectionable influences that extend beyond the lot on which the
use is located. Generally, these are industries dependent upon raw materials refined elsewhere. Such uses include, but are not limited to: lumberyards;
machine shops; products assembly; sheet metal shops; plastics; electronics; general nonalcoholic beverages; signs and displays; printing; publishing;
fabricated metal parts; appliances; clothing; textiles and used auto parts.
MAUSOLEUM: A building or structure designed with vaults to hold many caskets or crematory urns. The size of a mausoleum could range from an
elaborate grave marker for a single burial to a building erected to house entire families as an alternative to family grave plots.
MEDIUM MANUFACTURING: The compounding, processing, packaging, treatment, or assembly of certain products from processed or unprocessed raw
materials, where the finished product is noncombustible and nonexplosive. This manufacturing may produce noise, vibrations, illumination, or particulate
that is perceptible to adjacent land users, but is not offensive or obnoxious. Odors produced on site shall not have a material negative effect on other
businesses or properties in the area. This use shall include any packaging of the product being manufactured on site. Examples include, but are not limited
to, the production of the following: glass products made from manufactured glass; clay and pottery products; food and beverages; candy and other
confectionery products; computer hardware; products made from rubber, plastic, or resin; converted paper and cardboard products; fabricated metal
products made from semifinished metals.
MEMORIAL PARK: A cemetery developed with gravesite monuments that are flush with the ground surface.
MINERAL EXTRACTION: The extraction of sand, gravel, rock or other such material from the land.
Large Scale Mineral Extraction: Mineral extraction at a scale that would require a mandatory environmental impact statement as described in
Minnesota rules, part 4410.4400 subpart 9 nonmetallic mineral mining.
Small Scale Mineral Extraction: Mineral extraction at a scale less than would require a mandatory environmental impact statement as described in
Minnesota rules, part 4410.4400 subpart 9 nonmetallic mineral mining.
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENTS: Development of one tract of land that will include two (2) or more complementary and integrated uses. All uses will be
approved under the planned unit development (PUD) process.
MONTESSORI SCHOOL: A school for children where the fundamental aim is self-education.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 168/324
MORTUARY: An establishment with facilities for preparation of the deceased for burial but not for cremation, for the viewing of the deceased and for
funerals.
MOTEL: A building or group of attached or detached buildings under common ownership containing eight (8) or more guest or sleeping rooms which is
used or intended to be used primarily for the accommodation of transient automobile travelers. This term shall include buildings designated as auto courts,
tourist courts, motor courts, motor hotels and similar names.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or area in which freight brought by motor truck is assembled and/or stored for routing in intrastate or interstate
shipment.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING: See definition of Dwelling, Multiple-Family.
NONCONFORMING USE: A building or use of land which does not conform to the regulations of the district or zone in which it is situated.
NONHAZARDOUS INDUSTRIAL SOLID WASTE: Solid waste generated from an industrial or manufacturing process; MSW incinerator ash; and solid
waste generated from nonmanufacturing activities such as service and commercial establishments and chemical and debris contaminated soil from spills;
property cleanup, and development activities. Nonhazardous industrial waste shall not include: office materials; restaurant and food preparation waste;
discarded machinery; demolition waste; household waste; or hazardous waste.
NONHAZARDOUS INDUSTRIAL WASTE CONTAINMENT FACILITY: A facility that accepts and land disposes of only nonhazardous industrial waste. The
facility may accept nonhazardous industrial liquid waste if such liquids are processed to ensure no free liquids are land disposed. A facility shall include
containment cells and all other appurtenances necessary for its operation.
NONSERVICE MOTOR FUEL STATION: Shall include motor fuel stations, motor fuel station convenience stores, and all premises whereon the owner or
occupant conducts the business of furnishing, selling or dispensing motor fuel or liquefied petroleum for motor vehicles but shall not include major or minor
automobile repair.
NURSERY SCHOOL: A school for children of preschool age.
NURSING HOME: An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or approved to provide full time convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by
reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves.
OBSTRUCTION: Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood hazard area which may impede,
retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or that is placed where the flow
of water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life or property.
OFFICE SHOWROOM: A facility in which the handling of information or the performing of administrative services is conducted as the principal use;
including services provided to persons both on site and off site on a walk-in or appointment basis. Up to fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area of the
structure may be used for the display of merchandise and equipment, and its sale to a customer where delivery of purchased merchandise is made directly
to the ultimate consumer from a warehouse.
OFFICE WAREHOUSE: A building with gross floor area consisting of at least fifteen percent (15%) finished office space, in addition to warehousing and
distribution uses including storage, wholesale, and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment, but excluding bulk storage of materials
that are inflammable or explosive or that create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
OFFICES, BUSINESS: A building(s) in which business of a nonretail nature and clerical services and duties are carried out, including corporate offices,
banks, credit unions, insurance and real estate offices and including multiple-tenant office buildings.
OFFICES, PROFESSIONAL: A building in which professional and management duties and services are carried out, including medical and dental clinics
and offices; psychiatrists' and psychologists' offices; architectural, engineering, planning and legal offices; and similar uses.
OPEN SPACE: Any unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with a building.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER LINE (OHWL): A line delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave
evidence on the landscape. The ordinary high water mark is commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to
predominantly terrestrial.
OUTDOOR STORAGE/DISPLAY: Exterior depository, stockpiling, or safekeeping of all merchandise, materials, supplies, products (finished or unfinished),
equipment, vehicles or trailers, or the like. Outdoor storage does not include large structures or equipment which: a) are accessory and integral to a
permitted use within the general industrial district, b) refine or store combustible or explosive materials, or c) blend, store and distribute chemicals or
fertilizer. Nor shall outdoor storage include required off street parking areas. Outside storage areas are located within a clearly defined boundary and may
be enclosed by a structure that includes a roof but no side walls or any uncovered areas surrounded by fencing, berming, landscaping or other screening
material.
OVERLAY DISTRICT: An area within a zoning district that has an additional set of restrictions governing permitted uses with the intent of preserving
natural amenities or resources; or, an area within a district or subdistrict that permits a use or uses, based upon meeting specified criteria, which may not
be allowed or permitted elsewhere in the district because of the absence of said criteria.
OVERSIZED RECREATION VEHICLE: A recreation vehicle twenty three feet (23') or more in length or six thousand five hundred (6,500) pounds or more
in empty weight.
PASSENGER VEHICLE: A motor vehicle which meets the criteria for "passenger" class registration and license plate as established by the Minnesota
department of public safety.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: A criterion established to control noise, odor, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat
generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: An area to be planned, developed, operated and/or maintained as a single entity and containing one or more land uses
or building types, which allows variances from the strict interpretation of this title in order to achieve other community or design objectives.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 169/324
PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE: The main use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not "public property" as defined in this section.
PROTECTED WATERS: Any waters of the state which serve a beneficial public purpose, as defined in Minnesota statutes 1976, section 103G.005.
However, no lake, pond or flowage of less than ten (10) acres in size and no river or stream having a total drainage area less than two (2) square miles
shall be regulated as protected waters for the purposes of shoreland management.
PUBLIC HEARING: An official public meeting for which notice has been published in the official newspaper.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any street or highway and includes the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of
vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or facility.
PUBLICATION: A notice placed in the official newspaper.
REACH: A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or manmade obstruction. In an urban
area the segment of a stream or river between two (2) consecutive bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
RECREATION VEHICLE: Any vehicle which meets the criteria for "recreation" class registration and license plate, DNR registration, or trailer registration
used for conveyance of recreation vehicles as established by the Minnesota department of public safety, Minnesota department of natural resources, or
this title, including, but not limited to: travel trailers, stock car trailers, campers, motor homes, tent trailers, vehicles converted to motor homes, boat trailers,
snowmobiles, snowmobile trailers, boats, personal watercraft, all-terrain vehicles, and all-terrain vehicle trailers.
RECYCLING: The process of collecting and preparing recyclable materials and reusing the materials in their original form or using them in manufacturing
processes that do not cause the destruction of recyclable material in a manner that precludes further use.
RECYCLING OPERATION: An area where used, waste, discarded, or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed,
disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron, and other metals, paper, rags, bottles and lumber. Recycling operation shall not include
businesses that use recycled materials to manufacture a finished product.
REGIONAL FLOOD: A flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what
can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term
"base flood" as used in the flood insurance study.
REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION: An elevation not less than one foot (1') above the water surface profile associated with the regional
flood plus any increases in flood heights attributable to encroachments on the floodplain. It is the elevation to which uses regulated by this title are required
to be elevated or floodproofed.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES: A residential use defined by chapter 462, Minnesota statutes, which provides twenty four (24) hour housing for the mentally
retarded and physically handicapped and foster care patients.
RIGHT OF WAY: A street, alley or easement permanently established for the passage of persons and vehicles including the traveled surface of lands
adjacent that are formally dedicated to such usage.
ROOMERS: An individual other than a member of the family occupying a dwelling unit who, for rent, is furnished sleeping accommodations, meals,
personal care or other services.
SALES LOT: An outdoor area, not enclosed within a building, that may include allowed temporary structures, used for temporary display of merchandise
for sale, which display is not the principal use of the property but is in compliance with the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
Examples of such use include seasonal display and sale of Christmas trees, gardening or nursery products, consumer fireworks, or other similar goods.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY: Real property that is designed and used only for renting or leasing individual storage space in the facility under the
following conditions:
A. The occupants have access to their individual storage space only for the purpose of storing and removing their personal property;
B. The owner does not issue a warehouse receipt, bill of lading, or other document of title for the personal property stored in the storage space; and
C. The property has two (2) or more individual storage spaces. The term does not include a garage used principally for parking motor vehicles or any
property of a financial institution that contains vaults, safe deposit boxes, or other receptacles for the uses, purposes, and benefits of the financial
institution's customers.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY STORAGE SPACE: An enclosure, cubicle, or room that is fully enclosed and equipped with a door designed to be
locked for security by the occupant.
SEMIFINISHED PRODUCT: The end result of a manufacturing process that will become a raw material for an establishment engaged in further
manufacturing.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between a lot line and a building line or use.
SHOPPING CENTER: A group of unified commercial establishments located on a single land parcel and consisting of not less than four (4) distinct
business entities which share or jointly use parking facilities.
SHORE IMPACT ZONE: Lands located adjacent to and within one hundred feet (100') of the OHWL of public water.
SHORELAND: Lands located within one thousand feet (1,000') of the OHWL of a lake, pond or flowage and within three hundred feet (300') of a river or
stream or the landward extent of a floodway designated by ordinance and the zoning map on such river or stream, whichever is greater. The practical
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 170/324
limits of shorelands may be less than the statutory limits whenever the waters involved are bounded by topographic divides which extend landward from
the OHWL for lesser distances.
SIDEWALK SIGNS: A portable sign for temporary placement on a sidewalk in the public right of way, intended for a building or business located adjacent
to the right of way with no front yard or a front yard that will not accommodate a permanent freestanding sign as permitted by this title.
SOLAR COLLECTOR: A device, structure or part thereof that transfers direct solar energy into thermal, chemical or electrical energy and that contributes
significantly to a structure's energy supply. To be utilized in a cost effective manner the collector should be oriented to within twenty two and one-half
degrees (221/2) true south.
SOLID WASTE: Garbage, refuse, sludge from a water supply treatment plant or air contaminant treatment facility, and other discarded waste materials and
sludges, in solid, semisolid, liquid, or contained gaseous form, resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and from
community activities, but does not include hazardous waste; animal waste used as fertilizer; earthen fill, boulders, rock; concrete diamond grinding and
saw slurry associated with the construction, improvement, or repair of a road when deposited on the road project site in a manner that is in compliance
with best management practices and rules of the pollution control agency; sewage sludge; solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage or other
common pollutants in water resources, such as silt, dissolved or suspended solids in industrial wastewater effluents or discharges which are point sources
subject to permits under section 402 of the federal water pollution control act, as amended, dissolved materials in irrigation return flows; or source, special
nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the atomic energy act of 1954, as amended.
SPECIAL WASTE: A nonhazardous industrial waste that is not mixed municipal solid waste and is managed as a separate waste stream.
SPENT BAUXITE: A nonhazardous industrial waste, consisting primarily of aluminum oxide, aluminum silicate and silica material.
SPENT BAUXITE DISPOSAL FACILITY: A facility that accepts and land disposes of only spent bauxite. A facility shall include containment cells, leachate
collection systems, monitoring systems and other appurtenances necessary for its operation.
STREET: A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
STREET LINE: The legal line of demarcation between a street and abutting land.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the
ground.
TAPROOM: An area within a microbrewery, small brewery or brewery; or a premises adjacent to the microbrewery, small brewery or brewery and under
the same ownership as the microbrewery, small brewery or brewery; that provides the on-sale of the malt liquor produced by the microbrewery, small
brewery or brewery.
TOWER: A structure upon which communication equipment is mounted or attached and including support devices such as cables, braces, etc.
TOWNHOME: A building on a single lot in a row of not less than two (2) units in which each unit has at least two (2) walls exposed to the outdoors; no unit
is located over another unit; and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more vertical common fire resistant walls. In no case shall any unit
have in excess of two (2) party walls.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person, individual, copartnership, or corporation, either as principal or agent, who engages in, does or transacts any
temporary and transient business in this state, either in one locality or in traveling from place to place in this state, selling goods, wares and merchandise;
and who for the purpose of carrying on such business, hires, leases, occupies or uses a building, structure, vehicle, trailer, tent or other portable shelter, or
vacant lot for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise. The term "transient merchant" does not include a seller or exhibitor in a
firearms collector show involving two (2) or more sellers or exhibitors.
TRANSMISSION FACILITIES: Essential service facilities consisting of overhead electric lines in excess of thirty five (35) kV and supporting structures or
natural gas transmission pipelines in excess of two hundred (200) pounds per square inch.
TRUCK STOP: Any building, premises or land in which or upon which a business, service or industry involving the maintenance, cleaning, servicing,
storage or repair of commercial vehicles is conducted. Primary activities include the dispensing of motor fuel and the sale of accessories or equipment for
trucks and similar commercial vehicles but may also include overnight accommodations, restaurant facilities, a car wash and truck wash or other ancillary
uses.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereof is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained and shall
include any manner of performance of such activity with respect to the performance standards of this title.
USE, PERMITTED BY PUD: A use which is permitted only if the PUD procedure is used and a plan is formally approved by the city.
USE, PERMITTED BY RIGHT: A use which is unconditionally permitted in the district under which it is listed.
USE, PUBLIC OR INSTITUTIONAL: A government, nonprofit or quasi-public use or institution such as a church, library, public or private school, hospital or
municipally owned or operated building, structure or land use for public purpose, or a use owned or operated by a nonprofit, religious or eleemosynary
institution and providing educational, cultural, recreational, religious or similar types of public programs.
VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is self-propelled or designed to be pushed or pulled and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motor bikes,
motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers, trailers, boats, planes and gliders.
WASTE PROCESSING: The treatment of waste after collection and before disposal. Processing includes, but is not limited to, reduction, storage,
separation, exchange, resource recovery, physical, chemical, or biological modification, and transfer from one waste facility to another.
WASTE PROCESSING FACILITY: A facility that treats solid waste after collection and before disposal. Processing includes, but is not limited to, reduction;
storage; separation; exchange; resource recovery; physical, chemical, or biological modification; and transfer from one waste facility to another.
WASTE TRANSFER STATION: A facility in which collected solid waste from any source is temporarily stored, concentrated or deposited to await
subsequent transportation.
WETLAND ALTERATION: Any activity that will change or diminish the course, current, or cross section of a public water.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 171/324
WETLANDS: Swamps, marshes or drainage basins as defined in "U.S. Fish And Wildlife Circular No. 39" (1971 edition). For the purposes of
shoreland/wetland regulations, wetland types 3, 4 and 5, of at least two and five-tenths (2.5) acres in size, will be regulated.
WINE ON PREMISES STORE: A facility that provides the ingredients and equipment for a customer to use to produce wine at the store as regulated by
Minnesota statutes, as may be amended.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between side lot lines and extending from the abutting front street right of way line
to a depth required in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located. On a corner lot the narrowest street dimension shall be the front yard.
YARD, INTERIOR SIDE: A side yard which is not adjacent to a street.
YARD OR SETBACK: A required open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided for
herein. The measurement of a yard shall be construed as the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the building line.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending along a side lot line between the front and rear yards, having a width as specified in the yard regulations for the district in
which such lot is located.
YARD, STREET SIDE: A side yard which is adjacent to a street.
ZERO LOT LINE HOUSING: Single-family detached dwellings located on individual lots which are designated to have no setback from one or more lot
lines.
ZONING DISTRICT: See definition of District. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989; amd. Ord. B-1, 12-5-1989; Ord. B-1, 12-28-1989; Ord. B-4, 5-15-1990; Ord. B-1, 5-24-
1990; Ord. B-13, 9-17-1991; Ord. B-20, 5-19-1992; Ord. B-20, 5-28-1992; Ord. B-21, 6-16-1992; Ord. B-25, 2-2-1993; Ord. B-32, 9-21-1993; Ord. B-35, 1-
25-1994; Ord. B-32, 2-11-1994; Ord. B-35, 2-11-1994; Ord. B-40, 4-29-1994; Ord. B-43, 7-5-1994; Ord. B-60, 5-7-1996; Ord. B-59, 5-24-1996; Ord. B-64,
8-23-1996; Ord. B-72, 11-5-1996; Ord. B-74, 11-5-1996; Ord. B-90, 7-15-1997; Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997; Ord. B-97, 1-6-1998; Ord. B-114, 3-6-2001; Ord. B-
129, 6-3-2003; Ord. B-131, 7-15-2003; Ord. B-137, 3-1-2004; Ord. B-138, 5-18-2004; Ord. B-141, 7-20-2004; Ord. B-153, 4-1-2005; Ord. B-155, 6-7-2005;
Ord. B-163, 11-15-2005; Ord. B-167, 4-4-2006; Ord. B-174, 10-17-2006; Ord. B-176, 10-17-2006; Ord. B-223, 5-15-2012; Ord. B-226, 3-19-2013; Ord. B-
243, 5-20-2015; Ord. B-248, 7-21-2015; Ord. B-252, 8-16-2016; Ord. B-264, 7-31-2017)
Chapter 2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
11-2-1: SCOPE AND INTERPRETATION:
These provisions apply to all districts.
A. Scope: No structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, altered or moved and no structure or land shall be used for
any purpose or in any manner which is not in conformity with the provisions of this title.
B. Interpretation: In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
C. Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this title to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this title imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this title shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this title
are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only. (Ord. B-25, 2-2-1993)
11-2-2: LOT PROVISIONS:
A. Lots Of Record:
1. No lot of record shall be reduced in size below the district requirements of this title.
2. A lot of record shall be deemed a buildable lot even though the lot area and/or dimensions are less than those required for the district provided as
follows:
a. It fronts on a public street.
b. Minimum requirements for private or public utility service are met.
c. Evidence must be presented that the lot in question met minimum requirements for the division of property under ordinance regulations in effect at
the time of the division of property.
B. One Building Per Lot: Except for PUD, or a multiple-family project, not more than one principal building shall be located on a lot. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
11-2-3: SEWER AND WATER; SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS:
Single-family dwellings which are not connected to the municipal sewer system shall be permitted only when the requirements for private on site sewer
systems have been satisfied. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 172/324
11-2-4: ATTACHED DEVELOPMENTS:
A. Requirements: All attached developments which share the ownership of common open spaces or other facilities (i.e., driveways or utility services) shall
be required to have condominium association documentation consistent with state statutes.
B. Single-Family Attached Dwellings: Single-family attached dwellings without common open space or shared facilities shall have FHA party wall,
maintenance or comparable agreements consistent with state statutes. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
11-2-5: ROOFTOP MECHANICAL SYSTEMS:
All outside rooftop mechanical systems shall be completely screened from public streets and R districts. Additional and/or more specific screening
standards for rooftop mechanical systems are detailed in the individual commercial, business park, and industrial districts. (Ord. B-184, 12-19-2006)
11-2-6: REQUIRED YARDS AND OPEN SPACE:
A. Reduction: No yard or other open space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such yard or other open space less than the minimum
required by this title. If the existing yard or other open space as existing is less than the minimum required, it shall not be further reduced.
B. Relative To Other Buildings: No required yard or other open space allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be used to satisfy yard, other open
space or minimum lot area requirements for any other building. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
11-2-7: STREET ACCESS REQUIRED:
Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot having frontage on a public street as defined herein. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
11-2-8: PRIVATE STREETS AND UTILITIES:
All streets and utilities not located within a public right of way must be maintained by the owner. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
11-2-9: OUTDOOR STORAGE:
Except as specifically authorized by this title, all equipment, merchandise, materials, supplies, unlicensed vehicles, junk vehicles, trash and junk, and
finished and unfinished products shall be stored within structures as defined herein. This provision does not apply to clothesline poles, lawn furniture,
picnic tables and playground equipment as associated with residential use. Construction materials may be stored outdoors only during construction, and
such materials must be for use in construction on the property on which they are stored. (Ord. B-114, 3-6-2001)
A. Storing Or Parking Junked Vehicle Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to park, store or leave any junked motor vehicle, whether attended or not,
upon any public or private property within the city, or for any person, as an owner of or an occupant having control of private property within the city to
permit the parking, storing or leaving of any junked vehicle upon such private property, unless such junked vehicle is within an enclosed building or
structure lawfully situated upon private property or is so parked, stored or left upon private property lawfully zoned and operated as a recycling
operation.
B. Woodpiles: Firewood shall not be stored in the front yard or nearer the front lot line than the principal building or less than five feet (5') from a lot line.
Firewood shall be stacked on an impervious surface or be elevated at least four inches (4") off the ground. Stacks shall not exceed six feet (6') in
height. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
C. Recreation Vehicles: See section 8-2-5 of this code for regulations pertaining to the storage of recreation vehicles. (Ord. XII.20, 7-20-2004)
D. Trash And Junk: All solid waste material, debris, refuse, garbage, junk or similar material shall be kept within tightly closed containers designed for such
purpose. The containers shall be kept in an enclosed area between days of scheduled pick up. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
11-2-10: ANIMALS:
The care and keeping of animals within the city is subject to the regulations contained in title 7, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. B-153, 4-1-2005)
11-2-11: TEMPORARY BUILDINGS:
A. Construction Office, Temporary: Temporary buildings incidental to construction work on the premises shall be permitted provided they receive a building
permit and such buildings are removed upon completion or abandonment of said construction.
B. Sales Office, Temporary: All temporary sales offices shall conform to the following performance standards:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 173/324
1. All temporary sales offices shall receive a building permit.
2. The temporary sales office shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the certificate of occupancy for the development's model unit or leasing office,
or within six (6) months of the issuance of the building permit for the temporary sales office, whichever occurs first. If requested in writing prior to
expiration of the original six (6) month period, six (6) month extensions may be granted by staff. Said extensions shall also expire within six (6)
months or thirty (30) days of the certificate of occupancy for the development's model unit or leasing office, whichever occurs first.
3. Each development project shall be limited to one temporary sales office.
4. All temporary sales offices shall be required to meet the standards of the current Minnesota state building code and Americans with disabilities act
(ADA).
5. All temporary sales offices shall meet the setback standards as required for any structure within the applicable zoning district.
6. Temporary sales offices shall have skirting around the entire base of the unit.
7. Prior to use by the public, all temporary sales offices shall provide at least six (6) off street parking stalls for every one thousand (1,000) square feet
of gross floor area. In addition, the surface of the parking area shall at a minimum consist of class V crushed rock. Should the temporary sales office
exist longer than one year, the off street parking area shall be paved. Each parking stall shall be delineated by a concrete parking stop, sign or
landscape planter.
8. Temporary sales offices shall be permitted only for residential subdivisions for which a final plat has been approved by the city council. Additionally, a
temporary sales office shall be located on the property for which the final plat was approved. No off site temporary sales offices will be permitted.
9. All temporary sales trailers shall have access from a public or private paved street. (Ord. B-145, 11-3-2004)
C. Allowed By Interim Use Permit: Temporary buildings are allowed by the interim use permit in section 11-4-16, "GI General Industrial District", of this title.
(Ord. B-144, 10-19-2004; amd. Ord. B-174, 10-17-2006)
D. Sales Lots: Temporary structures allowed by interim use permit associated with sales lots that are in compliance with all building code, fire code, zoning
ordinance, this code, county ordinance, or state statute applicable to transient merchants, temporary structures, or sales lots. (Ord. B-155, 6-7-2005)
11-2-12: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEMS:
A. Purpose And Intent: It is the goal of the city council, as expressed in the comprehensive plan, for Rosemount to become a more sustainable community
by encouraging activities that conserve energy and result in less/no pollution output such as alternative energy sources. In accordance with that goal,
the city finds that it is in the public interest to encourage alternative energy systems that have a positive impact on energy production and conservation
while not having an adverse impact on the community. Therefore, the purposes of this section include:
1. To promote rather than restrict development of alternative energy sources by removing regulatory barriers and creating a clear regulatory path for
approving alternative energy systems.
2. To create a livable community where development incorporates sustainable design elements such as resource and energy conservation and use of
renewable energy.
3. To protect and enhance air quality, limit the effects of climate change and decrease use of fossil fuels.
4. To encourage alternative energy development in locations where the technology is viable and environmental, economic and social impacts can be
mitigated.
B. Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this title, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM: A ground source heat pump, wind or solar energy system.
COMMUNITY SOLAR GARDEN: A solar electric (photovoltaic) array that provides retail electric power (or a financial proxy for retail power) to multiple
community members or businesses residing or located off site from the location of the solar energy system, under the provisions of Minnesota statutes
216B.1641 or successor statute.
PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM: An active solar energy system that converts solar energy directly into electricity.
SOLAR COLLECTOR: A device, structure or a part of a device or structure for which the primary purpose is to capture sunlight and transform it into
thermal, mechanical, chemical, or electrical energy.
SOLAR ENERGY: Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected in the form of heat or light by a solar collector.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A device or structural design feature, a substantial purpose of which is to provide daylight for interior lighting or provide for
the collection, storage and distribution of solar energy for space heating or cooling, electricity generation or water heating.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ACTIVE: A solar energy system whose primary purpose is to harvest energy by transferring solar energy into another form
of energy or transferring heat from a solar collector to another medium using mechanical, electrical, or chemical means.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING INTEGRATED: A solar energy system that is an integral part of a principal or accessory building, replacing or
substituting for an architectural or structural component of the building. Building integrated systems include, but are not limited to, photovoltaic or hot
water solar energy systems that are contained within or substitute for roofing materials, windows, skylights, awnings and shade devices.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GRID INTERTIE: A photovoltaic solar energy system that is connected to an electric circuit served by an electric utility
company.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 174/324
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GROUND MOUNTED: A freestanding solar system mounted directly to the ground using a rack or pole rather than being
mounted on a building.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, OFF GRID: A photovoltaic solar energy system in which the circuits energized by the solar energy system are not
electrically connected in any way to electric circuits that are served by an electric utility company.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, PASSIVE: A system that captures solar light or heat without transforming it to another form of energy or transferring the
energy via a heat exchanger.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ROOF MOUNTED: A solar energy system mounted directly or abutting the roof of a principal or accessory building.
SOLAR FARM: A commercial facility that converts sunlight into electricity, whether by photovoltaic (PV), concentrating solar thermal devices (CST), or
other conversion technology, for the principal purpose of wholesale sales of generated electricity.
SOLAR HOT WATER SYSTEM (Also THERMAL SYSTEM): A system that includes a solar collector and a heat exchanger that heats or preheats water
for building heating systems or other hot water needs, including residential domestic hot water and hot water for commercial processes.
SOLAR RESOURCE: A view of the sun from a specific point on a lot or building that is not obscured by any vegetation, building, or object for a
minimum of four (4) hours between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and three o'clock (3:00) P.M. standard time on any day of the year.
C. Solar Energy Systems: The following standards apply to solar energy systems, subject to standards of the applicable zoning district in which they are
located.
1. Exemptions: Passive or building integrated solar energy systems are exempt from the requirements of this section and shall be regulated as any
other building element.
2. Uses: Roof mounted solar energy systems are an accessory use in some districts. Ground mounted solar energy systems are an accessory use in
the agricultural, residential, PI - public and institutional, and industrial districts. Community solar gardens or solar farms as defined in this section are
an interim use in the following zoning district outside the metropolitan urban service area (MUSA): AG - agricultural, PI - public and institutional, LI -
light industrial, GI - general industrial and HI - heavy industrial.
3. Setbacks: Roof mounted solar energy systems shall comply with the setbacks requirement for the applicable zoning district and structure type
(principal or accessory) on which they are mounted and may encroach those setbacks per subsection 11-5-2C1a, "Special Structural Elements", of
this title. Ground mounted solar energy systems shall comply with the accessory structure setback standards for the applicable zoning district in
which they are located. Community solar gardens or solar farms shall comply with the principal structure setback standards for the applicable zoning
district in which they are located.
4. Height: Roof mounted solar energy systems shall comply with the height standards of the applicable zoning district. Roof mounted solar energy
systems may be mounted at an angle to the roof to improve their efficiency; however, the highest point of a solar panel in any residential district shall
not be more than three feet (3'), measured in a straight line, above the roof upon which the panel is mounted. This three foot (3') height limitation
does not apply to roof mounted solar energy systems located in nonresidential districts or on nonresidential uses. Ground mounted solar energy
systems shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height.
5. Aesthetics: Roof mounted solar energy systems shall be designed to blend into the architecture of the building, provided that design considerations
shall not diminish energy production. The color of the solar collector is not required to be consistent with other roofing materials. Reflection angles
from collector surfaces shall be oriented away from neighboring windows. Where necessary, screening may be required to address glare.
6. Screening: Roof mounted solar energy systems located in nonresidential districts or on nonresidential uses shall be screened in accordance with the
requirements of section 11-2-5 of this chapter and the screening requirements of the applicable zoning district to the extent possible without reducing
their efficiency. Ground mounted solar energy systems, community solar gardens or solar farms shall be screened from view of the public right of
way to the extent possible without reducing their efficiency by setback, berming, landscaping, walls or a combination thereof.
7. Coverage: Roof mounted solar energy systems shall not cover more than eighty percent (80%) of the south facing or flat roof upon which the panels
are mounted and shall be set back a minimum of one foot (1') from the edge of the roof. The surface area of ground mounted systems shall not
exceed the maximum lot coverage standard of the applicable zoning district.
8. Feeder Lines: All power lines shall be placed underground within the interior of each parcel.
9. Compliance With Building Code: All active solar energy systems shall meet approval of local building code officials, consistent with the state of
Minnesota building code, and solar thermal systems shall comply with HVAC related requirements of the energy code.
10. Compliance With State Electric Code: All photovoltaic systems shall comply with the Minnesota state electric code.
11. Compliance With State Plumbing Code: Solar thermal systems shall comply with applicable Minnesota state plumbing code.
12. Certifications: Solar electric system components shall be certified by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., and solar thermal systems shall be certified by
the Solar Rating And Certification Corporation, or other appropriate certification(s) as determined by the city. The city reserves the right to deny a
building permit for proposed solar energy systems deemed to have inadequate certification.
13. Utility Connection: All grid intertie systems shall have an agreement with the local utility prior to the issuance of a building permit. A visible external
disconnect must be provided if required by the utility. Off grid systems are exempt from this requirement.
14. Abandonment: If the solar energy system remains nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous period of one year, the system shall be deemed to
be abandoned and shall constitute a public nuisance. The owner shall remove the abandoned system at their expense after a demolition permit has
been obtained. Removal includes the entire structure including transmission equipment.
15. Permits: No solar energy system shall be erected, altered, improved, reconstructed, maintained or moved in the city without first securing a permit
from the city. Community solar gardens or solar farms as defined in this section shall also require an interim use permit.
16. Deviations: Deviations from the required standards for a solar energy system may be addressed though a variance. (Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 175/324
11-2-13: GARAGE SALES:
Temporary garage sales shall comply with the following requirements:
A. The sale shall not be more than four (4) successive days in duration.
B. Not more than three (3) such sales are permitted on the premises in a calendar year.
C. There shall be at least one month between sales on the same premises. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
11-2-14: TEMPORARY DWELLINGS:
The use and occupancy of a manufactured home, tent, RV or other temporary dwelling for the purpose of living quarters is not permitted in any district.
(Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
11-2-15: SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING REQUIREMENTS:
All single-family detached dwellings shall be constructed according to the following minimum standards:
A. All single-family detached dwellings shall have a minimum width of twenty four feet (24') in both directions and shall have, prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy, a minimum gross finished floor area (excluding garage space) as follows:
1. In the RR rural residential and RL very low density single-family residential districts, one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.
2. In the R-1 low density residential district, one thousand (1,000) square feet.
3. In the R-1A low density residential district, nine hundred eighty (980) square feet.
B. All single-family detached dwellings shall have a permanent frost free foundation or equal, in accordance with the applicable building code.
C. Main roofs shall have a minimum pitch, as follows:
1. In the AG agricultural, RR rural residential, and RL very low density single-family residential districts, a five to twelve (5:12) minimum pitch per
definition of the applicable building code.
2. In the R-1 low density residential and R-1A low density residential districts, a three to twelve (3:12) minimum pitch per definition of the applicable
building code.
D. Roofs shall be shingled with asphalt, wood, tiles or other comparable materials similar in appearance as approved by the applicable building code.
E. Except for earth sheltered homes, all exterior vertical surfaces of a single-family dwelling and accessory structures shall be treated as a front and have
an equally attractive, or the same, fascia. Any exterior building finish shall consist of a combination of the following materials: wood, brick, natural
stone, aluminum and glass, steel, or vinyl siding. Steel siding with exposed panels exceeding sixteen inches (16") in width, shall not be permitted. (Ord.
B-96, 12-2-1997)
F. All single-family dwellings shall be required to provide at least two (2) attached enclosed garage parking spaces no less than four hundred forty (440)
square feet in area and no less than twenty feet (20') wide in either direction. The maximum allowable size for attached garages is one thousand
(1,000) square feet in area.
Any single-family dwelling permit for properties receiving preliminary plat, lot division or registered land survey approvals after the effective date hereof,
shall include certificates of survey providing for the location of an attached third garage stall, whether or not construction is intended. The area allotted
for the third stall shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') wide and twenty feet (20') long. The combined area for the required two (2) stall attached garage
and the proposed third stall shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet. (Ord. B-142, 9-21-2004)
11-2-16: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
A. Home occupations shall be conducted solely by persons residing in the residence.
B. All business activity and storage shall take place within structures.
C. There shall be no alteration to the exterior of the residential dwelling, accessory building or yard that in any way alters the residential character of the
premises.
D. No sign, display or device identifying the occupation shall be used.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 176/324
E. The occupation shall not be visible or audible from any property line.
F. Said occupation shall not involve the retail sale or rental of products on the premises.
G. Unless completely enclosed within an approved structure, no vehicle used in the conduct of the occupation shall be parked, stored or otherwise present
at the premises other than such as is customarily used for domestic or household purposes such as a van or three-quarter ton truck.
H. Only on site off street parking facilities normal for a residential use shall be used.
I. The conduct of an occupation or the use of substances which may be hazardous to or may in any way jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of
neighbors and neighboring property shall not be permitted. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
J. Body art establishments, as defined by state statute 146B, are prohibited from home occupations. (Ord. B-214, 6-7-2011)
11-2-17: ESSENTIAL SERVICE FACILITIES:
Essential service facilities are permitted uses in all zoning districts except electrical substations and switching stations are prohibited in all residential (R)
and public/institutional (P) districts. Essential service facilities shall be subject to all of the applicable district development standards as well as any overlay
district standards with the following additional standards:
A. Every fenced enclosure is subject to the principal building setback or yard criteria of the district in which it is located.
B. Electrical substations and switching stations located on any lot or parcel which is adjacent to a lot or parcel in a residential (R), commercial (C), and/or
public institutional (P) district or use must provide mechanical or vegetative screening in the yard adjacent to a public right of way or such lot or parcel
in the R, C, or P district. Screening consisting of earthen berm, landscaping, and/or wall having ninety percent (90%) opacity to a height not less than
six feet (6') in height shall be provided within the yard adjacent to a public right of way or such lot or parcel in the R, C, or P district. Screening shall not
be required in yards that are adjacent to wastewater treatment facilities.
C. An application for transmission facilities shall be required to be submitted to the city, including information related to the proposed design, proposed
siting, and alternative sites together with such application fee as may be approved from time to time by the city council. All transmission facilities shall
be required to receive a permit from the city, except for those that are less than or equal to one-fourth (1/4) mile in length. No application shall be
considered until a public hearing has been held by the planning commission. A notice of such hearing shall be published at least ten (10) days prior to
the hearing, and notices shall be mailed to each property owner within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the affected property, except when located in
agricultural (AG), agricultural preserve (AG-P) and rural residential (RR) districts which shall require mailed notice to each property owner within onefourth
(1/4) mile. The city council shall consider the recommendation of the planning commission and either approve or deny the application.
D. The application for transmission facilities must be approved based upon the following findings:
1. The proposed siting complies with the city's comprehensive guide plan.
2. To the extent possible, the proposed siting is within or adjacent to existing public rights of way, private utility easements or other designated corridors
for transportation or transmission facilities.
3. The proposed siting is necessary based upon a need and locational analysis.
4. Impacts, including, but not limited to, noise and views, are identified and mitigated.
5. The proposed siting will not create hazards to the health, safety and general welfare of surrounding property owners or natural environment. (Ord. B-
90, 7-15-1997)
11-2-18: SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLINGS AND TOWNHOME REQUIREMENTS:
All single-family attached dwellings shall be constructed according to the following minimum standards:
A. Building Site: A maximum of six (6) dwelling units may be attached per building, except where buildings are adjacent to RR, RL, R-1 and R-1A zoning
districts; such buildings shall be limited to a maximum of four (4) dwelling units per building.
B. Basements: All dwelling units within the development shall have a permanent frost free foundation or equal, in accordance with the applicable building
code.
C. Single-Family Attached Dwelling Frontage: No frontage requirement on a public street or road is necessary for single-family attached development;
however, access to a public street is required via common open space fronting the right of way.
D. Setback Requirements For Single-Family Attached Dwelling Development: The following setbacks shall be required for townhome development:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 177/324
Principal Structure Accessory Structure
(Attached Or Detached) Parking Lot
Any front, rear or side along a principal arterial highway 60 feet 40 feet 40 feet
Any front, rear or side along a minor arterial highway 50 feet 30 feet 30 feet
Any front, rear or side along a collector street 40 feet 20 feet 20 feet
Any front, rear or side along a local street 30 feet 20 feet 20 feet
Interior side or rear lot line 20 feet 10 feet 10 feet
Any front, rear or side of building along a private roadway 20 feet from back of curb 20 feet from back of curb 15 feet from back of curb
E. Minimum Distance Between Townhome Structures: In addition to the setback requirements of subsection D of this section, the following minimum
distances shall be maintained between structures:
1. A minimum of twenty feet (20') shall be maintained between side walls of end unit townhomes between adjacent rows of townhome units.
2. Where the rear of a row of townhome dwelling units faces the rear of an adjoining row of townhome dwelling units, the minimum distance between
structures shall be sixty feet (60').
3. Where the rear of a row of townhomes faces the side wall or front of an adjoining row of townhomes, the minimum distance between the structures
shall be forty feet (40').
4. Off street parking areas provided within the common area for the use of all of the homeowners shall maintain a minimum setback of fifteen feet (15')
from adjacent townhome dwelling units.
F. Minimum Separation: Single-family attached dwellings shall have a minimum separation of twenty feet (20') between buildings.
G. Single-Family Attached Dwelling Parking Requirements: Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum of two and one-half (21/2) car parking spaces
available for each dwelling unit's use. Two (2) enclosed garage car parking spaces, no less than four hundred forty (440) square feet in area, shall be
provided on the dwelling unit lot and the remaining requirements provided for within the overall townhome development. The development shall provide
the remaining one-half (1/2) space per unit in the common space, which will be accessible to all dwellings.
H. Design Of Garage And Accessory Structures: Garages and other accessory structures shall be architecturally compatible in construction and
appearance with the main building. Garage spaces required to satisfy off street parking requirements shall be attached to the townhome dwelling unit.
A minimum of one hundred fifty (150) cubic feet of storage space, exclusive of parking spaces provided, shall be provided within the garage.
I. Design Of Streets And Parking Areas:
1. All parking and driving surfaces shall be surfaced with concrete or asphalt, and shall be defined by continuous concrete perimeter curbing.
2. All internal private roadways shall be a minimum twenty eight feet (28') wide face to face.
J. Exterior Vertical Surface Design: All exterior vertical surfaces of a townhome dwelling and accessory structures shall be treated as a front and have an
equally attractive or the same fascia. At least fifty percent (50%) of any exterior building finish shall consist of a combination of materials which are
noncombustible, nondegradable and maintenance free (for example, base brick, natural stone, glass and aluminum, steel or vinyl siding) or those
comparable in grade and quality. No exterior building finish shall be sheet aluminum, asbestos, iron, steel, corrugated aluminum or untreated block.
K. Vertical Wall Surface Alignments: No more than two (2) adjacent unit exterior walls may occupy the same vertical plane. All townhome structures
containing three (3) or more dwelling units shall have minimum offsets of four feet (4') between one of the units and the adjacent property.
L. Single-Family Attached Platted Additions:
1. Density: All single-family attached developments shall be built in platted additions to the city and shall have a maximum net density not to exceed six
(6) dwelling units per acre. Said land shall be platted before a building permit is issued. For the purpose of this section, "plat" is defined in
accordance with Minnesota statutes, section 505.01 et seq., as amended. Minimum single-family attached development lot size shall be one-half
(1/2) acre.
M. Single-Family Attached Dwelling Open Space Requirements:
1. Recreational Space: All areas not occupied by structures, parking or driving surfaces shall be landscaped and maintained with vegetation. At least
twenty percent (20%) of the open/green space, excluding required setback areas, shall be reserved for playgrounds and/or passive recreational
space. Park lands shall be graded and seeded by the developer.
2. Streets And Lanes: The developer of each townhome development shall be responsible for building and developing of the open space into finished,
graded and fully developed areas consisting of paved streets having a minimum of five (5) ton axle load bituminous surfacing and common paved
parking areas, in accordance with section 11-6-1, "Off Street Parking Requirements", of this title.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 178/324
N. Requirements Of Homeowners' Association: The declaration of covenants for a homeowners' association shall be approved by the city and shall
contain the following:
1. Duties Of Homeowners' Association: The open space and common areas shall be maintained and cared for by the developer of the single-family
attached project until a homeowners' association is formed to maintain open space and common areas. This single-family attached homeowners'
association shall be responsible for the care and maintenance of all open space and common areas of this single-family attached project and also for
the maintenance and appearance of the exterior of each unit.
2. Homeowners' Charges: The homeowners' association shall levy charges to each owner for the maintenance cost, operating costs and improvement
costs for the open space, parks, and green areas and also for the parking and bituminous surfaced areas which are not publicly owned and
maintained. In addition, the homeowners' association will assume the responsibility to maintain the exterior of the building and also their front and
rear yards in an acceptable condition which is compatible to the neighboring property. This condition shall be so kept that it will not cause a blighting
of the area or a general deterioration of the single-family attached development. The homeowners' association will cause blighted properties to be
repaired, restored, and maintained as necessary to a proper standard for the area.
3. Failure To Organize Homeowners' Association: In the event that the developer or owner of the single-family attached project is unable to organize
the property owners into an association for the maintenance of the open space and single-family attached project after twelve (12) months from the
completion of the construction, the council will call for a public hearing of all persons so concerned and ask for the creation of such an association. If
no association is formed or if the association ceases to function any time after it is formed, the council will order such maintenance work and
restoration of the area and then will assess such costs, together with a reasonable supervision charge, to the property owners in the single-family
attached project or the individual property owner receiving the individual benefit.
4. Declaration Of Covenants: The council may require that the declaration of covenants include provisions to meet the minimum requirements of this
section or to satisfy conditions of city approval, may be enforced by the city, and may not be amended or released without city council approval. (Ord.
B-96, 12-2-1997)
11-2-19: MANUFACTURED HOME PARK REQUIREMENTS:
A. Purpose And Intent: The purpose of the manufactured home park requirements is to provide regulations for the design, use, maintenance, operation
and potential closure of parks intended for manufactured housing and to provide for public health, safety and welfare for residents of manufactured
housing parks. All parks shall be constructed according to the following minimum standards.
B. Uses Permitted By PUD:
Community building, management office, private recreation facilities.
Condominium style manufactured home parks.
Home occupations subject to requirements established in section 11-2-16 of this chapter.
Manufactured homes and accessory structures.
Public and institutional uses required by the resident population.
C. Required Conditions:
1. Manufactured homes not meeting single-family dwelling requirements are permitted only in planned manufactured home parks. The PUD procedure
is required for all park proposals.
2. Manufactured home parks must be serviced by public sewer and water systems.
3. Manufactured homes must have a full basement or must be affixed to a permanent frost free foundation with a completely enclosed crawl space.
4. Only manufactured homes certified as meeting current HUD "manufactured home construction and safety standards" shall be permitted, unless
evidence is furnished that manufactured homes meeting prior HUD codes have been updated to meet current construction and safety standards and
upon inspection have been found safe and fit for residential occupancy.
5. Every person operating a manufactured home park within the city shall provide and keep a suitable guest register for the registration of all persons
provided with accommodations, and each person shall register therein, as provided by state law. This register shall contain the following:
a. Name and lot address of each occupant;
b. Name and address of the owner of the manufactured home;
c. Make, model, year and license of each manufactured home; and
d. Date of arrival and departure of each manufactured home.
This information shall be kept for at least three (3) years after the date the occupant leaves the manufactured home park.
D. Site/Design Requirements:
1. Minimum Site Area: Minimum site area for manufactured home parks is forty (40) acres.
2. Property Line Abutting Street: Manufactured home parks shall have at least one property line abutting a collector or arterial street, as defined by the
comprehensive guide plan.
3. Setbacks: All structures within manufactured home parks shall be set back a minimum of fifty feet (50') from all adjacent property lines. Said setback
area shall be provided with a dense combination of earthen berms and plant materials, specific plans for which must be approved by the planning
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 179/324
commission.
4. Parks And Recreational Uses: Dedication for parks and recreational uses shall be determined according to the requirements of title 12 of this code.
The city council shall determine whether land or cash in lieu of land shall be required, and, in the case of land dedication, whether the land shall be
publicly or privately owned and maintained.
5. Streets And Utilities Under Single Ownership: Streets and utilities in manufactured home parks under single ownership shall be privately
constructed, owned and maintained.
6. Privately Owned Utilities: Privately owned utilities shall be designed and constructed to meet the minimum specifications of the Minnesota
department of health and the Minnesota pollution control agency. The use of propane or butane gas for any purpose in lieu of public or private
utilities within the confines of the manufactured home park is prohibited.
7. Private Streets: Private streets shall be constructed to meet minimum city specifications and shall be paved to a minimum width of thirty two feet
(32') where on street parking is permitted. Where parking is permitted on one side only and signs are posted, the minimum street width shall be
twenty eight feet (28'). All streets and roadways located within the manufactured home park shall have a concrete curb and gutter and paved in
accordance with city standards.
8. Condominium Style Parks: The city council shall determine whether streets and utilities in condominium style manufactured home parks may be
publicly owned and maintained.
9. Access Points: All manufactured home parks shall be designed with a minimum of two (2) access points on public thoroughfares, providing full
ingress and egress at each location.
10. Storm Shelters: Each manufactured home park shall provide a storm shelter or shelters of sufficient capacity to safely protect all of the residents of
the park in case of a storm emergency. In lieu thereof, the planning commission may approve basement shelters within each unit provided the
minimum standards for safety are assured.
11. Outdoor Storage Of Recreation Vehicles: The outdoor storage of recreation vehicles shall not be permitted except as provided for in subsection 11-
4-8D of this title.
12. Sidewalks: A concrete sidewalk, not less than five feet (5') wide shall be constructed along one side of streets entering the manufactured housing
park and provide safe pedestrian links to recreational amenities and the required shelter within the park and to public recreational facilities as
recommended by the parks and recreation commission.
13. Landscaping: All surfaces not occupied by the manufactured home, patios, sidewalks or hard surfaced off street parking shall be sodded and
maintained with grass. One boulevard or shade tree shall be provided per manufactured home with a minimum size of two inches (2") (B&B). In
addition, landscape screening is required in the perimeter setback areas to mitigate the effects of dissimilar uses and traffic.
E. Minimum Lot Requirements And Setbacks:
1. Minimum Lot Area: Five thousand (5,000) square feet.
2. Minimum Lot Width: Fifty feet (50').
3. Maximum Lot Coverage: Seventy five percent (75%).
4. Minimum Front Yard Setbacks:
a. Principal structure: Twenty feet (20').
b. Accessory structure: Twenty feet (20').
5. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks:
a. Principal structure: Twenty feet (20').
b. Accessory structures: Ten feet (10').
6. Minimum Rear Yard Setbacks:
a. Principal structure: Twenty feet (20').
b. Accessory structures: Ten feet (10').
7. Carports And Garages: A freestanding carport or garage not attached to a manufactured home may be permitted provided that it conforms to all
applicable uniform building codes and is consistent with accessory structure setbacks provided herein. Prior to issuance of any building permit,
permission must be provided by the park owner and certified to the city.
8. Accessory Structures: One freestanding accessory structure or storage shed per manufactured home may be permitted in addition to above
mentioned carports or garages. All accessory structures shall conform to applicable building codes. Said structures shall be limited to one hundred
twenty (120) square feet in size.
F. Manufactured Home Park Closings:
1. Purpose And Intent: In view of the peculiar nature and problems associated with the closure or conversion of manufactured home parks, the city
council finds that the public health, safety and general welfare will be promoted by requiring compensation to displaced homeowners and tenants of
such parks. The purpose of this section is to define by whom and in what amount compensation for the park relocation or displacement of a
manufactured home is paid. This section is adopted pursuant to the authority granted under Minnesota statutes 327C.095. The relocation costs
stated in this section are intended to be considered along with all other compensation eligible to the displaced residents. If the park closing falls
under the federal uniform relocation act, the park owner will not be required to reimburse residents' expenses reimbursed under that act.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 180/324
2. Definitions: The following words and terms when used in this section shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
APPURTENANCE: The visible, functional, or ornamental objects accessory to and part of a building.
CLOSURE STATEMENT: A statement prepared by the park owner clearly stating the park is closing, addressing the availability, location, and
potential costs of adequate replacement rental sites within a twenty five (25) mile radius of the manufactured home park that is closing and the
probable relocation costs of the manufactured homes located in the park to other parks within the twenty five (25) mile radius.
DISPLACED RESIDENT: A resident of an owner occupied manufactured home who rents a lot in a manufactured home park, including members of
the resident's household, as of the date the park owner submits a closure statement to the city community development department.
LOT: An area within a manufactured home park, designed and used for the accommodation of a manufactured home.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, not affixed to or part of real estate, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is
eight feet (8') or more in width or forty feet (40') or more in length, or when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical system contained in it.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: Any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which two (2) or more occupied manufactured homes are located, either
free of charge or for compensation, and includes any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment
of the manufactured home park. Also referred to in this section simply as "park".
PARK OWNER: The owner of a manufactured home park and any person acting on behalf of the owner in the operation or management of a
manufactured home park.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, incorporated and unincorporated association or any other legal or commercial entity.
PURCHASER: The person buying the manufactured home park from the park owner. In the event that the park owner intends to retain ownership
and convert the park to a different use, all references to the purchaser refer to the park owner.
RELOCATION COSTS: The reasonable cost of relocating a manufactured home from a manufactured home park within the city that is being closed
or converted to another use to another manufactured home park within a twenty five (25) mile radius of the park, as follows:
a. Preparation For Move: Reasonable costs incurred to prepare the eligible manufactured home for transportation to another site. This category
includes crane services, tire and/or axle rental if needed, and the cost of repairs or modifications that are required in order to take down, move and
set up the manufactured home.
b. Transportation To Another Site: Reasonable costs incurred to transport the eligible manufactured home and any attached appurtenances, such as
porches, decks, skirting and awnings, which were not acquired after notice of closure or conversion of the park to another manufactured home
park within a twenty five (25) mile radius. This category also includes the cost of insuring the manufactured home while the home is in the process
of being relocated, and the cost of obtaining moving permits provided that the park owner shall not be required to pay delinquent taxes on a
manufactured home if necessary in order to obtain a moving permit. This category does not include the cost of moving personal property separate
and distinct from the mobile home and separate and distinct from the appliances and appurtenances of the mobile home.
c. Hookup At New Location:
(1) The reasonable cost of connecting the eligible manufactured home to utilities at the relocation site, including crane services if needed. The
park owner shall not be required to upgrade the electrical or plumbing systems of the manufactured home.
(2) Relocation costs do not include the cost of any repairs or modifications to the manufactured home needed to bring the home into compliance
with the state and federal manufactured home building standards for the year in which the home was constructed. Relocation costs also do not
include the cost of any repairs or modifications to the home or appurtenances into compliance with the rules and regulations of the manufactured
home park to which the manufactured home is to be relocated, if those rules and regulations are no more stringent than the rules and
regulations of the park in which the home is located, and the resident was notified of noncompliance with the rules and regulations of the park in
which it is located within sixty (60) days prior to delivery of the closure statement.
3. Notice Of Closing: If the manufactured home park is to be sold with the intent to convert in whole or in part to another use or the owner of the park
requests and receives rezoning of the property from the city, the park owner shall, at least nine (9) months prior to conversion to another use or sale
to someone with the intent to convert to another use, provide a copy of a closure statement to a resident or each manufactured home and to the city
community development department.
4. Notice Of Public Hearing: The community development department shall schedule a public hearing with the city council. The community
development department shall mail a notice at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing to a resident of each manufactured home in the park
stating the time, place and purpose of the hearing. The park owner shall provide the city with a list of the names and addresses of at least one
resident of each manufactured home in the park at the time the closure statement is submitted to the community development department.
5. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be held before the city council for the purpose of reviewing the closure statement and evaluating what impact
the park closing may have on displaced residents and the park owner. At the public hearing, the city council will take testimony regarding the
reasonableness of the maximum relocation costs to be paid by the park owner and the actual costs to relocate park residents. Based on the
testimony, the city council, at its discretion, may adopt an ordinance increasing or decreasing the maximum total relocation costs as described in
subsection F10 of this section.
6. Conditions Of Closing:
a. As a condition of the closing of the manufactured home park, the park owner shall pay the relocation costs to the contractors providing the
relocation services and/or to displaced residents. If the park owner determines within four (4) months prior to the date of closure of the park that
the park will not be closed, the park owner may rescind the notice of closure and shall pay any actual relocation costs incurred by any of the park's
manufactured home owners. If the park owner determines at least four (4) months prior to the date of closure of the park that the park will not be
closed, the park owner may rescind the notice of closure, and not be liable for any relocation costs.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 181/324
b. Each displaced resident is eligible for an equal share of the maximum total compensation as described in subsection F10 of this section. If a
displaced resident's relocation cost is less than their equal share, then the difference between the equal share and the actual relocation costs of
that household is equally distributed to the displaced residents who have relocation costs in excess of their equal share.
c. The city shall not issue a building permit in conjunction with the reuse of the manufactured home park property unless the park owner has paid the
relocation costs and/or the park purchaser has compensated displaced residents in accordance with the requirements of this section. Approval of
any application for rezoning, platting, conditional use permit, planned unit development or variance in conjunction with a park closing or conversion
shall be conditional on compliance with the requirements of this section.
7. Displaced Resident Statement: Within ninety (90) days of receipt of a closure notice, the displaced resident shall provide the park owner with a
written statement of relocation costs, or in the alternative, a written statement that the resident cannot relocate his or her manufactured home to
another manufactured home park within a twenty five (25) mile radius. If a resident determines not to relocate as defined within this section, the
resident must state whether he or she elects to receive relocation costs under subsection F8 or F9 of this section.
8. Election To Relocate:
a. If a manufactured home can be relocated to another manufactured home park within a twenty five (25) mile radius, the park owner shall pay
displaced residents' "relocation costs" as defined herein.
b. The park owner shall make relocation payments directly to contractors providing the relocation service, or the displaced resident may choose to be
reimbursed by the park owner after the resident submits to the park owner proof of payment of relocation costs. The park owner shall be entitled to
receive adequate documentation of relocation costs, including costs of proposals, invoices, estimates and contacts for relocation services.
c. If a displaced resident cannot relocate the manufactured home within a twenty five (25) mile radius of the park which is being closed or some other
agreed upon distance, and the resident elects not to tender title to the manufactured home, the resident is entitled to relocation costs based upon
an average of relocation costs awarded to other residents in the park.
d. A displaced resident compensated under this section shall retain title to the manufactured home and shall be responsible for its prompt removal
from the manufactured home park. All rent due and owing to the park owner, and all property taxes for the current and prior years shall be paid by
the displaced resident prior to removing the manufactured home from the park.
9. Election To Receive Compensation: If a resident cannot relocate his or her manufactured home to another manufactured home park within a twenty
five (25) mile radius or some other agreed upon distance and tenders title to the manufactured home, the resident is entitled to compensation to be
paid by the purchaser of the park in order to mitigate the adverse financial impact of the park closing. In such instance, the compensation shall be an
amount equal to the estimated market value of the manufactured home as determined by an independent appraiser experienced in manufactured
home appraisal, or the tax assessed value of the manufactured home for the year in which the park is scheduled to close, whichever is greater. The
appraisal shall be conducted only after it is determined that the manufactured home cannot be relocated to another park within twenty five (25) miles.
The purchaser shall pay the cost of the appraisal. The resident shall transfer title of the manufactured home to the park purchaser free and clear of
all liens and encumbrances. All rent due the property owner and all property taxes for the current and prior years shall be paid by displaced residents
prior to the removal of the manufactured home from the park by the park purchaser.
10. Limitation Of Relocation Costs And Compensation: Subject to subsection F5 of this section, the total amount of compensation paid to displaced
owners of manufactured homes shall not exceed the greater of twenty five percent (25%) of the county assessor's estimated market value of the
manufactured home park, as determined by the county assessor for the year in which the park is scheduled to close, or twenty five percent (25%) of
the purchase price of the park. At the public hearing of the park closure, the city council will take testimony regarding the reasonableness of the
maximum relocation costs to be paid by the park owner and the actual costs to relocate park residents. Based on the testimony, the city council, at its
discretion, may adopt an ordinance increasing or decreasing the maximum total relocation costs.
11. Penalty: Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. B-177, 12-5-2006)
11-2-20: TEMPORARY FAMILY HEALTHCARE DWELLINGS:
Pursuant to authority granted by Minnesota statutes, section 462.3593, subdivision 9, the city of Rosemount opts out of the requirements of Minnesota
statutes, section 462.3593, which defines and regulates temporary family healthcare dwellings. (Ord. B-255, 9-6-2016)
Chapter 3
ZONING DISTRICTS
11-3-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS:
For the purpose of this title, the city of Rosemount, Minnesota, is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
AG Agricultural district
AG-P Agricultural preserve district
RR Rural residential district
RL Very low density single-family residential district
R-1 Low density residential district
R-1A Low density residential district
R-2 Moderate density residential district
R-3 Medium density residential district
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 182/324
R-4 High density residential district
C-1 Convenience commercial district
DT Downtown district
C-3 Highway service commercial district
C-4 General commercial district
BP Business park district
LI Light industrial district
GI General industrial district
HI Heavy industrial district
WM Waste management district
P Public and institutional district
FP Floodplain district
IP Industrial park district
(Ord. B, 9-19-1989; amd. Ord. B-25, 2-2-1993; Ord. B-35, 1-25-1994; Ord. B-169, 4-4-2006; Ord. B-174, 10-17-2006; Ord. B-175, 10-17-2006; Ord. B-194,
11-20-2007; Ord. B-211, 1-4-2011)
11-3-2: ZONING DISTRICTS MAP:
The boundaries of these districts are hereby defined and established on a map entitled "zoning map city of Rosemount, Minnesota", dated September 19,
1989, which map and all explanatory matter thereon is hereby made a part of this title. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
11-3-3: INTERPRETATION OF ZONING DISTRICTS MAP:
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any districts indicated on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets or highways shall be construed as following the centerlines of said streets or
highways.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following city boundary lines shall be construed as following such boundaries.
D. Boundaries indicated as approximately following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks.
E. Boundaries indicated as approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets or highways shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such
distance therefrom as indicated on the official zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown
on the official zoning map.
F. Boundaries following the shoreline of a stream, lake or other body of water shall be construed to follow the ordinary high water elevation (OHWE) and in
the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the OHWE.
G. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers, canals or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such
centerlines.
H. Where the application of the aforesaid rules leaves a reasonable doubt as to the boundaries between two (2) districts, the regulations of the more
restrictive district shall govern the entire parcel in question, unless otherwise determined by the board of appeals and adjustments. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
Chapter 4
DISTRICT USE REGULATIONS
11-4-1: AG AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: This district is primarily established to encourage the long term continuation of agricultural and related uses in the city in areas
which are both suitable for agriculture and are not planned for urban development. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 183/324
B. Permitted Uses:
Agriculture, including accessory and related uses.
Commercial greenhouses and landscape nurseries.
Commercial livestock, furbearing animals, and fowl; dairy farming; and commercial horse stables provided:
1. The site shall not be less than twenty (20) acres in size;
2. All structures shall be located a minimum of seventy five feet (75') from all residential property lines.
Essential service facilities.
Keeping of horses, provided:
1. All structures shall be located a minimum of seventy five feet (75') from all residential property lines.
2. Subject to the regulations regarding the care and keeping of horses within the city contained in title 7, chapter 4 of this code.
Single-family detached dwellings, subject to section 11-2-15 of this title. (Ord. B-220, 4-17-2012)
C. Accessory Uses:
Agricultural product stands.
Community gardens, provided the site has an approved conditional use permit (CUP). Community gardens are not permitted with residential uses.
Gazebos and screened porches.
Home occupations, subject to section 11-2-16 of this title.
Private detached garages.
Private outdoor recreation, customarily associated with a residence. Swimming pools shall be subject to section 5-3-1 of this code.
Recreation vehicle storage, subject to section 8-2-5 of this code.
Roof mounted or ground mounted solar energy systems, subject to section 11-2-12 of this title.
Roomers, a maximum of two (2) per dwelling unit.
Signs as regulated by chapter 8 of this title. (Ord. B-220, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014)
D. Conditional Uses: The following uses are conditional uses in the AG District and are subject to the conditional use permit provisions outlined in this title:
AM radio antennas and supporting towers and related accessory structures. This use may be permitted only on properties situated in that part of the
City north and east of State Trunk Highway 55.
Cement or concrete production provided the site has an approved mineral extraction permit in compliance with section 11-10-4, "Small Scale Mineral
Extraction", of this title.
Commercial event centers, subject to:
1. The parcel must be a minimum of five (5) acres in size.
2. Site must be located east of Akron Avenue and south of County Road 42.
3. The property owner and venue operator must be the same individual(s) and the site shall be its primary residence. The operator, or its designee,
must be on the premises for the duration of each event.
4. The maximum number of guests is two hundred (200). A larger number of guests may be approved by the City based on the size of site,
structures, parking availability, and other relevant factors.
5. Outdoor seating areas, where liquor is available shall be located in a controlled or cordoned area acceptable to the City with at least one (1)
opening.
6. Outdoor seating areas where food and/or liquor is available shall be set back twenty feet (20') from property lines and have appropriate
screening to adjacent properties.
7. The hours of operation shall be no later than ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on Sunday through Thursday and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Friday
and Saturday.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 184/324
8. Off street parking shall be provided to accommodate one (1) stall per two (2) guests plus seven (7) stalls. Class 5 gravel surfacing shall be
allowed as long as the property is without access to public sanitary sewer to the site. When public sanitary sewer service becomes available to the
property, the property owner shall surface the parking lot with a blacktop or concrete surface within one (1) year. No vehicle parking is permitted
within or along any public right-of-way.
9. Parking lot setbacks for gravel or surface lots shall be twenty feet (20') from the side and rear property lines and fifty feet (50') from the front
property line.
10. Parking lot shall be screened from neighboring parcels.
11. Lighting shall be provided as necessary for security, safety, and traffic circulation. The level of lighting shall not exceed 0.5 lumen at any
residential property line or 1.0 lumen at any nonresidential property line.
12. A traffic circulation and safety plan, including but not limited to access and signage, shall be reviewed and approved by the City Fire Marshal
and Police Chief.
13. Compliance with all applicable regulations including State Health Code, State building codes, and local liquor licensing requirements. The
operator shall coordinate events and activities with adjoining property owners to ensure appropriate Health and Safety Codes are met.
14. The serving of food and beverages is permitted only in conjunction with an event.
15. Overnight accommodations for guests, including campers, tents, or other recreation vehicles, are prohibited.
16. Sanitary facilities adequate for the number of attendees shall be provided as determined by the City. Portable toilets may be approved for
temporary use and must be screened from view from roads and neighboring properties by landscaping or a wooden enclosure. No portable toilets
shall be located closer than four hundred feet (400') from a neighboring residential structure.
17. Sound amplification systems cannot be used outdoors after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
18. Noise from an event shall not be plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet (50') or more from the property line.
19. Trash enclosures must be provided and meet the standards for the C-4 General Commercial Zoning District.
Commercial outdoor recreation.
Farm wineries, with or without associated event spaces, microbreweries, microdistilleries, winery associated retail and restaurants without drivethrough
facilities, subject to the following:
1. The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of this use on adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. No loading docks or
overhead vehicle doors shall be on a side abutting any public rights-of-way or any residential use or district.
2. The principal building shall be the primary source for screening of the loading area or any required outdoor equipment.
3. All drives, loading and parking areas for the farm winery and associated uses shall be paved with a concrete or bituminous surface including
concrete curbing.
4. Pedestrian circulation between the parking area and the farm winery and associated uses shall be provided through sidewalks at least five feet
(5') in width and paved with concrete, bituminous, pavers or similar hardscape.
5. Outdoor seating is subject to the performance standards outlined for outdoor seating in section 3-1-14 of this Code and subsection 11-4-14D of
this chapter.
Golf courses, including accessory and related uses.
Kennels, provided:
1. The site shall not be less than twenty (20) acres in size.
2. All structures shall be located a minimum of seventy five feet (75') from all residential property lines.
3. Subject to the regulations regarding the care and keeping of animals within the City contained in title 7, chapter 4 of this Code.
Public parks owned and operated by a governmental unit, including recreational facilities and structures consistent with the public area.
Small wireless facilities within right-of-way, subject to the regulations contained in title 4, chapter 2 of this Code.
Transmission facilities greater than one-fourth (1/4) mile in length. (Ord. B-264, 7-31-2017; amd. Ord. B-265, 11-21-2017)
E. Interim Uses:
Community solar gardens or solar farms on properties outside the metropolitan urban service area (MUSA), subject to section 11-2-12 of this title.
Large scale mineral extraction ancillary uses as defined in section 11-10-4-1 of this title.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 185/324
Large scale mineral extraction and related accessory uses within the Large Scale Mineral Extraction Overlay District described in section 11-10-4-1
of this title.
Small scale mineral extraction and related accessory uses within the Small Scale Mineral Extraction Overlay District described in section 11-10-4 of
this title. (Ord. B-223, 5-15-2012; amd. Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014)
F. Minimum Lot Requirements And Setbacks: (See also subsection 11-5-2C, "Supplementary Yard Regulations", of this title.)
1. Minimum lot area: 2.5 acres.
2. Minimum lot width: Three hundred feet (300').
3. Minimum front yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Fifty feet (50').
b. Accessory structure: Fifty feet (50').
c. Surface parking, excluding driveways: Fifty feet (50').
4. Minimum side yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structure: Thirty feet (30').
c. Surface parking, including driveways: Five feet (5').
5. Minimum rear yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structure: Thirty feet (30').
c. Surface parking, excluding driveways: Five feet (5').
6. Maximum gross density: One dwelling unit/forty (40) acres.
7. Maximum building height:
a. Principal structure: Fifty feet (50').
b. Accessory structure: Seventy five feet (75'). (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
11-4-2: AG-P AGRICULTURAL PRESERVE DISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: This district is expressly established to allow landowners to comply with the requirements of the Metropolitan Area Agricultural
Preserves Act, Minnesota Statutes, chapter 473H. (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
B. Permitted Uses:
Agriculture, including accessory and related uses.
Commercial livestock, furbearing animals, and fowl; dairy farming; and commercial horse stables provided:
1. The site shall not be less than twenty (20) acres in size;
2. All structures shall be located a minimum of seventy five feet (75') from all residential property lines.
3. Subject to the regulations regarding the care and keeping of horses within the City in title 7, chapter 4 of this Code.
Essential service facilities.
Keeping of horses, provided:
1. All structures shall be located a minimum of seventy five feet (75') from all residential property lines.
2. The maximum number of horses shall not exceed one per two (2) acres. Subject to the regulations regarding the care and keeping of horses
within the City in title 7, chapter 4 of this Code.
Single-family detached dwellings, subject to section 11-2-15 of this title.
C. Accessory Uses:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 186/324
Agricultural product stands.
Community gardens, provided the site has an approved conditional use permit (CUP). Community gardens are not permitted with residential uses.
Gazebos and screened porches.
Home occupations, subject to section 11-2-16 of this title.
Private detached garages.
Private outdoor recreation, customarily associated with a residence. Swimming pools shall be subject to section 5-3-1 of this Code.
Recreation vehicle storage, subject to section 8-2-5 of this Code.
Roomers, a maximum of two (2) per dwelling unit.
Satellite dishes and solar collectors, subject to section 11-2-12 of this title.
Signs as regulated by chapter 8 of this title. (Ord. B-220, 4-17-2012)
D. Conditional Uses:
Public parks, owned and operated by a governmental unit, including recreational facilities and structures consistent with the public area.
Small wireless facilities within right-of-way, subject to the regulations contained in title 4, chapter 2 of this Code.
Transmission facilities greater than one-fourth (1/4) mile in length. (Ord. B-220, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. B-265, 11-21-2017)
E. Uses Permitted By PUD:
None.
F. Minimum Lot Requirements And Setbacks: (See also subsection 11-5-2C, "Supplementary Yard Regulations", of this title.)
1. Minimum lot area: Forty (40) acres.
2. Minimum lot width: Three hundred feet (300').
3. Minimum front yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Fifty feet (50').
b. Accessory structure: Fifty feet (50').
c. Surface parking, excluding driveways: Fifty feet (50').
4. Minimum side yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structure: Thirty feet (30').
c. Surface parking, excluding driveways: Five feet (5').
5. Minimum rear yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structure: Thirty feet (30').
c. Surface parking, excluding driveways: Five feet (5').
6. Maximum gross density: One dwelling unit/forty (40) acres.
7. Maximum building height:
a. Principal structure: Fifty feet (50').
b. Accessory structure: Seventy five feet (75'). (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
11-4-3: RR RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: It is the purpose of this district to provide for a large lot rural residential lifestyle which is separate from and not in conflict with
commercial agricultural activities. Within these districts, public sewer and water systems are not available and on site systems shall meet the City's
minimum requirements. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 187/324
B. Permitted Uses:
Commercial horse stables, provided:
1. Lot is not less than twenty (20) acres;
2. All structures shall be located a minimum of seventy five feet (75') from all residential property lines.
3. Subject to the regulations regarding the care and keeping of horses within the City contained in title 7, chapter 4 of this Code.
Essential service facilities except electrical substations and switching substations.
Keeping of horses, provided:
1. All structures shall be located a minimum of seventy five feet (75') from all residential property lines.
2. The maximum number of horses shall not exceed one per two (2) acres. Subject to the regulations regarding the care and keeping of horses
within the City contained in title 7, chapter 4 of this Code.
Single-family detached dwellings, subject to section 11-2-15 of this title. (Ord. B-220, 4-17-2012)
C. Accessory Uses:
Community gardens, provided the site has an approved conditional use permit (CUP). Community gardens are not permitted with residential uses.
Construction office, temporary.
Gazebos and screened porches.
Home occupations, subject to section 11-2-16 of this title.
Private detached garages.
Private outdoor recreation, customarily associated with a residence. Swimming pools subject to section 5-3-1 of this Code.
Recreation vehicle storage, subject to section 8-2-5 of this Code.
Roof mounted or ground mounted solar energy systems, subject to section 11-2-12 of this title.
Roomers, a maximum of two (2) per dwelling unit.
Sales office, temporary.
Signs as regulated by chapter 8 of this title. (Ord. B-220, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014)
D. Conditional Uses:
Churches and places of worship regardless of religious affiliation subject to the following restrictions:
1. The property is designated "TR Transitional Residential" within the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan.
2. The property must have direct access onto an arterial street or access to a local street within five hundred feet (500') of the local street's
intersection with an arterial street.
3. No ancillary uses, including, but not limited to, daycare, Montessori schools, and nurseries occurring separately from the religious service, are
allowed at the church or place of worship.
4. Site and building standards for a church or place of worship shall be greater than the surrounding residences to mitigate the greater scale and
intensity of this use. Site and building standards in subsections 11-4-14G1 and G3 through G7 of this chapter shall apply.
5. Landscaping standards for a church or place of worship shall be greater than the surrounding residences to mitigate the greater scale and
intensity of this use and may require extensive boundary and foundation plantings to buffer the surrounding residences. The minimum landscaping
requirement for churches and places of worship shall be the standards of the C-4 General Commercial Zoning District.
6. The maximum lot coverage for churches and places of worship shall be thirty percent (30%).
Commercial greenhouses and landscape nurseries.
Golf courses, including accessory and related uses.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 188/324
Kennels, provided:
1. The site shall not be less than twenty (20) acres in size.
2. All structures shall be located a minimum of seventy five feet (75') from all residential property lines.
3. No outdoor keeping of animals or dog runs shall be permitted.
4. Subject to the regulations regarding the care and keeping of animals within the City contained in title 7, chapter 4 of this Code.
Public parks, owned and operated by a governmental unit, including recreational structures and facilities.
Small wireless facilities within right-of-way, subject to the regulations contained in title 4, chapter 2 of this Code.
Transmission facilities greater than one-fourth (1/4) mile in length. (Ord. B-220, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. B-265, 11-21-2017)
E. Uses Permitted By PUD:
None.
F. Minimum Lot Requirements And Setbacks: (See also subsection 11-5-2C, "Supplementary Yard Regulations", of this title.)
1. Minimum lot area:
a. Platted land: 2.5 acres.
b. Unplatted land: Five (5) acres.
2. Minimum lot width:
a. Platted land: Two hundred feet (200').
b. Unplatted land: Three hundred feet (300').
3. Minimum front yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Forty feet (40').
b. Accessory structure: Forty feet (40').
c. Surface parking, excluding driveways: Forty feet (40').
4. Minimum side yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structure: Thirty feet (30').
c. Surface parking, including driveways: Five feet (5').
5. Minimum rear yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structure: Thirty feet (30').
c. Surface parking, excluding driveways: Five feet (5').
6. Maximum gross density: One dwelling unit/five (5) acres.
7. Maximum building height:
a. Principal structure: Thirty five feet (35').
b. Accessory structure: Thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
11-4-4: RL VERY LOW DENSITY SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: The purpose of this district is to allow low density residential development within the metropolitan urban service area while
minimizing negative environmental impacts on areas with greatest physical amenities (rolling topography, forest, wildlife habitat, water bodies). Singlefamily
detached dwelling cluster development will be encouraged as a tool to protect unique physical features and restrict development to the most
suitable locations. The twenty thousand (20,000) square foot minimum lot size will accommodate larger homes than the R-1 (10,000 square foot
minimum lot size) District, will mandate increased structure separation and will allow for more selective siting of homes. The lower maximum density of
one dwelling unit per acre will result in preservation of natural amenities within the context of providing urban services.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 189/324
B. Permitted Uses:
Essential service facilities except electrical substations and switching stations.
Licensed child daycare, for twelve (12) or fewer persons. Unlicensed facilities subject to the requirements of customary home occupations in section
11-2-16 of this title.
Residential facilities, licensed by the State of Minnesota, serving six (6) or fewer persons.
Single-family detached dwellings, subject to section 11-2-15 of this title. (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
C. Accessory Uses:
Construction office, temporary.
Gazebos and screened porches.
Home occupations, subject to section 11-2-16 of this title.
Private detached garages.
Private outdoor recreation, customarily associated with a residence. Swimming pools subject to section 5-3-1 of this Code.
Recreation vehicle storage, subject to section 8-2-5 of this Code.
Roof mounted or ground mounted solar energy systems, subject to section 11-2-12 of this title.
Roomers, a maximum of two (2) per dwelling unit.
Sales office, temporary. (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997; amd. Ord. B-141, 7-20-2004; Ord. B-145, 11-3-2004; Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014)
D. Conditional Uses:
Golf courses, including accessory and related uses.
Public parks, owned and operated by a governmental unit, including recreational facilities and structures consistent with the public area.
Small wireless facilities within right-of-way, subject to the regulations contained in title 4, chapter 2 of this Code.
Transmission facilities greater than one-fourth (1/4) mile in length. (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997; amd. Ord. B-265, 11-21-2017)
E. Uses Permitted By PUD:
Single-family detached dwelling cluster developments with a net density up to 2.5 dwelling units per acre in concentrations of residential units
intended to minimize impact on ponds, lakes, wetlands, woodlands, floodplains, significant trees and woodlands, steep slopes and other natural or
unique features elsewhere in the district. Such areas may be included within conservation easements or other forms of public or private open space.
All developments including common open space are required to have homeowners' associations in accordance with subsection 11-2-18N of this title.
F. Minimum Lot Requirements And Setbacks: (See also subsection 11-5-2C, "Supplementary Yard Regulations", of this title.)
1. Minimum lot area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width: One hundred ten feet (110').
3. Minimum lot depth: One hundred eighty feet (180').
4. Minimum front yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structure: Thirty feet (30').
c. Surface parking, excluding driveways: Thirty feet (30').
5. Minimum side yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Fifteen feet (15').
b. Accessory structure: Fifteen feet (15').
c. Surface parking, including driveways: Fifteen feet (15').
6. Minimum rear yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Thirty feet (30').
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 190/324
b. Accessory structure:
(1) One hundred twenty (120) square feet or less: Fifteen feet (15').
(2) Larger than one hundred twenty (120) square feet: Thirty feet (30').
c. Surface parking, excluding driveways: Five feet (5').
7. Maximum gross density: One dwelling unit/acre.
8. Maximum building height:
a. Principal structure: Thirty five feet (35').
b. Accessory structure: Eighteen feet (18').
9. Maximum lot coverage: Thirty percent (30%). (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
11-4-5: R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: This is a low density residential district that is intended to accommodate newer single-family detached housing development within
the metropolitan urban service area. Dwelling units within this district are intended to be connected to the public sewer and water systems. (Ord. B-22,
9-24-1992; amd. Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
B. Permitted Uses:
Essential service facilities except electrical substations and switching stations.
Licensed child daycare for twelve (12) or fewer persons. Unlicensed child daycare shall comply with the requirements for customary home
occupations in section 11-2-16 of this title.
Residential facilities, licensed by the State of Minnesota, serving six (6) or fewer persons.
Single-family detached dwellings, subject to section 11-2-15 of this title. (Ord. B-220, 4-17-2012)
C. Accessory Uses:
Cemeteries, accessory to churches or places of worship.
Community gardens, provided the site has an approved conditional use permit (CUP). Community gardens are not permitted with residential uses.
Construction office, temporary.
Gazebos and screened porches.
Home occupations, subject to section 11-2-16 of this title.
Private detached garages.
Private outdoor recreation customarily associated with a residence. Swimming pools shall be subject to section 5-3-1 of this Code.
Recreation vehicle storage, subject to section 8-2-5 of this Code.
Roof mounted or ground mounted solar energy systems, subject to section 11-2-12 of this title.
Roomers, a maximum of two (2) per dwelling unit.
Sales office, temporary.
Signs as regulated by chapter 8 of this title. (Ord. B-220, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014)
D. Conditional Uses: The following uses are conditional uses in the R-1 District and subject to the minimum lot requirements and setbacks in subsection
11-4-18F of this chapter (except minimum lot area), the site and building standards in subsection 11-4-18G of this chapter and the conditional use
permit standards in section 11-10-7 of this title:
Child daycares, Montessori, or nursery facilities within a church, place of worship, or school.
Churches and places of worship regardless of religious affiliation.
1. The property must have direct access onto an arterial or collector street or access to a local street within five hundred feet (500') of the local
street's intersection with an arterial or collector street.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 191/324
Elementary and middle or special needs schools.
Golf courses.
Public parks, owned and operated by a governmental unit, including recreational facilities and structures consistent with the public area.
Small wireless facilities within right-of-way, subject to the regulations contained in title 4, chapter 2 of this Code.
Transmission facilities greater than one-fourth (1/4) mile in length.
Other uses similar to those listed in this subsection as determined by the Board of Appeals and Adjustments and approved by the City Council,
subject to issuance of a conditional use permit. (Ord. B-220, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. B-265, 11-21-2017)
E. Uses Permitted By PUD:
Single-family detached dwelling cluster developments. All developments including common open space are required to have homeowners'
associations in accordance with subsection 11-2-18N of this title.
F. Minimum Lot Requirements And Setbacks: (See also subsection 11-5-2C, "Supplementary Yard Regulations", of this title.)
1. Minimum lot area:
a. Interior lots: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
b. Corner lots: Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width:
a. Interior lots: Eighty feet (80').
b. Corner lots: Ninety five feet (95').
3. Minimum lot depth: One hundred twenty five feet (125').
4. Minimum front yard setback:
a. Principal structure, including garage: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structure: Thirty feet (30').
c. Established principal and accessory structures: Where forty percent (40%) or more of the lots on any block are developed with buildings, if the
average front yard is less than the required front yard, the average or twenty feet (20'), whichever is greater, shall be the required front yard.
5. Minimum side yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Ten feet (10').
b. Accessory structure: Ten feet (10'). (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
c. Surface parking, including driveways: Five feet (5'). (Ord. B-114, 3-6-2001)
6. Minimum rear yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structure:
(1) One hundred twenty (120) square feet or less: Five feet (5').
(2) Larger than one hundred twenty (120) square feet: Thirty feet (30'). (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
c. Surface parking, excluding driveways: Five feet (5'). (Ord. B-114, 3-6-2001)
7. Maximum gross density: 2.5 dwelling units/acre.
8. Maximum building height:
a. Principal structure: Thirty five feet (35').
b. Accessory structure: Eighteen feet (18').
9. Maximum lot coverage: Thirty percent (30%). (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
11-4-6: R-1A LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: This is a low density residential district that is intended to preserve the character of existing single-family neighborhoods platted on
or before 1979 within the metropolitan urban service area. Dwelling units within this district are intended to be connected to the public sewer and water
systems. (Ord. B-22, 9-24-1992)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 192/324
B. Permitted Uses:
Essential service facilities except electrical substations and switching stations.
Licensed child daycare for twelve (12) or fewer persons. Unlicensed child daycare shall comply with the requirements for customary home
occupations in section 11-2-16 of this title.
Residential facilities, licensed by the State of Minnesota, serving six (6) or fewer persons.
Single-family detached dwellings, subject to section 11-2-15 of this title. (Ord. B-220, 4-17-2012)
C. Accessory Uses:
Community gardens, provided the site has an approved conditional use permit (CUP). Community gardens are not permitted with residential uses.
Construction office, temporary.
Gazebos and screened porches.
Home occupations, subject to section 11-2-16 of this title.
Private detached garages.
Private outdoor recreation customarily associated with a residence. Swimming pools shall be subject to section 5-3-1 of this Code.
Recreation vehicle storage, subject to section 8-2-5 of this Code.
Roof mounted or ground mounted solar energy systems, subject to section 11-2-12 of this title.
Roomers, a maximum of two (2) per dwelling unit.
Sales office, temporary.
Signs as regulated by chapter 8 of this title. (Ord. B-220, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014)
D. Conditional Uses: The following uses are conditional uses in the R-1A District and subject to the minimum lot requirements and setbacks in subsection
11-4-18F of this chapter (except minimum lot area), the site and building standards in subsection 11-4-18G of this chapter and the conditional use
permit standards in section 11-10-7 of this title:
Child daycares, Montessori, or nursery facilities within a church, place of worship, or school.
Churches and places of worship regardless of religious affiliation.
1. The property must have direct access onto an arterial or collector street or access to a local street within five hundred feet (500') of the local
street's intersection with an arterial or collector street.
Elementary and middle or special needs schools.
Public parks, owned and operated by a governmental unit, including recreational facilities and structures consistent with the public area.
Small wireless facilities within right-of-way, subject to the regulations contained in title 4, chapter 2 of this Code.
Transmission facilities greater than one-fourth (1/4) mile in length.
Other uses similar to those listed in this subsection as determined by the Board of Appeals and Adjustments and approved by the City Council,
subject to issuance of a conditional use permit. (Ord. B-220, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. B-265, 11-21-2017)
E. Uses Permitted By PUD:
Single-family detached dwelling cluster developments. All developments including common open space are required to have homeowners'
associations in accordance with subsection 11-2-18N of this title.
F. Minimum Lot Requirements And Setbacks: (See also subsection 11-5-2C, "Supplementary Yard Regulations", of this title.)
1. Minimum lot area:
a. Interior lots: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
b. Corner lots: Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 193/324
a. Interior lots: Eighty feet (80').
b. Corner lots: Ninety five feet (95').
3. Minimum lot depth: One hundred twenty five feet (125').
4. Minimum front yard setback:
a. New principal structure, including garage: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structure: Thirty feet (30').
c. Established principal and accessory structures: Where forty percent (40%) or more of the lots on the same side of the block where the structure is
located are developed with buildings, if the average front yard is less than the required front yard, the average or twenty feet (20'), whichever is
greater, shall be the minimum required front yard.
5. Minimum side yard setback:
a. Principal structure, including garage:
(1) Single story: Five feet (5').
(2) Two-story: Ten feet (10').
b. Accessory structure: Five feet (5'). (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
c. Surface parking, including driveways: Five feet (5'). (Ord. B-114, 2-6-2001)
6. Minimum rear yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Twenty five feet (25').
b. Accessory structure:
(1) One hundred twenty (120) square feet or less: Five feet (5').
(2) Larger than one hundred twenty (120) square feet: Twenty five feet (25'). (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
c. Surface parking, excluding driveways: Five feet (5'). (Ord. B-114, 3-6-2001)
7. Maximum gross density: 2.5 dwelling units/acre.
8. Maximum building height:
a. Principal structure: Thirty five feet (35').
b. Accessory structure: Eighteen feet (18').
9. Maximum lot coverage: Thirty percent (30%). (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
11-4-7: R-2 MODERATE DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: This is a low to medium density residential district which is located within the metropolitan urban service area and is primarily, but
not exclusively, intended to accommodate attached single-family dwellings. Dwelling units within this district are intended to be connected to the public
sewer and water systems. (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
B. Permitted Uses:
Essential service facilities except electrical substations and switching stations.
Licensed child daycare for twelve (12) or fewer persons. Unlicensed child daycare shall comply with the requirements for customary home
occupations in section 11-2-16 of this title.
Residential facilities, licensed by the State of Minnesota, serving six (6) or fewer persons.
Single-family attached dwellings, subject to section 11-2-18 of this title.
Single-family detached dwellings, subject to section 11-2-15 of this title.
Two-family dwellings. (Ord. B-220, 4-17-2012)
C. Accessory Uses:
Cemeteries accessory to churches or places of worship.
Community gardens, provided the site has an approved conditional use permit (CUP). Community gardens are not permitted with residential uses.
Construction office, temporary.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 194/324
Gazebos and screened porches.
Home occupations, subject to section 11-2-16 of this title.
Private detached garages.
Private outdoor recreation customarily associated with a residence. Swimming pools shall be subject to section 5-3-1 of this Code.
Roof mounted or ground mounted solar energy systems, subject to section 11-2-12 of this title.
Roomers, a maximum of two (2) per dwelling unit.
Sales office, temporary.
Signs as regulated by chapter 8 of this title. (Ord. B-220, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014)
D. Conditional Uses: The following uses are conditional uses in the R-2 District and subject to the minimum lot requirements and setbacks in subsection
11-4-18F of this chapter (except minimum lot area), the site and building standards in subsection 11-4-18G of this chapter and the conditional use
permit standards in section 11-10-7 of this title:
Child daycares, Montessori, or nursery facilities within a church, place of worship, or school.
Churches and places of worship regardless of religious affiliation.
1. The property must have direct access onto an arterial or collector street or access to a local street within five hundred feet (500') of the local
street's intersection with an arterial or collector street.
Elementary and middle or special needs schools.
Public parks, owned and operated by a government unit, including recreational facilities and structures consistent with the public area.
Recreation vehicle storage. Recreation vehicle storage accessory to multiple-family development shall be subject to subsection 11-4-8D of this
chapter.
Small wireless facilities within right-of-way, subject to the regulations contained in title 4, chapter 2 of this Code.
Transmission facilities greater than one-fourth (1/4) mile in length.
Other uses similar to those listed in this subsection as determined by the Board of Appeals and Adjustments and approved by the City Council,
subject to issuance of a conditional use permit. (Ord. B-220, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. B-265, 11-21-2017)
E. Uses Permitted By PUD:
Manufactured home parks, subject to section 11-2-19 of this title.
Mixed use developments.
Single-family detached dwelling cluster developments.
F. Minimum Lot Requirements And Setbacks: (See also subsection 11-5-2C, "Supplementary Yard Regulations", of this title.)
1. Minimum lot area:
a. Single- and two-family: Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
b. Multiple-family, including townhomes: Eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width:
a. Single- and two-family: One hundred feet (100').
b. Multiple-family, including townhomes: One hundred twenty feet (120').
3. Minimum lot depth:
a. Single- and two-family: One hundred twenty feet (120').
b. Multiple-family, including townhomes: One hundred fifty feet (150').
4. Minimum front yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structure: Thirty feet (30').
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 195/324
c. Surface parking, excluding single- and two-family driveways: Thirty feet (30').
d. Established principal and accessory structures: Where forty percent (40%) or more of the lots on the same side of the block where the structure is
located are developed with buildings, if the average front yard is less than the required front yard, the average or twenty feet (20'), whichever is
greater, shall be the minimum required front yard.
5. Minimum side yard setback:
a. Principal structure:
(1) Single-family and two-family: Ten feet (10').
(2) Multiple-family, including townhomes: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structure: Ten feet (10').
c. Surface parking:
(1) Single- and two-family, including driveways: Five feet (5').
(2) Multiple-family, including townhomes: Ten feet (10').
6. Minimum rear yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structure:
(1) Single- and two-family:
(A) One hundred twenty (120) square feet or less: Five feet (5').
(B) Larger than one hundred twenty (120) square feet: Thirty feet (30').
(2) Multiple-family, including townhomes: Ten feet (10').
c. Surface parking:
(1) Single- and two-family, excluding driveways: Five feet (5').
(2) Multiple-family, including townhomes: Ten feet (10').
7. Maximum gross density: Six (6) dwelling units/acre.
8. Maximum building height:
a. Principal structure: Thirty five feet (35').
b. Accessory structure: Eighteen feet (18').
9. Maximum lot coverage:
a. Two-family dwellings: Thirty percent (30%).
b. Single-family detached dwellings: Forty percent (40%).
c. Single-family attached dwellings: Seventy percent (70%). (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
11-4-8: R-3 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: This is a medium to high density residential district which is intended to be located within or near the Rosemount Central Business
District (CBD) where streets and utilities are sufficient in capacity to accommodate higher density development and where shopping and recreational
facilities are available within close walking or driving distance. Housing types include apartments, condominiums and townhouses. It is intended that
this district provide a blend of housing, recreation and open space opportunities. (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
B. Permitted Uses:
Apartments.
Assisted living care facilities.
Condominiums.
Congregate housing.
Essential service facilities except electrical substations and switching stations.
Licensed child daycare for twelve (12) or fewer persons. Unlicensed child daycare shall comply with the requirements for customary home
occupations in section 11-2-16 of this title.
Nursing and retirement homes.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 196/324
Residential facilities, licensed by the State of Minnesota, for six (6) or fewer persons.
Single-family attached dwellings, subject to section 11-2-18 of this title.
Two-family dwellings. (Ord. B-220, 4-17-2012)
C. Accessory Uses:
Cemeteries, accessory to churches or places of worship.
Community gardens, provided the site has an approved conditional use permit (CUP). Community gardens are not permitted with residential uses.
Construction office, temporary.
Gazebos and screened porches.
Home occupations, subject to section 11-2-16 of this title.
Private outdoor recreation, customarily associated with a multiple-family development, provided:
1. They are no nearer the front lot line than the principal structure;
2. They are set back from lot lines the distance required for accessory structures.
3. Swimming pools shall be subject to section 5-3-1 of this Code.
Roof mounted or ground mounted solar energy systems, subject to section 11-2-12 of this title.
Roomers, at a maximum of two (2) per dwelling unit.
Sales office, temporary.
Signs as regulated by chapter 8 of this title. (Ord. B-220, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014)
D. Conditional Uses: The following uses are conditional uses in the R-3 District and subject to the minimum lot requirements and setbacks in subsection
11-4-18F of this chapter (except minimum lot area), the site and building standards in subsection 11-4-18G of this chapter and the conditional use
permit standards in section 11-10-7 of this title:
Child daycares, Montessori, or nursery facilities within a church, place of worship, or school.
Churches and places of worship regardless of religious affiliation.
1. The property must have direct access onto an arterial or collector street or access to a local street within five hundred feet (500') of the local
street's intersection with an arterial or collector street.
Elementary and middle or special needs schools.
Public parks, owned and operated by a governmental unit, including recreational facilities and structures consistent with the public area.
Recreation vehicle storage accessory to the multiple-family development, provided all storage shall be within a building or a central storage area, or
be subject to the following requirements:
1. Outdoor storage shall not be within a required yard.
2. If not stored within a building, the storage area shall be screened from view as required by subsection 8-2-5G1 of this Code.
3. Temporary storage of oversize recreation vehicles is allowed pursuant to a permit under subsection 8-2-5F of this Code.
Small wireless facilities within right-of-way, subject to the regulations contained in title 4, chapter 2 of this Code.
Transmission facilities greater than one-fourth (1/4) mile in length.
Other uses similar to those listed in this subsection as determined by the Board of Appeals and Adjustments and approved by the City Council,
subject to issuance of a conditional use permit. (Ord. B-220, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. B-265, 11-21-2017)
E. Uses Permitted By PUD:
Manufactured home parks, subject to the requirements of section 11-2-19 of this title.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 197/324
Mixed use developments.
F. Minimum Lot Requirements And Setbacks: (See also subsection 11-5-2C, "Supplementary Yard Regulations", of this title.)
1. Minimum lot area: Twenty two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width: One hundred fifty feet (150').
3. Minimum lot depth: One hundred fifty feet (150').
4. Minimum front yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structure: Thirty feet (30').
c. Surface parking: Thirty feet (30').
d. Established principal and accessory structures: Where forty percent (40%) or more of the lots on the same side of the block where the structure is
located are developed with buildings, if the average front yard is less than the required front yard, the average or twenty feet (20'), whichever is
greater, shall be the minimum required front yard.
5. Minimum side yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structure: Ten feet (10').
c. Surface parking: Ten feet (10').
6. Minimum rear yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structure: Ten feet (10').
c. Surface parking: Ten feet (10').
7. Maximum gross density: Twelve (12) dwelling units/acre.
8. Maximum building height:
a. Principal structure: Thirty five feet (35').
b. Accessory structure: Eighteen feet (18').
9. Maximum lot coverage: Seventy five percent (75%).
10. GUOS per unit: Five hundred (500) square feet. (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
11-4-9: R-4 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: This is an exclusively high density residential district which is primarily intended to accommodate high rise apartments and condos
and senior citizen housing. It is the intent of this title that this district be within or adjacent to the Rosemount CBD to provide for the maximum
convenience and accessibility for residents. (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
B. Permitted Uses:
Apartments.
Assisted living care facilities.
Condominiums.
Congregate housing.
Essential service facilities except electrical substations and switching stations.
Licensed child daycare for twelve (12) or fewer persons.
Nursing and retirement homes.
Residential facilities, licensed by the State of Minnesota, for six (6) or fewer persons. (Ord. B-220, 4-17-2012)
C. Accessory Uses:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 198/324
Cemeteries accessory to churches or places of worship.
Community gardens, provided the site has an approved conditional use permit (CUP). Community gardens are not permitted with residential uses.
Construction office, temporary.
Gazebos and screened porches.
Home occupations, subject to section 11-2-16 of this title.
Private outdoor recreation, customarily associated with a multiple-family development, provided:
1. They are no nearer the front lot line than the principal structure;
2. They are set back from lot lines the distance required for accessory structures.
3. Swimming pools shall be subject to section 5-3-1 of this Code.
Roof mounted or ground mounted solar energy systems, subject to section 11-2-12 of this title.
Sales office, temporary.
Signs as regulated by chapter 8 of this title. (Ord. B-220, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014)
D. Conditional Uses: The following uses are conditional uses in the R-4 District and subject to the minimum lot requirements and setbacks in subsection
11-4-18F of this chapter (except minimum lot area), the site and building standards in subsection 11-4-18G of this chapter and the conditional use
permit standards in section 11-10-7 of this title:
Child daycares, Montessori, or nursery facilities within a church, place of worship, or school.
Churches and places of worship regardless of religious affiliation.
1. The property must have direct access onto an arterial or collector street or access to a local street within five hundred feet (500') of the local
street's intersection with an arterial or collector street.
Elementary and middle or special needs schools.
Public parks owned and operated by a government unit, including recreational facilities and structures.
Small wireless facilities within right-of-way, subject to the regulations contained in title 4, chapter 2 of this Code.
Transmission facilities greater than one-fourth (1/4) mile in length.
Other uses similar to those listed in this subsection as determined by the Board of Appeals and Adjustments and approved by the City Council,
subject to issuance of a conditional use permit. (Ord. B-220, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. B-265, 11-21-2017)
E. Uses Permitted By PUD:
Manufactured home parks, subject to the requirements of section 11-2-19 of this title.
Mixed use developments.
F. Minimum Lot Requirements And Setbacks: (See also subsection 11-5-2C, "Supplementary Yard Regulations", of this title.)
1. Minimum lot area: Twenty two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width: One hundred fifty feet (150').
3. Minimum lot depth: One hundred fifty feet (150').
4. Minimum front yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structure: Fifty feet (50').
c. Surface parking: Thirty feet (30').
5. Minimum side yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structure: Ten feet (10').
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 199/324
c. Surface parking: Ten feet (10').
6. Minimum rear yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structure: Ten feet (10').
c. Surface parking: Ten feet (10').
7. Maximum gross density: Forty (40) dwelling units/acre.
8. Maximum building height:
a. Principal structure: Thirty five feet (35').
b. Accessory structure: Eighteen feet (18').
9. Maximum lot coverage: Seventy five percent (75%).
10. GUOS per unit: Five hundred (500) square feet. (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
11-4-10: C-1 CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: The purpose of the Convenience Commercial District is to provide residential neighborhoods with convenience shopping and
personal services that could serve the daily and weekly needs of the adjoining residents. Convenience Commercial Districts typically occupy a small
area at the intersection of two (2) collector streets, or streets of higher classification, and provide a gateway into the neighborhood. These convenience
commercial centers are meant to provide services and goods only for the surrounding neighborhoods and are not intended to serve the entire
community. Zoning standards are intended to promote compatibility in form, function and style. The district is intended to be compatible within a
residential neighborhood context. Therefore, the number of permitted uses is limited and the scale of uses is comparatively small. (Ord. B-208, 12-21-
2010)
B. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted uses in the C-1 District:
Essential service facilities.
Personal services no larger than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, including barber and beauty shops, fitness centers, laundry services, shoe
repair, photography and video rental excluding funeral service and crematory facilities, massage, body piercing, tattoo and pawn shops.
Professional services and offices no larger than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, including architects and attorney offices, dental and medical
clinics, financial services, insurance providers, real estate businesses and the like.
Retail sales no larger than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, including automobile parts, books and stationery, clothing, drug, gifts and novelties,
groceries, furniture and hardware, hobby, video sales, jewelry, and sporting goods stores or the like. Automobile sales, new or used, and off-sale
liquor are prohibited.
Small wireless facilities within right-of-way, subject to the regulations contained in title 4, chapter 2 of this Code. (Ord. B-208, 12-21-2010; amd. Ord.
B-265, 11-21-2017)
C. Accessory Uses: The following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:
Accessory apartments provided they are located above the first floor.
Construction office, temporary.
Fences as regulated by this title.
Off street parking as regulated by this title, but not including semitrailer trucks.
Outdoor display/sales and storage. Outdoor display/storage or sales of goods shall be allowed on the private sidewalk immediately in front of the
principal building, provided that:
1. The outdoor display/storage or sales area shall not block a handicap accessible route and shall maintain a minimum four foot (4') clearance for
pedestrian access.
2. The outdoor display/storage or sales area does not exceed four feet (4') in height and is maintained in an orderly fashion.
3. No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district.
4. Outdoor display/storage or sales shall only be conducted by the owner or lessee of the premises.
5. Only merchandise that is normally manufactured, sold, or stored by the occupant on the premises shall be sold and/or promoted.
Roof mounted or ground mounted solar energy systems, subject to section 11-2-12 of this title.
Signs as regulated by this title. (Ord. B-208, 12-21-2010; amd. Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 200/324
D. Conditional Uses: The following uses are conditional uses in the C-1 District, and are subject to the conditional use permit provisions outlined in this
title:
Child daycare services.
1. Licensed daycare facilities must meet the following conditions:
a. Pick up and drop off areas shall be located on the site, and shall be designed to avoid interfering with traffic and pedestrian movements.
b. Outdoor recreational area shall be located and designed in a manner which mitigates visual and noise impacts on any abutting residential
parcels.
c. Such facilities shall obtain all applicable State, County, and City licenses.
Eating and drinking establishment as part of multi-tenant or mixed use building. These establishments include such places as restaurants and
cafeterias and places for the sale and consumption of soft drinks, juices, ice cream and beverages of all kinds, provided the following conditions are
met:
1. The gross floor area of the restaurant shall not exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet.
2. Drive-up window service or exterior loudspeakers shall not be permitted.
Educational services excluding elementary and secondary schools, as part of a multi-tenant or mixed use building, including arts and crafts, dance
and music instruction and self-defense and similar individual or small group educational services.
Multiple parcels, tenants, buildings provided that the uses are specified as permitted accessory or conditional uses in the C-1 District.
Nonservice motor fuel stations, subject to the standards listed in the C-3 District. Vehicle repair is prohibited.
Outdoor seating or dining, subject to the following:
1. The site and enclosure(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of outdoor seating or dining areas on contiguous properties and/or public rightsof-
way.
2. The seating area shall be located on private property along the front, side or rear of the principal building but shall not be located within a
required setback or on the side abutting any residential use or district.
3. The seating area shall not interfere with circulation in any required parking, loading, maneuvering or pedestrian area. A minimum four foot (4')
passageway shall be maintained along the private sidewalk for pedestrians.
4. The seating area shall be located in a controlled or cordoned area acceptable to the City with at least one opening to an acceptable pedestrian
walk.
5. When a liquor license is granted, an uninterrupted enclosure is required and the enclosure shall only have access through the principal building.
6. The seating area shall not be permitted within two hundred feet (200') of any residential use or district as measured at the property line and shall
be separated from residential use or district by the principal structure or other method of screening acceptable to the City. The minimum distance
from a residential use or district may be reduced should the City determine the applicant has added sufficient elements to reduce the impact of this
use.
7. No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district.
Teen center.
1. Outdoor recreational areas shall be located and designed in a manner that mitigates visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas.
2. Recreational areas shall be designed to avoid interfering with traffic and pedestrian movements.
3. Such facilities shall adhere to City curfews.
4. Bicycle parking spaces must be provided and shall be located in a clearly designated, safe and convenient location. (Ord. B-208, 12-21-2010;
amd. Ord. B-248, 7-21-2015)
E. Interim Uses:
1. Those interim uses listed in the C-3 Highway Commercial District.
F. Minimum Lot Requirements And Setbacks:
1. Minimum lot area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 201/324
2. Minimum lot width: One hundred fifty feet (150').
3. Minimum lot depth: One hundred twenty five feet (125').
4. Maximum lot coverage: Seventy five percent (75%).
5. Minimum front yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structure: Thirty feet (30').
6. Minimum side yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Ten feet (10').
b. Accessory structure: Ten feet (10').
7. Minimum rear yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Ten feet (10').
b. Accessory structure: Ten feet (10').
8. Parking setbacks:
a. Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet (20').
b. Minimum rear yard setback: Ten feet (10').
c. Minimum side yard setback: Ten feet (10').
d. When there exists an easement for a shared private roadway or drive, the required setback is ten feet (10') from the easement.
9. Buffer yard: Where a C-1 Convenience Commercial District abuts a residential district, any new development shall include a required buffer strip on
the side and rear yards not less than thirty feet (30') in width. This strip shall contain no structures, shall not be used for parking, off street loading or
storage, and shall be landscaped. Landscaping shall include sod or seeded grass, and planting of trees and shrubbery. A screen wall or fence not
less than fifty percent (50%) opaque, nor less than three feet (3') in height shall be erected to provide sufficient screening of the commercial parking.
10. Maximum building height:
a. Principal structure: Thirty five feet (35').
b. Accessory structure: Eighteen feet (18').
11. District size:
a. Minimum: One acre.
b. Maximum: Three (3) acres.
G. Site And Building Standards: To prevent urban blight and ensure quality long lasting construction compatible with both adjacent properties and those
throughout the district, all sites and buildings shall comply with the following standards, as well as applicable sections of this title:
1. Architectural Appearance: While variation in materials and colors that support the general theme may be allowed, the overall building should have
"360 degree" architecture. Any variations shall focus the highest level of architectural detail, material variation, facade articulation, or roofline
enhancements on those elevations that face a public right of way. Nonearth tone materials shall be limited to architectural accents. The color of the
nonbrick or stone portion of the building shall match the predominant brick or stone color portion.
2. Building Massing: Facades shall be articulated to reduce their mass and scale and provide visual interest consistent with Rosemount's identity,
character, and scale. Large uninterrupted building walls or elevations are prohibited. Corner architectural elements are encouraged to define the
edges of a building. A building more than one hundred feet (100') in width shall be divided into increments of no more than thirty feet (30') through
the articulation of the facade. This shall be achieved through combinations of the following techniques:
a. Divisions or breaks in the materials.
b. Arcades, entry features, window bays, or the like.
c. Variations in rooflines or slope plane.
d. Variation in building plane or setback.
e. Equivalent techniques approved by the city.
3. Permitted Materials: The exterior wall surfaces of all buildings shall be constructed of at least fifty percent (50%) brick or natural stone. The
remaining fifty percent (50%) of the wall surface may be specialty integral colored concrete block (including textured, burnished, and rock faced
block), tile (masonry, stone or clay), architectural textured concrete panels cast in place, or better. EIFS or masonry stucco may be used for the sign
band areas and/or architectural accents totaling no more than ten percent (10%) of the nonglass, brick or stone portion of the building. Unadorned
concrete is prohibited.
4. Pedestrian Circulation: Appropriate provisions shall be made to protect pedestrian areas from encroachments by parked or moving vehicles. Clear
and well lit walkways shall extend throughout the site and parking area(s) connecting building entrances to adjacent public sidewalks and any
parking facilities located on the site.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 202/324
a. Walkway(s) shall be made of high quality, long lasting, and decorative materials and incorporate architectural themes present in the surrounding
building. Bituminous or asphalt materials are prohibited.
b. A walkway at least six feet (6') wide shall extend along any facade featuring a customer entrance and any facade abutting a parking or
maneuvering area.
c. A continuous and permanent concrete curb not less than six inches (6") above grade shall separate internal sidewalks from parking, loading,
stacking and maneuvering areas.
d. Concrete sidewalks, five feet (5') in width, shall be provided on all commercial property abutting any collector or arterial street.
5. Lighting: Lighting shall be consistent in character throughout the entire property site, in both design and bulb type.
a. Any light fixture must be placed in such a manner that no light emitting surface is visible from any residential area or public/private roadway,
walkway, trail or other public way when viewed at ground level.
b. Light shall be directed toward the ground. Externally lit signs, display, building and aesthetic lighting must be lit from the top and shine downward.
Lighting must be shielded to prevent direct glare.
c. The level of lighting shall not exceed 0.5 lumens at any residential property line or 1.0 lumen at any nonresidential property line.
d. The maximum height for exterior lighting is twenty feet (20').
e. All nonessential lighting will be required to be turned off after business hours, leaving only the necessary lighting for site security.
6. Parking Lots: To reduce the impact of large expanses of paved surfaces, provide a more pedestrian friendly environment and provide adequate room
for snow storage, all parking areas (including driveways and drive aisles) shall be screened and landscaped. Trees, shrubs, flowers and ground
cover needed in these areas shall be in addition to the minimum number of trees and foundation plantings required by this title.
a. Screening: Landscaping and berming shall be a primary source for screening parking areas. Should landscaping and berming be found ineffective
by the City, the City may approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an alternative. Screening walls shall be constructed of the same
materials as the principal building and shall not extend more than twenty five feet (25') without a change in architecture to reduce their mass and
appearance. The screening source (landscaping and berming or walls and/or decorative fencing) shall provide a minimum fifty percent (50%)
opacity screen to a height of at least four feet (4').
b. Landscaping: A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the parking area shall be landscaped. This landscaping shall be located on islands, peninsulas
or the like within the perimeter of the parking area.
(1) The islands or peninsulas shall be a minimum eight and one-half feet (8.5') wide and extend the length of the adjacent parking stall(s). These
dimensions may be altered to provide sufficient area for the proposed landscaping to mature.
(2) To ensure this landscaping is properly dispersed, a minimum of one island, peninsulas or the like shall be located within each six thousand
(6,000) square feet of vehicular use area.
(3) A minimum of one tree shall be required for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet or fraction thereof, of required landscape area. Deciduous
trees shall have a clear trunk of at least five feet (5') above the ground and a caliper of at least two and one-half inches (2.5"). Coniferous trees
shall be at least four feet (4') in height. The remaining area shall be landscaped with shrubs or ground cover (not to include rocks or gravel
except as a mulch around shrubs and ground cover) not to exceed two feet (2') in height.
7. Landscaping: All areas of land other than those occupied by building or hardcover shall be landscaped with a combination of sod and plantings.
Rock or mulch may only be used as an accent material around sod or plantings. Trees, shrubs, flowers and ground cover needed in these areas
shall be in addition to the minimum number of trees and foundation plantings required by this title. All landscaped areas shall be irrigated. Portions of
the site may be exempt from these requirements where future development or expansion is planned. These areas shall either be graded and seeded
with prairie grass in accordance with the City of Rosemount grading requirements or remain as undisturbed natural areas containing existing viable
natural vegetation that can be maintained free of foreign and noxious plant material and will not produce soil erosion due to potential increases in
stormwater runoff. (Ord. B-208, 12-21-2010)
11-4-11: DT DOWNTOWN DISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: The purpose of this district is to encourage a viable downtown area. Rosemount's downtown is intended to serve the entire City
and be a diversified commercial, civic, and lifestyle center that offers the full range of comparison goods, sales and services, cultural, civic, and
entertainment opportunities, financial and professional offices, attached and multiple-family housing, and public uses. Although this district relies on
automobile traffic, the needs of pedestrians and bicyclists are deemed equally important. Pedestrian and bicycle linkages, landscaping, and appropriate
amenities are important components of this district. The pedestrian orientation of buildings adjacent to sidewalks encourages parking in the rear yards
and enhances the traditional character exemplified by historical central business districts. Zoning standards are intended to promote compatibility in
form, function and style. (Ord. B-211, 1-4-2011)
B. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted uses in the DT District:
Apartments, condominiums, or multiple-family housing, subject to the following conditions:
1. No dwelling units shall be allowed on the first floor of any part of the building within one hundred fifty feet (150') of Trunk Highway 3.
2. A minimum of one underground or structured parking stall is provided per dwelling unit.
Arcade parlors, billiard halls, and dance clubs.
Brew on premises and wine on premises stores.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 203/324
Brewpubs.
Business services and offices, including accounting, advertising, auditing, commercial art, computer services, mailing, photocopying, photography,
and public relations.
Communications businesses.
Eating and drinking establishments, excluding drive-through facilities.
Essential service facilities.
Financial institutions, excluding currency exchanges, payday loans, check cashing, or drive-through facilities.
General repair services, including appliance repair, furniture reupholstery and repair, jewelry, clock and watch repair, radio repair, small electronics
repair, and television repair, but excluding uses that involve hazardous materials or corrosives or result in hazardous wastes or noxious fumes in its
processes.
Hotels.
Membership organizations, including clubs, lodges, trade associations, unions, political and religious organizations.
Microbreweries, with or without associated taprooms.
Microdistilleries, with or without associated cocktail rooms.
Museums and art galleries.
Personal services, including barber and beauty shops, laundry services, shoe repair and photography, excluding body piercing, tattoo and pawn
shops.
Professional services, including architects and attorney offices, dental and medical clinics, financial services, insurance providers, and real estate
businesses.
Public or governmental services, including libraries, City offices, auditoriums, public administration buildings and civic centers.
Public parking lots and transit stations.
Public parks, owned and operated by a government unit, including recreational facilities and structures consistent with the public area.
Retail sales, including books and stationery, clothing, drug, gifts and novelties, groceries, furniture and hardware, hobby, jewelry, and sporting goods
stores, or other retail establishments of a community nature, but excluding used parts and pawn shops, automobile and related equipment sales,
services, parts sales and gasoline and fuel sales. New auto parts sales are allowable provided that auto parts sales activity results in no more than
ten percent (10%) of store revenue or comprises no more than ten percent (10%) of the floor space.
Single-family attached dwellings, subject to the following conditions:
1. No dwelling units, common areas, or parking stalls shall be allowed within one hundred fifty feet (150') of Trunk Highway 3.
2. Standards set forth in section 11-2-18 of this title.
Small wireless facilities within right-of-way, subject to the regulations contained in title 4, chapter 2 of this Code.
Veterinary clinic, not including outdoor runs or kennels. Subject to the regulations regarding the care and keeping of animals within the City contained
in title 7, chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. B-211, 1-4-2011; amd. Ord. B-243, 5-20-2015; Ord. B-265, 11-21-2017)
C. Accessory Uses: The following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:
Accessory apartments, provided they are located above the first floor.
Construction office, temporary.
Fences, as regulated by this title.
Off street parking, as regulated by this title, but not including semitrailer trucks.
Outdoor sales and display of merchandise, provided that:
1. Merchandise must consist only of finished products.
2. Outdoor sales shall be conducted by the owner or lessee of the premises or with the written consent of the owner or lessee.
3. Disassembled merchandise parts may be displayed outdoors only when new products are customarily sold unassembled and are intended for
customer purchase and assembly.
4. There shall be no display of automobiles or recreation vehicles.
5. Only merchandise that is normally manufactured, sold, or stored by the occupant on the premises shall be sold and/or promoted.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 204/324
6. Sales activity shall be conducted on a paved surface and provided the activity does not interfere with traffic and pedestrian movements.
7. Except while loading, unloading, or rendering a service in a designated loading area, no commercial trucks, truck-tractor, or semitrailer
combinations are permitted to be parked and/or stored longer than forty eight (48) hours. The principal use of a semitrailer may not be for outdoor
sales. Semitrailers that are principally used for education, training, and demonstration to the customer in the use or care of a product where sales
are a secondary use of the trailer may be permitted. These educational and demonstration semitrailers are to be limited to a period not to exceed
ninety six (96) hours.
8. Aggregate area of outdoor sales and display shall be limited to an area not more than forty percent (40%) of the finished square feet of the principal
building. The forty percent (40%) outdoor sales and display area may be exceeded for up to a four (4) day period through an administrative permit
approved by the community development director. No business shall receive more than twelve (12) permits per calendar year.
Outdoor seating areas, accessory to permitted or conditional uses.
Roof mounted solar energy systems, subject to section 11-2-12 of this title.
Signs, as regulated by this title. (Ord. B-211, 1-4-2011; amd. Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014)
D. Conditional Uses: The following uses are conditional uses in the DT district, and are subject to the conditional use permit provisions outlined in this title:
Child and adult daycare services:
1. Licensed daycare facilities must meet the following conditions:
a. Pick up and drop off areas shall be located on the site, and shall be designed to avoid interfering with traffic and pedestrian movements.
b. Outdoor recreational areas shall be located and designed in a manner that mitigates visual and noise impacts on any abutting residential
parcels.
c. Such facilities shall provide proof of all applicable state, county, and city licenses.
2. Adult daycare services, subject to the following conditions:
a. All outdoor leisure/recreation areas shall be located and designed to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas.
b. When a center is located in a multifunctional organization, the center may share a common space with the multifunctional organization if the
required space available for use by participants is maintained while the center is operating.
c. Provide proof of state, federal, and other governmental licensing agency approval.
Congregate housing.
Custom manufacturing, with accessory retail sales and display.
1. The size of a custom manufacturing facility shall be no greater than ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet.
2. Such uses shall be prohibited on property abutting a residential district.
Financial institution with drive-through facilities, subject to the following conditions:
1. Drive-up teller structures shall be located behind the building.
2. Drive-through canopies shall not extend beyond the sides of the building.
3. The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of the drive-through on adjacent properties and public rights of way. No use with a
drive-through window shall be located abutting any residential use or district.
4. The principal building shall be the primary source for screening the drive-through facility and stacking and exiting areas from adjacent properties
and/or rights of way. Landscaping and berming shall be a secondary source for screening drive-through, stacking or exiting areas. Should
landscaping and berming be found ineffective by the city, the city may approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an alternative.
Screening walls shall be constructed of a similar material to the principal building and shall not extend more than twenty five feet (25') without a
change in architecture to reduce their mass and appearance. Stacking areas shall have a minimum ninety percent (90%) opacity screen to a
height of six feet (6') while exiting areas shall have a minimum fifty percent (50%) opacity screen to a height of at least four feet (4').
5. Stacking lanes, drive-up teller structures, and service window shall be designed and located to minimize noises, emissions, and headlight glare
upon adjacent properties and public rights of way.
6. Stacking lanes shall not interfere with circulation through any required parking, loading, maneuvering or pedestrian area.
Funeral services and mortuaries, must provide adequate off street parking as regulated in this title. In the case of shared parking between abutting
uses, a reduction of up to forty percent (40%) in the number of required parking spaces may be approved.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 205/324
E. Interim Uses: The following uses shall be permitted interim uses:
Transient merchant sales lots as regulated by title 3, chapter 5 of this code and the zoning ordinance, provided that:
1. The owner and/or operator of the outdoor sales lot shall have written permission of the property owner of the property on which the sale or event
is located and shall have said written permission available for inspection if requested.
2. No portion of the sales lot or any advertising for the event shall take place within any public right of way or intersection sight triangle. A minimum
ten foot (10') setback, or the minimum parking setback for the applicable zoning district if it provides for a greater setback, shall be maintained from
all property lines and no portion of the use shall take place within one hundred feet (100') of any property line of any residential use or residentially
zoned property.
3. Any signage for the outdoor sales lot or event shall comply with the temporary signage requirements contained in chapter 8 of this title.
4. Any temporary structure, including tents and membrane structures, associated with the outdoor sales lot or event shall comply with all applicable
building codes and permit requirements.
5. Hours of operation shall be subject to the requirements of title 3, chapter 5 of this code.
6. Adequate off street parking, with a surface in compliance with subsection 8-2-2J of this code, shall be provided for both the principal and interim
use ensuring that no obstruction or interference occurs with existing traffic patterns.
7. No parking related to the outside sales lot or event shall be permitted on adjacent parcels without the prior written consent of the adjacent parcel
owner. Said written permission shall be available for inspection if requested.
8. A detailed site plan showing the outdoor sales lot area and dimensions, access and egress to the site, all structures, setbacks, signage, parking,
and any other information requested to approve the outdoor sales lot shall be submitted for approval with application materials required for an
interim use permit and an outdoor sales lot in title 3, chapter 5 of this code.
9. Outdoor sales lots for consumer fireworks sales shall meet the specialized requirements laid out in Minnesota statute, section 624.20, title 6,
chapter 4 of this code, and all other applicable zoning, city code, fire code, county ordinance, or state statutes.
10. The period during which the permitted use may continue will be specified by the city council, but in no case will be longer than sixty (60) days.
F. Minimum Lot Requirements:
1. Minimum Lot Area: None.
2. Minimum Lot Width: None.
3. Maximum Lot Coverage: Ninety percent (90%).
4. Minimum Front, Side, And Rear Setbacks: None.
5. Buffer Yard: Where a DT downtown district abuts a residential district, a ten foot (10') wide buffer yard shall be required. This buffer shall contain no
structures, shall not be used for parking, off street loading or storage, and shall be landscaped. Landscaping shall include sod or seeded grass and
planting of trees and shrubbery. A screen wall or fence not less than fifty percent (50%) opaque, nor less than three feet (3') in height shall be
erected to provide sufficient screening of the commercial parking. Berming and/or landscaping may substitute for the fence.
6. Maximum Building Height:
a. Principal structure: Forty five feet (45').
b. Accessory structure: Eighteen feet (18').
G. Site And Building Standards: To prevent urban blight and ensure quality long lasting construction compatible with both adjoining properties and
throughout the district, all sites and buildings shall comply with the following standards, as well as applicable sections of this title:
1. Architectural Appearance: Any building facade facing a public right of way shall have the highest level of architectural detail, material variation,
facade articulation, and roofline enhancements. Lots with multiple right of way frontages shall have the multiple facades facing the right of way
treated equally in their level of architecture. Color patterns of materials must be compatible and complementary with brick and stone colors naturally
occurring in the Upper Midwest. Nonearth tone materials shall be limited to architectural accents or signs.
2. Building Massing And Facade Variation:
a. Facades Facing Public Rights Of Way: Facades facing the public right of way shall include a minimum four (4) elements of architectural detail and
variation listed in subsection G2c of this section across the entire facade.
b. Facades Not Facing Public Rights Of Way: Facades not facing the public right of way shall include a minimum one element of architectural detail
and variation listed in subsection G2c of this section across the entire facade.
c. Elements Used For Architectural Detail And Variation: The following elements are suggestions to be used to increase the interest and compatibility
of buildings with the downtown district:
(1) Rooflines Elements:
(A) Commercial and civic: Parapets, cornices, entablature, dentil molding, pediments or similar feature.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 206/324
(B) Residential: Dormers, mansard roofs, hip roofs, clipped gables, or similar features.
(2) Window Elements: Lintels, pediments, rounded pediments, hoodmolds, foils, Chicago style windows, or similar features.
(3) Building Corner, Doorway, Or Subfacade Edge Elements: Rusticated corners, Gibbs surrounds, or similar features.
(4) Multiple-Story Facade Elements: Pilasters, window columns, stone bases, or similar features.
(5) Single-Story Or First Floor Commercial Elements: Transom windows, clerestories, awnings, heighted parapet walls, arcades, colonnades and
similar features.
3. Permitted Materials:
a. Facades Facing Public Rights Of Way: The exterior wall surfaces excluding doors and windows shall be a minimum of seventy five percent (75%)
face brick or stone. A maximum of twenty percent (20%) specialty integral colored concrete block (including textured, burnished, and rock faced
block) may be used for the base of the building facade. A maximum of ten percent (10%) EIFS, masonry stucco, or similar products may be used
for architectural details such as cornices, dentil molding, parapets, or sign bands. Any other material used shall be compatible with the materials
commonly used in the architectural style of the building (i.e., tile or polished metal for art deco style buildings). Unadorned concrete is prohibited.
b. Facades Not Facing Public Rights Of Way: The exterior wall surfaces excluding doors and windows shall be a minimum of sixty percent (60%)
face brick or stone. The remaining forty percent (40%) of the wall surface may be specialty integral colored concrete block (including textured,
burnished, and rock faced block), tile (masonry, stone or clay), architectural textured concrete panels cast in place, or better. A maximum of ten
percent (10%) EIFS, masonry stucco, or similar products may be used for sign bands or architectural accents. Unadorned concrete is prohibited.
4. Pedestrian Circulation: Appropriate provisions shall be made to protect pedestrian areas from encroachments by parked or moving vehicles. Clear
and well lit walkways shall extend throughout the site and parking area(s) connecting building entrances to adjacent public sidewalks and any
parking facilities located on the site.
a. Walkway(s) shall be made of high quality, long lasting, and decorative materials and incorporate architectural themes present in the surrounding
building. Bituminous or asphalt materials are prohibited.
b. A walkway at least six feet (6') wide shall extend along any facade featuring a customer entrance and any facade abutting a parking or
maneuvering area.
c. A continuous and permanent concrete curb not less than six inches (6") above grade shall separate internal sidewalks from parking, loading,
stacking and maneuvering areas.
d. Concrete sidewalks, a minimum of five feet (5') in width, shall be provided on all property abutting a public right of way.
5. Parking:
a. The outdoor overnight parking of trailers within city approved customer parking is prohibited. The term "trailer" shall include any vehicle that is not
self-propelled that requires another motorized vehicle to propel it and requires its own license from the state department of motor vehicles.
6. Lighting: Lighting shall be consistent in character throughout the entire property site, in both design and bulb type.
a. Any light fixture must be placed in such a manner that no light emitting surface is visible from any residential area or public/private roadway,
walkway, trail or other public way when viewed at ground level.
b. Light shall be directed toward the ground. Externally lit signs, display, building and aesthetic lighting must be lit from the top and shine downward.
Lighting must be shielded to prevent direct glare.
c. The level of lighting shall not exceed 0.5 lumens at any residential property line or 1.0 lumen at any nonresidential property line.
d. The maximum height for exterior lighting is thirty feet (30'). The maximum height for exterior lighting within one hundred feet (100') of a residential
use or district shall be twenty feet (20').
e. All nonessential lighting will be required to be turned off after business hours, leaving only the necessary lighting for site security.
7. Parking Lots: To reduce the impact of large expanses of paved surfaces, provide a more pedestrian friendly environment and provide adequate room
for snow storage, all parking areas (including driveways and drive aisles) shall be screened and landscaped. Trees, shrubs, flowers and ground
cover needed in these areas shall be in addition to the minimum number of trees and foundation plantings required by this title.
a. Screening: Buildings, landscaping and berming shall be a primary source for screening parking areas. Should landscaping and berming be found
ineffective by the city, the city may approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an alternative. Screening walls shall be constructed of the
same materials as the principal building and shall not extend more than twenty five feet (25') without a change in architecture to reduce their mass
and appearance. The screening source (landscaping and berming or walls and/or decorative fencing) shall provide a minimum fifty percent (50%)
opacity screen to a height of at least four feet (4').
b. Landscaping: A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the parking area shall be landscaped. This landscaping shall be located on islands, peninsulas
or the like within the perimeter of the parking area.
(1) The islands or peninsulas shall be a minimum eight and one-half feet (8.5') wide and extend the length of the adjacent parking stall(s). These
dimensions may be altered to provide sufficient area for the proposed landscaping to mature.
(2) To ensure this landscaping is properly dispersed, a minimum of one island, peninsulas or the like shall be located within each six thousand
(6,000) square feet of vehicular use area.
(3) A minimum of one tree shall be required for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet or fraction thereof, of required landscape area. Trees shall
meet the standards described in subsection 11-6-3E11 of this title. The remaining area shall be landscaped with shrubs or ground cover (not to
include rocks or gravel except as a mulch around shrubs and ground cover) not to exceed two feet (2') in height.
8. Landscaping: All areas of land other than those occupied by building or hardcover shall be landscaped with a combination of sod and plantings.
Rock or mulch may only be used as an accent material around sod or plantings. Trees, shrubs, flowers and ground cover needed in these areas
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 207/324
shall be in addition to the minimum number of trees and foundation plantings required by this title. All landscaped areas shall be irrigated. Portions of
the site may be exempt from these requirements where future development or expansion is planned. These areas shall either be graded and seeded
with prairie grass in accordance with the city of Rosemount grading requirements or remain as undisturbed natural areas containing existing viable
natural vegetation that can be maintained free of foreign and noxious plant material and will not produce soil erosion due to potential increases in
stormwater runoff. (Ord. B-211, 1-4-2011)
11-4-12: RESERVED:
(Ord. B-211, 1-4-2011)
11-4-13: C-3 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: The purpose of the highway service commercial district is to provide areas for business and retail services that require a large
amount of outdoor storage and/or passing motorists. This is a highly specialized district located in an area that has volumes of traffic with high visibility.
Zoning standards are intended to promote compatibility in form, function and style. (Ord. B-160, 11-1-2005)
B. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted uses in the C-3 district:
Child and adult daycare.
Communications businesses.
Essential service facilities.
Financial institutions without drive-through facilities.
General repair services, including appliance repair, furniture reupholstery and repair, jewelry, clock, watch, radio, small electronics, small engine, and
television repair. All general repair service shall be conducted in a closed building.
Indoor amusement and recreation services, including video arcades subject to the following restrictions:
1. Any arcade with fifteen (15) or more machines shall have an adult supervisor on duty during all hours of operation.
2. No arcade shall be operated within five hundred feet (500') of a school, church, or residence unless it is an integral part of a shopping center
and does not have an entrance except from within the shopping center.
Personal services, including barber and beauty shops, fitness centers, funeral services and mortuaries, laundry services, shoe repair, photography,
video rental and the like.
Professional services and offices, including architects and attorney offices, dental and medical clinics, financial services, insurance providers, real
estate businesses and the like.
Public parking lots and transit stations.
Public parks, owned and operated by a government unit, including recreational facilities and structures consistent with the public area.
Retail sales, including automobile parts, books and stationery, clothing, drug, gifts and novelties, groceries, furniture and hardware, hobby, video
sales, jewelry, and sporting goods stores or the like. All retail sales shall be conducted in a closed building.
Small wireless facilities within right-of-way, subject to the regulations contained in title 4, chapter 2 of this Code.
Veterinary services, not including outdoor runs or kennels. (Ord. B-160, 11-1-2005; amd. Ord. B-243, 5-20-2015; Ord. B-265, 11-21-2017)
C. Accessory Uses: The following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:
Car wash, full service, accessory to auto repair (major or minor) or nonservice motor fuel stations.
Car wash, self-service, accessory to auto repair (major or minor) or nonservice motor fuel stations.
Off street parking for a permitted, conditional or interim use.
Outdoor seating or dining areas for ten (10) or fewer seats, accessory to permitted or conditional uses, subject to:
1. The site shall be designed to limit the effects of outdoor seating or dining areas on contiguous properties and/or public rights-of-way.
2. The outdoor seating or dining area shall be located on private property along the front, side or rear of the principal building but shall not be
located within a required setback or on a side that abuts any residential use or district.
3. The outdoor seating or dining area shall not interfere with circulation in any required parking, loading, maneuvering or pedestrian area. A
minimum four foot (4') passageway shall be maintained along the private sidewalk for pedestrians.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 208/324
4. Patrons shall not be served food or beverages outside, except that employees may refill beverage containers in the seating area. At no time
shall the seating area be used for the consumption of alcoholic beverages.
5. The outdoor seating or dining area shall be equipped with refuse containers. The business owner shall ensure that the area is properly
maintained and litter free.
6. No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district.
Roof mounted solar energy systems, subject to section 11-2-12 of this title. (Ord. B-160, 11-1-2005; amd. Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014; Ord. B-248, 7-21-
2015)
D. Conditional Uses: The following uses are conditional uses in the C-3 District, and are subject to the conditional use permit provisions outlined in this
title:
Automotive repair, major or minor, subject to:
1. The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of this use on adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. No automotive repair
use shall be located on a site abutting any residential use or district. Sites or properties separated by a public right-of-way shall not be considered
abutting.
2. All repair, assembly, disassembly or maintenance of vehicles shall occur within a closed building, except minor maintenance, including tire
inflation, adding oil, wiper replacement and the like. All overhead vehicle doors on the building shall remain closed except when a vehicle is
entering or exiting the building.
3. Gasoline pumps/sales shall require an additional conditional use permit subject to the performance standards outlined in this subsection for
nonservice motor fuel stations.
4. Outdoor storage of parts, materials, and equipment may be allowed in the C-3 Highway Commercial or LI Light Industrial Districts subject to the
performance standards outlined in those districts for outdoor display/storage or sales.
5. Automotive repair uses shall designate on a site plan separate areas for customer parking and storage of inoperable vehicles awaiting repair or
repaired vehicles awaiting pick up. These areas shall meet the design standards outlined in section 11-6-1, "Off Street Parking Requirements", of
this title and be screened as follows:
a. Customer parking areas shall meet the applicable screening standards outlined in this title including, but not limited to, section 11-6-1, "Off
Street Parking Requirements", of this title and this section.
b. Inoperable vehicles awaiting repair or repaired vehicles awaiting pick up shall be stored behind the principal building. Landscaping and
berming shall be a secondary source for screening said vehicles. Should landscaping and berming be found ineffective by the city, the city may
approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an alternative. Screening walls shall be constructed of the same materials as the principal
building and shall not extend more than twenty five feet (25') without a change in architecture to reduce their mass and appearance. Stacking
areas shall have a minimum ninety percent (90%) opacity screen to a height of six feet (6').
c. In the C-3 highway commercial or LI light industrial districts junk or unlicensed vehicles awaiting repair or pick up shall be stored completely
inside a closed building in accordance with the performance standards outlined in section 11-2-9 of this title.
6. Parking of vehicles on public right of way shall be prohibited.
7. All painting must be conducted in an approved paint booth. All paint booths and all other activities of the operation shall thoroughly control the
emission of fumes, dust, or other particulate matter in compliance with Minnesota pollution control standards and applicable fire and building
codes.
8. All flammable materials, including liquids and rags, shall conform to the applicable provisions of the Minnesota fire code.
9. No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district.
Car wash, full or self-service, provided that:
1. The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of the washing operation on adjacent properties and public rights of way. No car
wash use shall be located abutting any residential use or district. Sites or properties separated by a public right of way shall not be considered
abutting.
2. The principal building shall be the primary source for screening the stacking and exiting areas from adjacent properties and/or rights of way.
Landscaping and berming shall be a secondary source for screening the stacking and exiting areas. Should landscaping and berming be found
ineffective by the city, the city may approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an alternative. Screening walls shall be constructed of the
same materials as the principal building and shall not extend more than twenty five feet (25') without a change in architecture to reduce their mass
and appearance. Stacking areas shall have a minimum ninety percent (90%) opacity screen to a height of six feet (6') while exiting areas shall
have a minimum fifty percent (50%) opacity screen to a height of at least four feet (4').
3. All overhead vehicle doors on the building shall remain closed except when a vehicle is entering or exiting the building.
4. Car washes shall have a minimum of six (6) stacking spaces per wash stall. Each space shall be a minimum of nine feet (9') wide by eighteen
feet (18') long.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 209/324
5. Stacking lanes shall not interfere with circulation in any required parking, loading, maneuvering or pedestrian area.
6. Untreated water from the car wash shall not be discharged into the storm sewer. If the water is to be pretreated and discharged into the storm
sewer, the pretreatment plans shall be subject to review and approval of the city engineer and building official, and subject to applicable
requirements of metropolitan council environmental services and MPCA.
Drive-through facilities.
1. The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of the drive-through on adjacent properties and public rights of way. No use with a
drive-through window shall be located abutting any residential use or district.
2. Drive-through facilities shall have a minimum six (6) stacking spaces per drive-through window. Fast food uses operating more than one window
per individual drive aisle shall meet the stacking requirements for a single drive-through facility. Each space shall be a minimum of nine feet (9')
wide by eighteen feet (18') long.
3. The principal building shall be the primary source for screening the drive-through facility and stacking and exiting areas from adjacent properties
and/or rights of way. Landscaping and berming shall be a secondary source for screening drive-through, stacking or exiting areas. Should
landscaping and berming be found ineffective by the city, the city may approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an alternative.
Screening walls shall be constructed of the same materials as the principal building and shall not extend more than twenty five feet (25') without a
change in architecture to reduce their mass and appearance. Stacking areas shall have a minimum ninety percent (90%) opacity screen to a
height of six feet (6') while exiting areas shall have a minimum fifty percent (50%) opacity screen to a height of at least four feet (4').
4. Stacking lanes, order board intercom, and service window shall be designed and located to minimize noises, emissions, and headlight glare
upon adjacent properties and public rights of way.
5. Stacking lanes shall not interfere with circulation through any required parking, loading, maneuvering or pedestrian area.
6. No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district.
7. In addition to the freestanding sign allowed by the sign ordinance, fast food uses may display menu signs related to drive-through facilities,
provided that:
a. Not more than one menu sign per defined drive-through aisle is allowed.
b. Individual menu signs shall be single sided with an area not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet including both menu information and sign
cabinet.
c. The height of the menu sign(s) shall not exceed eight feet (8') including its base or pole measured from grade to the top of the structure.
d. The menu sign(s) shall not encroach into any parking setback and shall be located directly adjacent to the drive-through aisle and oriented in
such a manner that the sign provides information to the drive-through patrons only and does not provide supplemental advertising to pass-by
traffic and does not impair visibility or obstruct circulation.
Landscape and horticultural services.
1. A principal structure must be built on site.
2. Landscape and horticultural services are subject to the performance standards outlined in this subsection for outdoor display/storage or sales.
Lumber and construction materials businesses.
1. A principal structure must be built on site.
2. Lumber and construction material yards are subject to the performance standards outlined in this subsection for outdoor display/storage or
sales.
Motor and recreation vehicle, trailer, boat, or agricultural machinery sales or rental.
1. The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of the sales or rental use on adjacent properties. No sales or display area shall be
located on a site abutting any residential use or district.
2. A minimum building floor area of twenty percent (20%) of the lot area shall be required. All overhead vehicle doors on the building shall remain
closed except when a vehicle is entering or exiting the building.
3. The outdoor sales or display area shall not interfere with circulation in any required parking, loading, maneuvering or pedestrian area.
4. The maximum area permitted for outdoor sales or display shall not exceed three and one-half (3.5) square feet of outdoor storage area to each
one square foot of enclosed ground floor principal building area.
5. The outdoor sales or display area shall conform to the principal building setback requirements of this district and meet the off street parking and
loading performance standards outlined in chapter 6 of this title.
6. Junk vehicles are prohibited.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 210/324
7. Any repair, assembly, disassembly or maintenance of vehicles shall require an additional conditional use permit subject to the performance
standards outlined in this subsection for automotive repair.
8. Outdoor storage of parts, materials, and equipment is prohibited.
9. Landscaping and berming shall be a primary source for screening outdoor sales and display area from adjacent rights of way. Should
landscaping and berming be found ineffective by the city, the city may approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an alternative.
Screening walls shall be constructed of the same materials as the principal building and shall not extend more than twenty five feet (25') without a
change in architecture to reduce their mass and appearance. The screening source (landscaping and berming or walls and/or decorative fencing)
shall provide a minimum fifty percent (50%) opacity screen to a height of at least four feet (4').
10. All necessary city or state licenses/permits shall be obtained and remain in good standing.
11. All exterior lighting shall conform to the C-3 district standards and applicable sections of this title.
12. No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district. Playing of music or advertisements from the
public address system is prohibited.
13. Tents, rooftop parking, ramps or similar vertical devices for elevated displays are prohibited.
14. Signs shall conform to the performance standards outlined in this title as well as the standards listed below:
a. Pennants, balloons, streamers, pinwheels or other attention attracting devices are prohibited.
b. No freestanding light poles shall be uses as temporary sign supports, as flagpoles or to connect flags, streamers, or pennants.
c. No graphics shall be painted on the building or windows.
d. Open hoods of vehicles, windshields, car windows, trunks, roofs or the like shall not be used for individual letters or other signage.
e. No vehicle or trailer shall be parked in such a manner as to advertise the site location, or to promote or advertise a sale or event.
Nonservice motor fuel station.
1. The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of this use on adjacent properties and public rights of way. No gasoline pumps shall
be located on a site abutting any residential use or district. Sites or properties separated by a public right of way shall not be considered abutting.
2. The principal building shall be the primary source for screening the gasoline pumps from adjacent properties and/or rights of way. Landscaping
and berming shall be a secondary source for screening gasoline pumps. Should landscaping and berming be found ineffective by the city, the city
may approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an alternative. Screening walls shall be constructed of the same materials as the
principal building and shall not extend more than twenty five feet (25') without a change in architecture to reduce their mass and appearance. The
secondary source of screening (landscaping and berming or walls and/or decorative fencing) shall provide a minimum ninety percent (90%)
opacity screen to a height of four feet (4').
3. Stacking for gas pumps shall be provided for at least one car beyond the pump island in each direction in which access can be gained to the
pump. Each space shall be a minimum of nine feet (9') wide by eighteen feet (18') long.
4. Stacking areas shall be designed and located to minimize noises, emissions, and headlight glare upon adjacent properties and shall not
interfere with circulation through any required parking, loading, maneuvering or pedestrian area.
5. Fuel pumps shall be installed on pump islands. Pump islands shall be elevated six inches (6") above the traveled surface of the site and shall
conform to the applicable principal building setback. Additionally, there shall be sufficient area around the pump island(s) to allow for safe and
efficient movement of vehicles through the site, with a minimum twenty four feet (24') between pump rows, measured curb face to curb.
6. Underground fuel storage tanks are to be positioned to allow adequate access by motor fuel transports and unloading operations that do not
conflict with circulation, access and other activities on the site.
7. A protective canopy structure may be located over the pump islands, subject to the following standards:
a. The edge of the canopy shall maintain setbacks as required for the principal building.
b. The architectural design, colors, and character of the canopy shall be consistent with the principal building on the site. The canopy
posts/signposts shall not obstruct traffic or the safe operation of the gas pumps.
c. The canopy shall not exceed eighteen feet (18') in height and must provide at least fourteen feet (14') of clearance to accommodate a
semitrailer passing underneath. The height of the canopy may be increased should the city council determine the architectural design enhances
the site and/or is more consistent with the principal building.
d. The canopy fascia shall not exceed three feet (3') in vertical height.
e. Canopy lighting shall consist of canister spotlights recessed into the canopy. No portion of the light source or fixture may extend below the
bottom face of the canopy. Total canopy illumination shall not exceed one hundred fifteen (115) foot-candles below the canopy at ground level.
The fascia of the canopy shall not be illuminated.
f. Signage may be allowed on a canopy, however such signage will apply toward the allowable sign area for the principal building and/or ground
sign.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 211/324
8. No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district.
9. The sale, storage, or display of vehicles is prohibited.
10. No outside storage, display, or services shall be allowed except as follows:
a. Propane sales limited to twenty (20) pound capacity tanks may be located outside provided the tanks are secured in a locker and the use
meets all state building and fire codes.
b. Sale or display of goods shall be allowed on the private sidewalk immediately in front of the principal building, provided that a minimum four
foot (4') clearance is maintained for pedestrian access and that the display does not exceed four feet (4') in height and is maintained in an
orderly fashion. Display shall not block the handicap accessible route.
c. Sale or display of goods shall be allowed in an area underneath the canopy adjacent to the pump island provided that the display does not
exceed three feet (3') in height or extend beyond the concrete base of the pump island. This area shall be maintained in an orderly and safe
fashion and in accordance with applicable state fire code regulations.
11. Any repair, assembly, disassembly or maintenance of vehicles shall require an additional conditional use permit subject to the performance
standards outlined in this subsection for automotive repair.
12. A car wash facility not accessory to automobile repair or a nonservice motor fuel station shall require an additional conditional use permit
subject to the performance standards outlined in this subsection for car wash, full or self-service.
Outdoor amusement and recreation services, subject to the following restrictions:
1. No outdoor amusement and recreation service shall be located on a site abutting any residential use or district.
2. The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of this use on adjacent properties and public rights of way.
3. All improvements except landscaping shall conform to the setback requirements for principal buildings in the district.
4. No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district.
Outdoor display/storage or sales, subject to the following:
1. Outdoor display/storage or sales related to motor and recreation vehicle, trailer, boat, or agricultural machinery sales or rental shall be subject to
those standards identified elsewhere in this chapter specific to such use.
2. The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of outdoor display/storage or sales on adjacent properties and public rights of way.
3. Outdoor display/storage or sales is limited to an area equal to forty five percent (45%) of the gross floor area of the principal building.
4. Outdoor display/storage or sales may be allowed in the following locations:
a. Outdoor display/storage or sales of goods shall be allowed on the private sidewalk immediately in front of the principal building, provided that
a minimum four foot (4') clearance is maintained for pedestrian access and that the display does not exceed four feet (4') in height and is
maintained in an orderly fashion. The outdoor display/storage or sales shall not block the handicap accessible route.
b. At the pump island of an automobile convenience facility, as specified in this subsection for nonservice motor fuel stations.
c. Within an enclosure constructed of materials compatible to the building's architecture such as decorative fencing or a building wall, provided
that:
(1) The display area shall be clearly identified on the approved site plan for the project and shall meet all applicable building setbacks.
(2) The enclosure shall provide a minimum ninety percent (90%) opacity screen.
(3) The display area shall be surfaced with concrete or an approved equivalent to control dust.
(4) The sales and display area shall not take up, or interfere with access to, any required parking, loading, maneuvering or pedestrian area.
(5) Displayed merchandise shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion.
(6) The square footage of the outdoor display area(s) shall be included in calculation of required off street parking for the use.
5. No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district.
6. Outdoor sales shall only be conducted by the owner or lessee of the premises.
7. Only merchandise that is normally manufactured, sold, or stored by the occupant on the premises shall be sold and/or promoted.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 212/324
Outdoor seating or dining areas for eleven (11) or more seats.
1. The site and outdoor seating or dining area shall be designed to limit the effects of outdoor seating or dining areas on contiguous properties
and/or public rights of way.
2. The seating area shall be located in a controlled or cordoned area acceptable to the city with at least one opening to an acceptable pedestrian
walk.
3. When a liquor license is granted, an uninterrupted enclosure is required and the enclosure shall only have access through the principal building.
4. The seating area shall be located on private property along the front, side or rear of the principal building, but shall not be located within a
required setback or on a side abutting any residential use or district.
5. The seating area shall not interfere with circulation in any required parking, loading, maneuvering or pedestrian area. A minimum four foot (4')
passageway shall be maintained along the private sidewalk for pedestrians.
6. The seating area shall not be permitted within two hundred feet (200') of any residential use or district as measured at the property line and shall
be separated from residential use or district by the principal structure or other method of screening acceptable to the city. The minimum distance
from a residential use or district may be reduced should the city determine the applicant has added sufficient elements to reduce the impact of this
use.
7. No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district.
Self-service storage facilities, subject to the following restrictions:
1. All storage shall be maintained in the storage space and there shall be no outdoor storage of any products, equipment or other material within
the storage facility; provided, however, open storage for licensed, operable recreation vehicles shall be permitted, provided the amount is not more
than twenty five percent (25%) of the area occupied by buildings.
2. The perimeter of the storage facility shall be entirely enclosed by a combination of buildings and decorative fencing. Chainlink, barbed wire or
wood privacy fencing shall not be permitted as decorative material, except as may otherwise be approved by the city council. For the purposes of
calculating foundation planting requirements, the decorative fencing of the perimeter shall be used in lieu of the building perimeter calculation.
3. All storage space openings shall be oriented internally to the facility and shall not directly face a public street or adjoining property.
4. Green space, planting clusters and berming shall be strategically designed and located around openings between storage facility structures.
5. The self-service storage facility shall be required to provide 1.25 times the required minimum for over story tree plantings so as to satisfy the
requirements of subsection 4 of this use, and provided the minimum interval spacing requirement at the boulevard is satisfied and met. All
landscaped areas shall be required to include the proper installation of an underground irrigation system.
6. An accessory caretaker residence may be permitted with a storage facility, provided it is only used for resident security and management
purposes and the exterior building materials shall match those of the principal and accessory storage facility structures.
7. The exterior wall surfaces of all building structures that comprise the development project shall consist of brick, decorative block, stone,
architectural concrete cast in place or precast concrete panels. The "interior" wall surfaces where storage spaces are located at or below the top of
the overhead door, and including the storage space doors and columns between such spaces, may be of metal, which shall consist of a decorative
factory applied finish.
8. The hours of operation for the self-service storage facility shall be restricted to between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M.
9. Access to the interior of the fenced area shall be available to emergency responders in a manner to be acceptable to the fire marshal.
10. All internal driveways intended for access to individual storage spaces shall have minimum widths of twenty feet (20').
11. No internal driveway may exceed one hundred fifty feet (150') without providing sufficient space to turn vehicles around allowing for a minimum
turning radius of forty five feet (45'), or as approved by the fire marshal.
12. Common parking space available to all storage units shall be provided at a rate no less than one space per six thousand (6,000) square feet of
storage area.
13. The exterior buildings, driveways, open space and landscaping, front, side and rear yards shall be maintained and repaired or replaced in
conformance with the approved plans by the property owner or landlord. This condition shall be kept that it will not cause a blighting of the area or
a general deterioration of the self-storage facility.
14. If storage units are to be sold individually, and no landlord or property owner is available to assume site management responsibilities, an
owners' association shall be required to assume the responsibilities of overall site management. The owners' association shall be governed by a
declaration of covenants that shall be approved by the city and recorded at Dakota County. The open space and common areas shall be
maintained and cared for by the developer of the self-storage facility until an owners' association is formed to maintain open space and common
areas. This owners' association shall be responsible for the care and maintenance of all open space and common areas of the self-storage facility
and also for the maintenance and appearance of the exterior of each unit. The owners' association shall levy charges to each owner for the
maintenance cost, operating costs and improvement costs for the open or green space, and for the common and privately owned parking and
paved areas beyond each storage unit. In addition, the owners' association will assume the responsibility to maintain the exterior of the building(s)
and also in an acceptable condition which is compatible with adjoining properties. The owners' association will cause blighted individually owned
units or areas within the facility to be repaired, restored and maintained as necessary to an acceptable standard for the area.
15. In the event that the developer or owner of the self-storage facility is unable to organize the property owners into an association for the
maintenance of the open space and individually owned storage units after twelve (12) months from the completion of the construction, the council
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 213/324
will call for a public hearing of all persons so concerned and ask for the creation of such an association. If no association is formed or if the
association ceases to function any time after it is formed, the council will order such maintenance work and restoration of the area and then will
assess such costs, together with a reasonable supervision charge, to the owners in the self-storage facility or the individual owner receiving the
individual benefit.
16. The council may require that the declaration of covenants include provisions to meet the minimum requirements of this section or to satisfy
conditions of city approval, may be enforced by the city, and may not be amended or released without city council approval.
Small breweries, with or without associated taprooms, subject to:
1. The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of this use on adjacent properties and public rights of way. No loading docks or
overhead vehicle doors shall be on a side abutting any public rights of way or any residential use or district.
2. The principal building shall be the primary source for screening of the loading area or any required outdoor equipment.
3. Outdoor seating is subject to the performance standards outlined in this subsection for outdoor seating and section 3-1-14 of this code.
Transmission facilities greater than one-fourth (1/4) mile in length. (Ord. B-160, 11-1-2005; amd. Ord. B-236, 7-15-2014; Ord. B-243, 5-20-2015; Ord.
B-248, 7-21-2015)
E. Interim Uses:
Transient merchant sales lots as regulated by title 3, chapter 5 of this code and the zoning ordinance, provided that:
1. The owner and/or operator of the outdoor sales lot or event shall have written permission of the property owner of the property on which the sale
or event is located and shall have said written permission available for inspection if requested.
2. No portion of the sales lot or any advertising for the event shall take place within any public right of way or intersection sight triangle. A minimum
ten foot (10') setback, or the minimum parking setback for the applicable zoning district if it provides for a greater setback, shall be maintained from
all property lines and no portion of the use shall take place within one hundred feet (100') of any property line of any residential use or residentially
zoned property.
3. Any signage for the outdoor sale lot or event shall comply with the temporary signage requirements contained in chapter 8 of this title.
4. Any temporary structure, including tents and membrane structures, associated with the outdoor sales lot or event shall comply with all applicable
building codes and permit requirements.
5. Hours of operation shall be subject to the requirements of title 3, chapter 5 of this code.
6. Adequate off street parking, with a surface in compliance with subsection 8-2-2I of this code, shall be provided for both the principal and interim
use ensuring that no obstruction or interference occurs with existing traffic patterns.
7. No parking related to the outside sales lot or event shall be permitted on adjacent parcels without the prior written consent of the adjacent parcel
owner. Said written permission shall be available for inspection if requested.
8. A detailed site plan showing the outdoor sales lot area and dimensions, access and egress to the site, all structures, setbacks, signage, parking,
and any other information requested to approve the outdoor sales lot shall be submitted for approval with application materials required for an
interim use permit and an outdoor sales lot in title 3, chapter 5 of this code.
9. Outdoor sales lot for consumer fireworks sales shall meet the specialized requirements laid out in Minnesota statute, section 624.20, title 6,
chapter 4 of this code, and all other applicable zoning, city code, fire code, county ordinance, or state statutes.
10. The period during which the permitted use may continue will be specified by the city council, but in no case will be longer than one hundred
twenty (120) days.
F. Minimum Lot Requirements And Setbacks:
1. Minimum lot area: One acre.
2. Minimum lot width: One hundred twenty feet (120').
3. Maximum lot coverage: Seventy five percent (75%).
4. Minimum district size: Two (2) acres.
5. Minimum front yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structures: Thirty feet (30').
6. Minimum side yard setbacks:
a. Principal structures: Ten feet (10').
b. Accessory structures: Ten feet (10').
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 214/324
7. Minimum rear yard setbacks:
a. Principal structures: Ten feet (10').
b. Accessory structures: Ten feet (10').
8. Parking setbacks:
a. Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet (20').
b. Minimum rear yard setback: Ten feet (10').
c. Minimum side yard setback: Ten feet (10').
d. When there exists an easement for a shared private roadway or drive, the required setback is ten feet (10') from the easement.
9. Buffer yard: A buffer yard equal to thirty feet (30') or two (2) times the height of the building, whichever is greater, shall be required along any side or
rear property line abutting any noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district. The minimum buffer yard for any single occupancy building with a
footprint equal to or larger than forty thousand (40,000) square feet, but not greater than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet, shall be
increased by fifty percent (50%) of the required buffer yard. Buffer yards for buildings with a footprint exceeding one hundred thousand (100,000)
square feet shall be increased by one hundred percent (100%). This area shall contain landscaping and berming to provide a ninety percent (90%)
opacity screen to a height of at least six feet (6') and shall not contain any structures, parking, off street loading or storage. Should landscaping and
berming be found ineffective by the city, the city may approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an alternative. Screening walls shall be
constructed of the same materials as the principal building and shall not extend more than twenty five feet (25') without a change in architecture to
reduce their mass and appearance.
10. Maximum building height:
a. Principal structure: Thirty five feet (35').
b. Accessory structure: Twenty five feet (25').
G. Site And Building Standards: To prevent urban blight and ensure quality, long lasting construction compatible with both adjacent properties and those
throughout the district, all sites and buildings shall comply with the following standards, as well as applicable sections of this title:
1. Architectural Appearance: While variation in materials and colors that support the general theme may be allowed, the overall building shall have "360
degree" architecture. Nonearth tone materials shall be limited to architectural accents. The color of the nonbrick or stone portion of the building shall
match the predominant brick or stone color portion.
2. Building Massing: Facades shall be articulated to reduce their mass and scale and provide visual interest consistent with Rosemount's identity,
character, and scale. Large uninterrupted building walls or elevations are prohibited. Corner architectural elements are encouraged to define the
edges of a building. A building more than one hundred feet (100') in width shall be divided into increments of no more than thirty feet (30') through
the articulation of the facade. This shall be achieved through combinations of the following techniques:
a. Divisions or breaks in the materials.
b. Arcades, entry features, window bays, or the like.
c. Variations in rooflines or slope plane.
d. Variation in building plane or setback.
e. Equivalent techniques approved by the city.
3. Permitted Materials: The exterior wall surfaces except for windows of all buildings shall be constructed of at least fifty percent (50%) brick or natural
stone. The remaining fifty percent (50%) of the wall surface may be specialty integral colored concrete block (including textured, burnished, and rock
faced block), tile (masonry, stone or clay), architectural textured concrete panels cast in place, or better. EIFS or masonry stucco may be used for the
sign band areas and/or architectural accents totaling no more than ten percent (10%) of the nonglass, brick or stone portion of the building.
Unadorned concrete is prohibited.
4. Pedestrian Circulation: Appropriate provisions shall be made to protect pedestrian areas from encroachments by parked or moving vehicles. Clear
and well lighted walkways shall extend throughout the site and parking area(s) connecting building entrances to adjacent public sidewalks and any
parking facilities located on the site.
a. Walkway(s) shall be made of high quality, long lasting, and decorative materials and incorporate architectural themes present in the surrounding
building. Bituminous or asphalt materials are prohibited.
b. A walkway at least six feet (6') wide shall extend along any facade featuring a customer entrance and any facade abutting a parking or
maneuvering area.
c. A continuous and permanent concrete curb not less than six inches (6") above grade shall separate internal sidewalks from parking, loading,
stacking and maneuvering areas.
d. Concrete sidewalks, five feet (5') in width, shall be provided on all commercial property along any collector or arterial street.
5. Lighting: Lighting shall be consistent in character throughout the entire property site, in both design and bulb type.
a. Any light fixture must be placed in such a manner that no light emitting surface is visible from any residential area or public/private roadway,
walkway, trail or other public way when viewed at ground level.
b. Light shall be directed toward the ground. Externally lit signs, display, building and aesthetic lighting must be lit from the top and shine downward.
Lighting must be shielded to prevent direct glare.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 215/324
c. The level of lighting shall not exceed 0.5 lumens at any residential property line or 1.0 lumen at any nonresidential property line.
d. The maximum height for exterior lighting is thirty feet (30'). The maximum height for exterior lighting within one hundred feet (100') of a residential
use or district shall be twenty feet (20').
e. All nonessential lighting will be required to be turned off after business hours, leaving only the necessary lighting for site security.
6. Parking Lots: To reduce the impact of large expanses of paved surfaces, provide a more pedestrian friendly environment and provide adequate room
for snow storage, all parking areas (including driveways and drive aisles) shall be screened and landscaped. Trees, shrubs, flowers and ground
cover needed in these areas shall be in addition to the minimum number of trees and foundation plantings required by this title.
a. Screening: Landscaping and berming shall be a primary source for screening parking areas. Should landscaping and berming be found ineffective
by the City, the City may approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an alternative. Screening walls shall be constructed of the same
materials as the principal building and shall not extend more than twenty five feet (25') without a change in architecture to reduce their mass and
appearance. The screening source (landscaping and berming or walls and/or decorative fencing) shall provide a minimum fifty percent (50%)
opacity screen to a height of at least four feet (4').
b. Landscaping: A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the parking area shall be landscaped. This landscaping shall be located on islands, peninsulas
or the like within the perimeter of the parking area.
(1) The islands or peninsulas shall be a minimum eight and one-half feet (8.5') wide and extend the length of the adjacent parking stall(s). These
dimensions may be altered to provide sufficient area for the proposed landscaping to mature.
(2) To ensure this landscaping is properly dispersed, a minimum of one island, peninsulas or the like shall be located within each six thousand
(6,000) square feet of vehicular use area.
(3) A minimum of one tree shall be required for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet or fraction thereof, of required landscape area. Deciduous
trees shall have a clear trunk of at least five feet (5') above the ground and a caliper of at least two and one-half inches (2.5"). Coniferous trees
shall be at least four feet (4') in height. The remaining area shall be landscaped with shrubs or ground cover (not to include rocks or gravel
except as a mulch around shrubs and ground cover) not to exceed two feet (2') in height.
7. Landscaping: All areas of land other than those occupied by building or hardcover shall be landscaped with a combination of sod and plantings.
Rock or mulch may only be used as an accent material around sod or plantings. Trees, shrubs, flowers and ground cover needed in these areas
shall be in addition to the minimum number of trees and foundation plantings required by this title. All landscaped areas shall be irrigated. Portions of
the site may be exempt from these requirements with City approval where future development or expansion is planned within a reasonable period of
time. These areas shall either be graded and seeded with prairie or maintained grass in accordance with the city of Rosemount grading requirements
or remain as undisturbed natural areas containing existing viable natural vegetation that can be maintained free of foreign and noxious plant material
and will not produce soil erosion due to potential increases in stormwater runoff. (Ord. B-160, 11-1-2005)
11-4-14: C-4 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: The purpose of the general commercial district is to provide a wide range of goods and services to the entire community. Due to
their proximity to major arterial streets, businesses in this district are dependent on large volumes of traffic, thus need to be highly visible and
accessible. It is the intent of this district to promote development that maximizes the full development potential in this area. Zoning standards are
intended to promote compatibility in form, function and style. (Ord. B-161, 11-1-2005)
B. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted uses in the C-4 district:
Brew on premises and wine on premises stores.
Brewpubs, excluding drive-through facilities.
Child and adult daycare.
Communications businesses.
Eating and drinking establishments without drive-through facilities.
Essential service facilities.
Financial institutions without drive-through facilities.
General repair services, including appliance repair, furniture reupholstery and repair, jewelry, clock, watch, radio, small electronics, small engine and
television repair occurring within an enclosed building.
Hotels and motels.
Indoor amusement and recreation services, including video arcades subject to the following restrictions:
1. Any arcade with fifteen (15) or more machines shall have an adult supervisor on duty during all hours of operation.
2. No arcade shall be operated within five hundred feet (500') of a school, church, or residence unless it is an integral part of a shopping center
and does not have an entrance except from within the shopping center.
Membership organizations.
Microbreweries, with or without associated taprooms.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 216/324
Microdistilleries, with or without associated cocktail rooms.
Personal services, including barber and beauty shops, fitness centers, funeral services and mortuaries, facilities, laundry services, shoe repair,
photography and video rental.
Professional services and offices, including architects and attorney offices, dental and medical clinics, financial services, insurance providers, real
estate businesses and the like.
Public or governmental services.
Public parking lots and transit stations.
Public parks, owned and operated by a government unit, including recreational facilities and structures consistent with the public area.
Retail sales, including automobile parts, books and stationery, clothing, drug, gifts and novelties, groceries, furniture and hardware, hobby, video
sales, jewelry, and sporting goods stores or the like. Automobile sales, new and used, are prohibited.
Small wireless facilities within right-of-way, subject to the regulations contained in title 4, chapter 2 of this Code.
Theaters, excluding drive-in theaters.
Veterinary services, not including outdoor runs or kennels. (Ord. B-161, 11-1-2005; amd. Ord. B-243, 5-20-2015; Ord. B-265, 11-21-2017)
C. Accessory Uses: The following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:
Car wash, full service, accessory to minor auto repair or nonservice motor fuel stations.
Off street parking for a permitted, conditional, or interim use.
Outdoor display/sales and storage. Outdoor display/storage or sales of goods shall be allowed on the private sidewalk immediately in front of the
principal building, provided that:
1. The outdoor display/storage or sales area shall not block a handicap accessible route and shall maintain a minimum four foot (4') clearance for
pedestrian access.
2. The outdoor display/storage or sales area does not exceed four feet (4') in height and is maintained in an orderly fashion.
3. No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district.
4. Outdoor display/storage or sales shall only be conducted by the owner or lessee of the premises.
5. Only merchandise that is normally manufactured, sold, or stored by the occupant on the premises shall be sold and/or promoted.
Outdoor seating or dining areas for ten (10) or fewer seats, accessory to permitted or conditional uses, subject to:
1. The site shall be designed to limit the effects of this outdoor seating or dining areas on adjacent properties.
2. The outdoor seating or dining area shall be located on private property along the front, side or rear of the principal building, but shall not be
located within a required setback or on a side abutting any residential use or district.
3. The outdoor seating or dining area shall not interfere with circulation in any required parking, loading, maneuvering or pedestrian area. A
minimum four foot (4') passageway shall be maintained along the private sidewalk for pedestrians.
4. Patrons shall not be served food or beverages outside, except that employees may refill beverage containers in the seating area. At no time
shall the seating area be used for the consumption of alcoholic beverages.
5. The outdoor seating or dining area shall be equipped with refuse containers. The business owner shall ensure that the area is properly
maintained and litter free.
6. No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district.
Roof mounted solar energy systems, subject to section 11-2-12 of this title. (Ord. B-161, 11-1-2005; amd. Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014; Ord. B-248, 7-21-
2015)
D. Conditional Uses: The following uses are conditional uses in the C-4 district, and are subject to the conditional use permit provisions outlined in this title:
Automotive repair, minor, subject to:
1. The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of this use on adjacent properties and public rights of way. No automotive repair
use shall be located on a site abutting any residential use or district. Sites or properties separated by a public right of way shall not be considered
abutting.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 217/324
2. All repair, assembly, disassembly or maintenance of vehicles shall occur within a closed building, except minor maintenance, including tire
inflation, adding oil, wiper replacement and the like. All overhead vehicle doors on the building shall remain closed except when a vehicle is
entering or exiting the building.
3. Gasoline pumps/sales shall require an additional conditional use permit subject to the performance standards outlined in this subsection for
nonservice motor fuel stations.
4. Outdoor storage of parts, materials, and equipment is prohibited.
5. Automotive repair uses shall designate on a site plan separate areas for customer parking and storage of inoperable vehicles awaiting repair or
repaired vehicles awaiting pick up. These areas shall meet the design standards outlined in section 11-6-1, "Off Street Parking Requirements", of
this title and be screened as follows:
a. Customer parking areas shall meet the applicable screening standards outlined in this title including, but not limited to, section 11-6-1, "Off
Street Parking Requirements", of this title and this section.
b. Inoperable vehicles awaiting repair or repaired vehicles awaiting pick up shall be stored behind the principal building. Landscaping and
berming shall be a secondary source for screening said vehicles. Should landscaping and berming be found ineffective by the city, the city may
approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an alternative. Screening walls shall be constructed of the same materials as the principal
building and shall not extend more than twenty five feet (25') without a change in architecture to reduce their mass and appearance. Stacking
areas shall have a minimum ninety percent (90%) opacity screen to a height of six feet (6').
c. Junk or unlicensed vehicles awaiting repair or pick up shall be stored completely inside a closed building in accordance with the performance
standards outlined in section 11-2-9 of this title.
6. Parking of vehicles on public right of way shall be prohibited.
7. All painting must be conducted in an approved paint booth. All paint booths and all other activities of the operation shall thoroughly control the
emission of fumes, dust, or other particulate matter in compliance with Minnesota pollution control standards and applicable fire and building
codes.
8. All flammable materials, including liquids and rags, shall conform to the applicable provisions of the Minnesota fire code.
9. No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district.
Drive-through facilities.
1. The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of the drive-through on adjacent properties and public rights of way. No use with a
drive-through window shall be located abutting any residential use or district.
2. Drive-through facilities shall have a minimum six (6) stacking spaces per drive-through window. Fast food uses operating more than one window
per individual drive aisle shall meet the stacking requirements for a single drive-through facility. Each space shall be a minimum of nine feet (9')
wide by eighteen feet (18') long.
3. The principal building shall be the primary source for screening the drive-through facility and stacking and exiting areas from adjacent properties
and/or rights of way. Landscaping and berming shall be a secondary source for screening drive-through, stacking or exiting areas. Should
landscaping and berming be found ineffective by the city, the city may approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an alternative.
Screening walls shall be constructed of the same materials as the principal building and shall not extend more than twenty five feet (25') without a
change in architecture to reduce their mass and appearance. Stacking areas shall have a minimum ninety percent (90%) opacity screen to a
height of six feet (6') while exiting areas shall have a minimum fifty percent (50%) opacity screen to a height of at least four feet (4').
4. Stacking lanes, order board intercom, and service window shall be designed and located to minimize noises, emissions, and headlight glare
upon adjacent properties and public rights of way.
5. Stacking lanes shall not interfere with circulation through any required parking, loading, maneuvering or pedestrian area.
6. No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district.
7. In addition to the freestanding sign allowed by the sign ordinance, fast food uses may display menu signs related to drive-through facilities,
provided that:
a. Not more than one menu sign per defined drive-through aisle is allowed.
b. Individual menu signs shall be single sided with an area not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet including both menu information and sign
cabinet.
c. The height of the menu sign(s) shall not exceed eight feet (8') including its base or pole measured from grade to the top of the structure.
d. The menu sign(s) shall not encroach into any parking setback and shall be located directly adjacent to the drive-through aisle and oriented in
such a manner that the sign provides information to the drive-through patrons only and does not provide supplemental advertising to pass-by
traffic and does not impair visibility or obstruct circulation.
Educational services, excluding elementary and secondary schools.
Nonservice motor fuel station subject to the requirements in the C-3 district in subsection 11-4-13D of this chapter.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 218/324
Outdoor seating or dining areas for eleven (11) or more seats.
1. The site and enclosure(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of outdoor seating or dining areas on contiguous properties and/or public rights of
way.
2. The seating area shall be located on private property along the front, side or rear of the principal building but shall not be located within a
required setback or on the side abutting any residential use or district.
3. The seating area shall not interfere with circulation in any required parking, loading, maneuvering or pedestrian area. A minimum four foot (4')
passageway shall be maintained along the private sidewalk for pedestrians.
4. The seating area shall be located in a controlled or cordoned area acceptable to the city with at least one opening to an acceptable pedestrian
walk.
5. When a liquor license is granted, an uninterrupted enclosure is required and the enclosure shall only have access through the principal building.
6. The seating area shall not be permitted within two hundred feet (200') of any residential use or district as measured at the property line and shall
be separated from residential use or district by the principal structure or other method of screening acceptable to the city. The minimum distance
from a residential use or district may be reduced should the city determine the applicant has added sufficient elements to reduce the impact of this
use.
7. No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district.
Small breweries, with or without associated taprooms, subject to:
1. The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of this use on adjacent properties and public rights of way. No loading docks or
overhead vehicle doors shall be on a side abutting any public rights of way or any residential use or district.
2. The principal building shall be the primary source for screening of the loading area or any required outdoor equipment.
3. Outdoor seating is subject to the performance standards outlined in this subsection for outdoor seating and section 3-1-14 of this code.
Transmission facilities greater than one-fourth (1/4) mile in length. (Ord. B-161, 11-1-2005; amd. Ord. B-236, 7-15-2014; Ord. B-243, 5-20-2015; Ord.
B-248, 7-21-2015)
E. Interim Uses:
Those interim uses listed in the C-3 highway commercial district.
F. Minimum Lot Requirements And Setbacks:
1. Minimum Lot Area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
2. Minimum Lot Width: One hundred twenty feet (120').
3. Maximum Lot Coverage: Seventy five percent (75%).
4. Minimum District Size: One acre.
5. Minimum Front Yard Setback:
a. Principal structure: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structures: Thirty feet (30').
6. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks:
a. Principal structures: Ten feet (10').
b. Accessory structures: Ten feet (10').
7. Minimum Rear Yard Setbacks:
a. Principal structures: Ten feet (10').
b. Accessory structures: Ten feet (10').
8. Parking Setbacks:
a. Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet (20').
b. Minimum rear yard setback: Ten feet (10').
c. Minimum side yard setback: Ten feet (10').
d. When there exists an easement for a shared private roadway or drive, the required setback is ten feet (10') from the easement.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 219/324
9. Buffer Yard: A buffer yard equal to thirty feet (30') or two (2) times the height of the building, whichever is greater, shall be required along any side or
rear property line abutting any noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district. The minimum buffer yard for any single occupancy building with a
footprint equal to or larger than forty thousand (40,000) square feet, but not greater than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet, shall be
increased by fifty percent (50%) of the required buffer yard. Buffer yards for buildings with a footprint exceeding one hundred thousand (100,000)
square feet shall be increased by one hundred percent (100%). This area shall contain landscaping and berming to provide a ninety percent (90%)
opacity screen to a height of at least six feet (6') and shall not contain any structures, parking, off street loading or storage. Should landscaping and
berming be found ineffective by the city, the city may approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an alternative. Screening walls shall be
constructed of the same materials as the principal building and shall not extend more than twenty five feet (25') without a change in architecture to
reduce their mass and appearance.
10. Maximum Building Height:
a. Principal structure: Thirty five feet (35').
b. Accessory structure: Twenty five feet (25').
G. Site And Building Standards: To prevent urban blight and ensure quality long lasting construction compatible with both adjacent properties and those
throughout the district, all sites and buildings shall comply with the following standards, as well as applicable sections of this title:
1. Architectural Appearance: While variation in materials and colors that support the general theme may be allowed, the overall building shall have "360
degree" architecture. Nonearth tone materials shall be limited to architectural accents. The color of the nonbrick or stone portion of the building shall
match the predominant brick or stone color portion.
2. Building Massing: Facades shall be articulated to reduce their mass and scale and provide visual interest consistent with Rosemount's identity,
character, and scale. Large uninterrupted building walls or elevations are prohibited. Corner architectural elements are encouraged to define the
edges of a building. A building more than one hundred feet (100') in width shall be divided into increments of no more than thirty feet (30') through
the articulation of the facade. This shall be achieved through combinations of the following techniques:
a. Divisions or breaks in the materials.
b. Arcades, entry features, window bays, or the like.
c. Variations in rooflines or slope plane.
d. Variation in building plane or setback.
e. Equivalent techniques approved by the city.
3. Permitted Materials: The exterior wall surfaces of all buildings shall be constructed of at least fifty percent (50%) brick or natural stone. The
remaining fifty percent (50%) of the wall surface may be specialty integral colored concrete block (including textured, burnished, and rock faced
block), tile (masonry, stone or clay), architectural textured concrete panels cast in place, or better. EIFS or masonry stucco may be used for the sign
band areas and/or architectural accents totaling no more than ten percent (10%) of the nonglass, brick or stone portion of the building. Unadorned
concrete is prohibited.
4. Pedestrian Circulation: Appropriate provisions shall be made to protect pedestrian areas from encroachments by parked or moving vehicles. Clear
and well lighted walkways shall extend throughout the site and parking area(s) connecting building entrances to adjacent public sidewalks and any
parking facilities located on the site.
a. Walkway(s) shall be made of high quality, long lasting, and decorative materials and incorporate architectural themes present in the surrounding
building. Bituminous or asphalt materials are prohibited.
b. A walkway at least six feet (6') wide shall extend along any facade featuring a customer entrance and any facade abutting a parking or
maneuvering area.
c. A continuous and permanent concrete curb not less than six inches (6") above grade shall separate internal sidewalks from parking, loading,
stacking and maneuvering areas.
d. Concrete sidewalks, five feet (5') in width, shall be provided on all commercial property abutting any collector or arterial street.
5. Lighting: Lighting shall be consistent in character throughout the entire property site, in both design and bulb type.
a. Any light fixture must be placed in such a manner that no light emitting surface is visible from any residential area or public/private roadway,
walkway, trail or other public way when viewed at ground level.
b. Light shall be directed toward the ground. Externally lit signs, display, building and aesthetic lighting must be lit from the top and shine downward.
Lighting must be shielded to prevent direct glare.
c. The level of lighting shall not exceed 0.5 lumen at any residential property line or 1.0 lumen at any nonresidential property line.
d. The maximum height for exterior lighting is thirty feet (30'). The maximum height for exterior lighting within one hundred feet (100') of a residential
use or district shall be twenty feet (20').
e. All nonessential lighting will be required to be turned off after business hours, leaving only the necessary lighting for site security.
6. Parking Lots: To reduce the impact of large expanses of paved surfaces, provide a more pedestrian friendly environment and provide adequate room
for snow storage, all parking areas (including driveways and drive aisles) shall be screened and landscaped. Trees, shrubs, flowers and ground
cover needed in these areas shall be in addition to the minimum number of trees and foundation plantings required by this title.
a. Screening: Landscaping and berming shall be a primary source for screening parking areas. Should landscaping and berming be found ineffective
by the city, the city may approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an alternative. Screening walls shall be constructed of the same
materials as the principal building and shall not extend more than twenty five feet (25') without a change in architecture to reduce their mass and
appearance. The screening source (landscaping and berming or walls and/or decorative fencing) shall provide a minimum fifty percent (50%)
opacity screen to a height of at least four feet (4').
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 220/324
b. Landscaping: A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the parking area shall be landscaped. This landscaping shall be located on islands, peninsulas
or the like within the perimeter of the parking area.
(1) The islands or peninsulas shall be a minimum eight and one-half feet (8.5') wide and extend the length of the adjacent parking stall(s). These
dimensions may be altered to provide sufficient area for the proposed landscaping to mature.
(2) To ensure this landscaping is properly dispersed, a minimum of one island, peninsulas or the like shall be located within each six thousand
(6,000) square feet of vehicular use area.
(3) A minimum of one tree shall be required for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet or fraction thereof, of required landscape area. Deciduous
trees shall have a clear trunk of at least five feet (5') above the ground and a caliper of at least two and one-half inches (2.5"). Coniferous trees
shall be at least four feet (4') in height. The remaining area shall be landscaped with shrubs or ground cover (not to include rocks or gravel
except as a mulch around shrubs and ground cover) not to exceed two feet (2') in height.
7. Landscaping: All areas of land other than those occupied by building or hardcover shall be landscaped with a combination of sod and plantings.
Rock or mulch may only be used as an accent material around sod or plantings. Trees, shrubs, flowers and ground cover needed in these areas
shall be in addition to the minimum number of trees and foundation plantings required by this title. All landscaped areas shall be irrigated. Portions of
the site may be exempt from these requirements where future development or expansion is planned. These areas shall either be graded and seeded
with prairie grass in accordance with the city of Rosemount grading requirements or remain as undisturbed natural areas containing existing viable
natural vegetation that can be maintained free of foreign and noxious plant material and will not produce soil erosion due to potential increases in
stormwater runoff. (Ord. B-161, 11-1-2005)
11-4-15: BP BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: The purpose of the BP business park district is to provide for the establishment of corporate headquarters, businesses, healthcare
offices and related professional and service uses that do not require outdoor storage in an environment that provides a high level of amenities including
landscaping, preservation of natural features, and architectural standards. (Ord. B-168, 4-4-2006)
B. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted uses in the BP Business Park District:
Breweries and small breweries, with or without associated taprooms, subject to:
1. Outdoor seating is subject to the performance standards outlined for outdoor seating in section 3-1-14 of this Code and subsection 11-4-14D of
this chapter.
Commercial indoor recreation.
Financial institutions, without drive-through facilities.
Light manufacturing, processing, and assembly uses conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
Medical or dental clinics.
Microdistilleries, with or without associated cocktail rooms, subject to:
1. Outdoor seating is subject to the performance standards outlined for outdoor seating in section 3-1-14 of this Code and subsection 11-4-14D of
this chapter.
Motion picture, recording, television and radio production studios, excluding towers or antennas.
Office, showroom.
Office, warehouse.
Printing and duplicating shops.
Professional service and office uses.
Public buildings and uses.
Small wireless facilities within right-of-way, subject to the regulations contained in title 4, chapter 2 of this Code.
Testing, research and laboratory uses.
Transit stations/park and ride facilities.
Warehousing, wholesaling and distribution uses conducted entirely within an enclosed building. (Ord. B-168, 4-4-2006; amd. Ord. B-243, 5-20-2015;
Ord. B-265, 11-21-2017)
C. Accessory Uses: The following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:
Off street parking or loading for a permitted, conditional or interim use.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 221/324
Outdoor structures. Functioning structures such as conveyor belt systems, cooling towers, storage silos or the like that are accessory and integral to
the principal use of the site may be allowed, subject to the following:
1. The applicant shall demonstrate that the outdoor structure or equipment cannot be integrated into a building design.
2. The site and building(s) shall be designed to screen and limit the effects of the outdoor structure or equipment on adjacent properties and public
right(s)-of-way.
3. Each property may have up to four (4) outdoor structures or equipment clustered together in a total aggregate area not to exceed five thousand
(5,000) square feet.
4. The height of outdoor structure or equipment shall not exceed sixty feet (60').
5. The outdoor structure or equipment shall not take up, encroach upon or interfere with access to any required yard, parking, loading,
maneuvering or pedestrian area.
6. The outdoor structure or equipment shall be located on an approved surface.
7. The City may exempt outdoor structure or equipment from the site and building performance standards in subsection G of this section; however
all such structures or equipment must be functional and shall be made of high quality long lasting material compatible with both adjacent properties
and other buildings in the BP District.
Overnight sleeping facilities for security personnel.
Retail sales of products manufactured, fabricated, or assembled on site limited to fifteen percent (15%) of the gross floor area of the principal
building.
Roof mounted solar energy systems, subject to section 11-2-12 of this title. (Ord. B-230, 11-5-2013; amd. Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014)
D. Conditional Uses: The following uses are conditional uses in the BP Business Park District and are subject to the conditional use permit provisions
outlined in this title:
Arenas, convention centers, and stadiums.
Business, trade and vocational schools.
Churches and places of worship. Churches and places of worship must have direct access to or be within three hundred feet (300') of a collector,
minor arterial, or principal arterial road.
Commercial bakeries.
Daycare centers, nursery and Montessori schools.
Drive-through facilities for banks, subject to the requirements of the C-3 District in subsection 11-4-13D of this chapter.
Health and athletic club facilities.
Hotels and motels, with or without associated restaurants located within, attached or adjacent to the hotel or motel.
Self-service storage facility, subject to the requirements of the C-3 District in subsection 11-4-13D of this chapter.
Other uses similar to those in this district as determined by the Board of Appeals and Adjustments, subject to issuance of a conditional use permit.
(Ord. B-168, 4-4-2006; amd. Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014; Ord. B-243, 5-20-2015)
E. Interim Uses: The following uses are interim uses in the BP business park district and are subject to the interim use permit provisions outlined in this
title:
None.
F. Minimum Lot Requirements And Setbacks:
1. Minimum lot area: One acre.
2. Minimum lot width: One hundred twenty feet (120').
3. Maximum lot coverage: Seventy five percent (75%).
4. Minimum district size: One acre.
5. Minimum front yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structures: Thirty feet (30').
6. Minimum side yard setbacks:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 222/324
a. Principal structures: Ten feet (10').
b. Accessory structures: Ten feet (10').
7. Minimum rear yard setbacks:
a. Principal structures: Ten feet (10').
b. Accessory structures: Ten feet (10').
8. Parking setbacks:
a. Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet (20').
b. Minimum rear yard setback: Ten feet (10').
c. Minimum side yard setback: Ten feet (10').
9. Buffer yard and setback increases: When a permitted, accessory, interim, or conditional use abuts any of the items listed in the table below, the
applicable increased minimum yard setback shall apply:
Increased Minimum Setback
Item
Parking And Circulation
Structure
Principal arterial ROW 40 feet 75 feet
Minor arterial ROW 35 feet 60 feet
Collector ROW 30 feet 40 feet
Railroad 10 feet 30 feet
Noncommercial or nonindustrial uses/districts 30 feet or 2 x building height1 30 feet or 2 x building height1
Note:
1.See subsection F9a of this section.
a. Noncommercial Or Nonindustrial Uses/Districts: A buffer yard equal to thirty feet (30') or two (2) times the height of the building, whichever is
greater, shall be required along any side or rear property line abutting any noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district. The minimum buffer yard
for any single occupancy building with a footprint equal to or larger than forty thousand (40,000) square feet, but not greater than one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet, shall be increased by fifty percent (50%) of the required buffer yard. Buffer yards for buildings with a footprint
exceeding one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet shall be increased by one hundred percent (100%). This area shall contain landscaping
and berming to provide a ninety percent (90%) opacity screen to a height of at least six feet (6') and shall not contain any structures, parking, off
street loading or storage. Should landscaping and berming be found ineffective by the city, the city may approve screening walls and/or decorative
fencing as an alternative. Screening walls shall be constructed of the same materials as the principal building and shall not extend more than thirty
five feet (35') without a change in architecture to reduce their mass and appearance. (Ord. B-168, 4-4-2006)
10. Maximum building height:
a. Principal structure: Fifty feet (50').
b. Accessory structure: Forty feet (40'), except for outdoor structures in subsection C of this section. (Ord. B-230, 11-5-2013)
G. Site And Building Standards: To prevent urban blight and ensure quality long lasting construction compatible with both adjacent properties and those
throughout the district, all sites and buildings shall comply with the following standards, as well as applicable sections of this title:
1. Architectural Appearance: While variation in materials and colors that support the general theme may be allowed, the overall building shall have "360
degree" architecture. Nonearth tone materials shall be limited to architectural accents. The color of the nonbrick or stone portion of the building shall
match the predominant brick or stone color portion.
a. Entry Features: Building entrances facing a public right of way or abutting a required parking area shall be accented by visually pleasing entry
features. This feature shall extend a minimum three hundred (300) square feet around a single entrance. Should the building have more than one
entrance facing a public right of way or abutting a required parking area, this feature shall extend a minimum one hundred fifty (150) square feet
around each individual entrance.
b. Corner Architecture: Corner architectural elements are encouraged to define the edges of a building.
2. Building Massing: Facades shall be articulated to reduce their mass and scale and provide visual interest consistent with Rosemount's identity,
character, and scale. Large uninterrupted building walls or elevations are prohibited. Any wall more than one hundred feet (100') in length shall be
divided into increments of no more than thirty five feet (35') through the articulation of the facade. This shall be achieved through combinations of the
following techniques:
a. Divisions or breaks in the materials.
b. Arcades, entry features, window bays, or the like.
c. Variations in rooflines or slope plane.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 223/324
d. Variation in building plane or setback.
e. Equivalent techniques approved by the city.
3. Permitted Materials: The exterior wall surfaces, except for windows, of all buildings shall be constructed of brick, natural stone, specialty integral
colored concrete block (including textured, burnished, and rock faced block), tile (masonry, stone or clay), architectural textured concrete panels cast
in place, precast concrete panels or better. Unadorned concrete is prohibited.
4. Pedestrian Circulation: Appropriate provisions shall be made to protect pedestrian areas from encroachments by parked or moving vehicles. Clear
and well lighted walkways shall extend throughout the site and parking area(s) connecting building entrances to adjacent public sidewalks and any
parking facilities located on the site.
a. A walkway at least six feet (6') wide shall extend along any facade featuring a building entrance and any facade abutting a required parking area.
b. A continuous and permanent concrete curb not less than six inches (6") above grade shall separate internal sidewalks from parking, loading,
stacking and maneuvering areas.
c. Concrete sidewalks, five feet (5') in width, shall be provided along any collector or arterial street.
5. Lighting: Lighting shall be consistent in character throughout the entire property site, in both design and bulb type.
a. Any light fixture must be placed in such a manner that no light emitting surface is visible from any residential area or public/private roadway,
walkway, trail or other public way when viewed at ground level.
b. Light shall be directed toward the ground. Externally lit signs, display, building and aesthetic lighting must be lit from the top and shine downward.
Lighting must be shielded to prevent direct glare.
c. The level of lighting shall not exceed 0.5 lumens at any residential property line or 1.0 lumen at any nonresidential property line.
d. The maximum height for exterior lighting shall be thirty feet (30'). The maximum height for exterior lighting within one hundred feet (100') of a
residential use or district shall be twenty feet (20').
e. All nonessential lighting will be required to be turned off after business hours, leaving only the necessary lighting for site security.
6. Parking And Loading Areas: To reduce the impact of large expanses of paved surfaces, provide screening, and supply adequate room for snow
storage, all parking areas (including driveways and drive aisles) adjacent to a public right of way or nonindustrial uses or districts shall be screened
and landscaped. Trees, shrubs, flowers and ground cover needed in these areas shall be in addition to the minimum number of the same required by
this title. These screening standards shall also apply to loading areas with the additional requirement that no loading area may face a public right of
way or nonindustrial use or district.
a. Screening: Landscaping and berming shall be the primary source for screening parking and loading areas. Should landscaping and berming be
found ineffective by the city, the city may approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an alternative. Screening walls shall be constructed
of the same materials as the principal building and shall not extend more than thirty five feet (35') without a change in architecture to reduce their
mass and appearance. Parking area screening shall provide a minimum fifty percent (50%) opacity screen to a height of at least four feet (4').
Loading areas screening shall provide a minimum ninety percent (90%) opacity screen to a height of at least eighteen feet (18').
b. Landscaping: A minimum of five percent (5%) of the parking area shall be landscaped. This landscaping shall be located on islands, peninsulas or
the like within the perimeter of the parking area.
(1) The islands or peninsulas shall be a minimum eight and one-half feet (8.5') wide and extend the length of the adjacent parking stall(s). These
dimensions may be altered to provide sufficient area for the proposed landscaping to mature.
(2) To ensure this landscaping is properly dispersed, a minimum of one island, peninsulas or the like shall be located within each six thousand
(6,000) square feet of vehicular use area.
(3) A minimum of one tree shall be required for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet or fraction thereof, of required landscape area. Deciduous
trees shall have a clear trunk of at least five feet (5') above the ground and a caliper of at least two and one-half inches (2.5"). Coniferous trees
shall be at least four feet (4') in height. The remaining area shall be landscaped with shrubs or ground cover (not to include rocks or gravel
except as a mulch around shrubs and ground cover) not to exceed two feet (2') in height.
7. Landscaping: All areas of land other than those occupied by building or hardcover shall be landscaped with a combination of sod and plantings.
Rock or mulch may only be used as an accent material around sod or plantings. Trees, shrubs, flowers and ground cover needed in these areas
shall be in addition to the minimum number of trees and foundation plantings required by this title. All landscaped areas shall be irrigated. Portions of
the site may be exempt from these requirements with city approval where future development or expansion is planned within a reasonable period of
time. These areas shall either be graded and seeded with prairie or maintained grass in accordance with the city of Rosemount grading requirements
or remain as undisturbed natural areas containing existing viable natural vegetation that can be maintained free of foreign and noxious plant material
and will not produce soil erosion due to potential increases in stormwater runoff.
8. Trash Handling: All trash, recycling and related handling equipment shall be stored in a manner consistent with the standards outlined in section 5-1-
3 of this code.
9. Signage: Only wall and freestanding ground monument signs shall be permitted in the district in accordance with the city of Rosemount's sign
regulations and these additional standards as follows:
a. Freestanding Ground Monument Signs: A freestanding ground monument sign shall be designed with a base structure of the same exterior
decorative materials as the principal structure on the site; and that extends from the sign copy area fully to the ground, except for architectural
relief treatments. All freestanding ground monument signs, if illuminated, shall use only indirect light with the light source fully diffused. These signs
shall be appropriately landscaped and subject to the same requirements for all landscaping on the property.
b. Wall Signs: Wall signs shall consist of permanent high quality materials with finished edges. No wood signs shall be permitted. Where more than
one wall sign is requested per building frontage (i.e., a multi-tenant center), a uniform sign criteria shall be prescribed by the building owner,
subject to review and approval by the city. The sign criteria shall, among other things, describe the uniform type of sign to be allowed, limitations of
placement on the building, the method of fastening, and the procedure for tenant sign approval.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 224/324
10. Rooftop Utilities: The ground level view of all rooftop equipment, including, but not limited to, rooftop structures related to elevators and other
mechanical utilities, shall be screened from public right-of-way and adjacent or nearby residential uses and districts. Screening should be
accomplished by incorporating architectural building design features such as a parapet wall or sloping roof structures. Wood fencing shall not be
permitted. If due to factors unique to the property or the project, it is physically impossible or impractical to screen these utilities, the City's Planning
Commission may approve alternative solutions that render them aesthetically compatible with the building.
11. Underground Electrical Services: No building or structure located in the district shall be served other than by underground electric, telephone and
cable distribution facilities. Poles, wires or other aboveground distribution facilities may only be temporarily installed during site construction or repair
of the underground system. No changes in the grade or contours of land above or adjacent to these facilities, once installed, shall be made without
the approved written consent of the City Engineer and the utility company providing such services. (Ord. B-168, 4-4-2006)
11-4-15-1: LI LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: The purpose of the LI Light Industrial District is to provide for the establishment of manufacturing, warehouse, repair, business, and
related limited service uses. The LI Light Industrial District is intended to include uses that may require limited outdoor and vehicle/trailer storage but
exclude more intensive industrial uses. (Ord. B-169, 4-4-2006)
B. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted uses in the LI Light Industrial District:
Breweries and small breweries, with or without associated taprooms, subject to:
1. Outdoor seating is subject to the performance standards outlined for outdoor seating in section 3-1-14 of this Code and subsection 11-4-14D of
this chapter.
Business, trade, and vocational schools.
Commercial indoor recreation.
Commercial use antennas and towers, subject to the requirements of section 11-9-6 of this title.
Distilleries.
General building and trade contractor office uses.
General repair services, excluding automotive repair and the like.
Light manufacturing, processing, and assembly uses.
Microdistilleries, with or without associated cocktail rooms, subject to:
1. Outdoor seating is subject to the performance standards outlined for outdoor seating in section 3-1-14 of this Code and subsection 11-4-14D of
this chapter.
Motion picture, recording, television and radio production studios.
Professional service and office uses.
Public buildings and uses.
Small wireless facilities within right-of-way, subject to the regulations contained in title 4, chapter 2 of this Code.
Testing, research and laboratory uses.
Transit stations/park and ride facilities.
Veterinary services including kennels, subject to:
1. The requirements of title 7, chapter 4, "Animal Control", of this Code.
2. The site shall not be less than twenty (20) acres in size.
3. All structures shall be located a minimum of seventy five feet (75') from any abutting residential use or district.
Warehousing, wholesaling and distribution uses. (Ord. B-169, 4-4-2006; amd. Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014; Ord. B-243, 5-20-2015; Ord. B-265, 11-21-2017)
C. Accessory Uses: The following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:
Car wash, full service, accessory to auto repair (major or minor) or nonservice motor fuel stations.
Car wash, self-service, accessory to auto repair (major or minor) or nonservice motor fuel stations.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 225/324
Off street parking or loading for a permitted, conditional or interim use.
Overnight sleeping facilities for security personnel.
Roof mounted or ground mounted solar energy systems, subject to section 11-2-12 of this title. (Ord. B-169, 4-4-2006; amd. Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014;
Ord. B-248, 7-21-2015)
D. Conditional Uses: The following uses are conditional uses in the LI Light Industrial District and are subject to the conditional use permit provisions
outlined in this title:
Automotive repair, major or minor, subject to the requirements of the C-3 District in subsection 11-4-13D of this chapter.
Car wash, full service, subject to the requirements outlined in the C-3 District in subsection 11-4-13D of this chapter.
Landscape and horticultural services, subject to:
1. A principal structure must be built on the site.
2. Landscape and horticultural services, subject to the requirements of the GI District subsection 11-4-16D of this chapter for outdoor
display/storage or sales.
Lumber and construction materials businesses, subject to:
1. A principal structure must be built on site.
2. Lumber and construction material businesses, subject to the requirements of the GI District subsection 11-4-16D of this chapter for outdoor
display/storage or sales.
Medium manufacturing, processing, and assembly uses.
Motor freight terminals.
Nonservice motor fuel station, subject to the requirements of the C-3 District in subsection 11-4-13D of this chapter.
Outdoor storage, subject to the following:
1. Outdoor display/storage or sales related to motor and recreational vehicle, trailer, boat, or agricultural machinery sales or rental is prohibited.
2. The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of outdoor storage on adjacent properties and public rights-of-way.
3. The outdoor storage area is limited to an area equal to fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area of the principal building.
4. The storage area shall be clearly identified on the approved site plan for the project, may only be located in either a side or rear yard, and shall
not encroach into any required setback.
5. Any outdoor storage area shall be enclosed by a one hundred percent (100%) opacity screen to a height equal to the item being screened but
not more than thirty five feet (35'). Any portion of the storage area adjacent to a public right-of-way (ROW) or any nonindustrial use or district shall
be screened by building(s) or screening wall(s) made of the same materials as the principal building and shall not extend more than seventy feet
(70') without a change in architecture to reduce its mass and appearance. Those portions of the storage area adjacent to any industrial use or
district may be screened by fencing or the like.
6. The storage area shall be surfaced with concrete or an approved equivalent to control dust.
7. The storage area shall not take up, or interfere with access to, any required parking, loading, maneuvering or pedestrian area.
8. The storage area shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion.
9. The perimeter measurement of the outdoor storage shall be included in the calculation of required foundation plantings.
10. No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district.
Self-service storage facilities, subject to requirements of the C-3 District in subsection 11-4-13D of this chapter except the following:
1. All storage shall be maintained in the storage space and there shall be no outdoor storage of any products, equipment or other material within
the storage facility; provided, however, open storage for licensed, operable recreation vehicles shall be permitted, provided the amount is not more
than fifty percent (50%) of the area occupied by buildings.
Other uses similar to those in this district as determined by the Board of Appeals and Adjustments, subject to issuance of a conditional use permit.
(Ord. B-169, 4-4-2006; amd. Ord. B-248, 7-21-2015)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 226/324
E. Interim Uses: The following uses are interim uses in the LI Light Industrial District and are subject to the interim use permit provisions outlined in this
title:
Commercial outdoor recreation.
Community solar gardens or solar farms on properties outside the metropolitan urban service area (MUSA), subject to section 11-2-12 of this title.
Temporary buildings accessory to an approved construction project, subject to:
1. Execution of an interim use permit agreement specifying the expiration of the IUP and removal of the temporary building(s).
2. Temporary buildings are subject to the interim use permit standards, findings and conditions specified in section 11-10-8 of this title.
3. Temporary buildings may be exempt from conformance with the following standards of the zoning ordinance at the discretion of the city:
a. Supplementary regulations subsection 11-5-2A, "Building Type And Construction", of this title.
b. Subsection 11-6-1L, "Off Street Parking Design And Construction Standards", and section 11-6-3, "Landscaping Requirements", of this title.
c. Subsection G, "Site And Building Standards", of this section for the LI light industrial district.
4. Temporary buildings shall conform to all other general industrial district standards specified within this title, and be set back five hundred feet
(500') from adjoining public right of way or visually screened from public right of way, public/institutional or residential districts or uses. If the
building is not appropriately screened, the city may require additional landscaping or enhanced treatment of the temporary structure.
5. Temporary buildings are subject to building code permits and requirements.
6. Temporary buildings are subject to fire code permits and requirements.
7. The site must accommodate adequate parking for the intended use.
8. Site grading and drainage must comply with city ordinances and engineering guidelines. The city may, at its discretion waive some of the
requirements if alternative solutions are acceptable. (Ord. B-169, 4-4-2006; amd. Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014)
F. Lot And Building Requirements:
1. Minimum lot area: Three (3) acres.
2. Minimum lot width: Two hundred forty feet (240').
3. Maximum lot coverage: Seventy five percent (75%).
4. Minimum district size: Five (5) acres.
5. Minimum front yard setback:
a. Principal structure: Thirty feet (30').
b. Accessory structures: Thirty feet (30').
6. Minimum side yard setbacks:
a. Principal structures: Ten feet (10').
b. Accessory structures: Ten feet (10').
7. Minimum rear yard setbacks:
a. Principal structures: Ten feet (10').
b. Accessory structures: Ten feet (10').
8. Parking setbacks:
a. Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet (20').
b. Minimum rear yard setback: Ten feet (10').
c. Minimum side yard setback: Ten feet (10').
9. Buffer yard and setback increases: When a permitted, accessory, interim, or conditional use abuts any of the items listed in the table below, the
applicable increased minimum yard setback shall apply.
Increased Minimum Setback
Parking And Circulation
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 227/324
Item Structure
Principal arterial ROW 40 feet 75 feet
Minor arterial ROW 35 feet 60 feet
Collector ROW 30 feet 40 feet
Railroad 10 feet 30 feet
Noncommercial or nonindustrial uses/districts 30 feet or 2 x building height1 30 feet or 2 x building height1
Note:
1.See subsection F9a of this section.
a. Noncommercial Or Nonindustrial Uses/Districts: A buffer yard equal to thirty feet (30') or two (2) times the height of the building, whichever is
greater, shall be required along any side or rear property line abutting any noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district. The minimum buffer yard
for any single occupancy building with a footprint equal to or larger than forty thousand (40,000) square feet, but not greater than one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet, shall be increased by fifty percent (50%) of the required buffer yard. Buffer yards for buildings with a footprint
exceeding one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet shall be increased by one hundred percent (100%). This area shall contain landscaping
and berming to provide a ninety percent (90%) opacity screen to a height of at least six feet (6') and shall not contain any structures, parking, off
street loading or storage. Should landscaping and berming be found ineffective by the city, the city may approve screening walls and/or decorative
fencing as an alternative. Screening walls shall be constructed of the same materials as the principal building and shall not extend more than thirty
five feet (35') without a change in architecture to reduce their mass and appearance.
G. Site And Building Standards: To prevent urban blight and ensure quality long lasting construction compatible with both adjacent properties and those
throughout the district, all sites and buildings shall comply with the following standards, as well as applicable sections of this title:
1. Architectural Appearance: While variation in materials and colors that support the general theme may be allowed, the overall building shall have "360
degree" architecture. Nonearth tone materials shall be limited to architectural accents. The color of the nonbrick or stone portion of the building shall
match the predominant brick or stone color portion.
a. Entry Features: Building entrances facing a public right of way or abutting a required parking area shall be accented by visually pleasing entry
features. This feature shall extend a minimum three hundred (300) square feet around a single entrance. Should the building have more than one
entrance facing a public right of way or abutting a required parking area, this feature shall extend a minimum one hundred fifty (150) square feet
around each individual entrance.
b. Corner Architecture: Corner architectural elements are encouraged to define the edges of a building.
2. Building Massing: Facades shall be articulated to reduce their mass and scale and provide visual interest consistent with Rosemount's identity,
character, and scale. Large uninterrupted building walls or elevations are prohibited. Any wall more than one hundred feet (100') in length shall be
divided into increments of no more than seventy feet (70') through the articulation of the facade. This shall be achieved through combinations of the
following techniques:
a. Divisions or breaks in the materials.
b. Arcades, entry features, window bays, or the like.
c. Variations in rooflines or slope plane.
d. Variation in building plane or setback.
e. Equivalent techniques approved by the city.
3. Permitted Materials: The exterior wall surfaces, except for windows, of all buildings shall be constructed of brick, natural stone, specialty integral
colored concrete block (including textured, burnished, and rock faced block), tile (masonry, stone or clay), architectural textured concrete panels cast
in place, precast concrete panels or better. Unadorned concrete is prohibited.
4. Pedestrian Circulation: Appropriate provisions shall be made to protect pedestrian areas from encroachments by parked or moving vehicles. Clear
and well lighted walkways shall extend throughout the site and parking area(s) connecting building entrances to adjacent public sidewalks and any
parking facilities located on the site.
a. A walkway at least six feet (6') wide shall extend along any facade featuring a building entrance and any facade abutting a required parking area.
b. A continuous and permanent concrete curb not less than six inches (6") above grade shall separate internal sidewalks from parking, loading,
stacking and maneuvering areas.
c. Concrete sidewalks, five feet (5') in width, shall be provided along any collector or arterial street.
5. Lighting: Lighting shall be consistent in character throughout the entire property site, in both design and bulb type.
a. Any light fixture must be placed in such a manner that no light emitting surface is visible from any residential area or public/private roadway,
walkway, trail or other public way when viewed at ground level.
b. Light shall be directed toward the ground. Externally lit signs, display, building and aesthetic lighting must be lit from the top and shine downward.
Lighting must be shielded to prevent direct glare.
c. The level of lighting shall not exceed 0.5 lumens at any residential property line or 1.0 lumen at any nonresidential property line.
d. The maximum height for exterior lighting shall be thirty feet (30'). The maximum height for exterior lighting within one hundred feet (100') of a
residential use or district shall be twenty feet (20').
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 228/324
e. All nonessential lighting will be required to be turned off after business hours, leaving only the necessary lighting for site security.
6. Parking And Loading Areas: To reduce the impact of large expanses of paved surfaces, provide screening, and supply adequate room for snow
storage, all parking areas (including driveways and drive aisles) adjacent to a public right of way or nonindustrial uses or districts shall be screened
and landscaped. Trees, shrubs, flowers and ground cover needed in these areas shall be in addition to the minimum number of the same required by
this title. These screening standards shall also apply to loading areas with the additional requirement that no loading area may face a public right of
way or nonindustrial use or district.
a. Screening: Landscaping and berming shall be the primary source for screening parking and loading areas. Should landscaping and berming be
found ineffective by the city, the city may approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an alternative. Screening walls shall be constructed
of the same materials as the principal building and shall not extend more than seventy feet (70') without a change in architecture to reduce their
mass and appearance. Parking area screening shall provide a minimum fifty percent (50%) opacity screen to a height of at least four feet (4').
Loading areas screening shall provide a minimum ninety percent (90%) opacity screen to a height of at least eighteen feet (18').
b. Landscaping: A minimum of five percent (5%) of the parking area shall be landscaped. This landscaping shall be located on islands, peninsulas or
the like within the perimeter of the parking area.
(1) The islands or peninsulas shall be a minimum eight and one-half feet (8.5') wide and extend the length of the adjacent parking stall(s). These
dimensions may be altered to provide sufficient area for the proposed landscaping to mature.
(2) To ensure this landscaping is properly dispersed, a minimum of one island, peninsulas or the like shall be located within each six thousand
(6,000) square feet of vehicular use area.
(3) A minimum of one tree shall be required for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet or fraction thereof, of required landscape area. Deciduous
trees shall have a clear trunk of at least five feet (5') above the ground and a caliper of at least two and one-half inches (2.5"). Coniferous trees
shall be at least four feet (4') in height. The remaining area shall be landscaped with shrubs or ground cover (not to include rocks or gravel
except as a mulch around shrubs and ground cover) not to exceed two feet (2') in height.
7. Landscaping: All areas of land other than those occupied by building or hardcover shall be landscaped with a combination of sod and plantings.
Rock or mulch may only be used as an accent material around sod or plantings. Trees, shrubs, flowers and ground cover needed in these areas
shall be in addition to the minimum number of trees and foundation plantings required by this title. All landscaped areas shall be irrigated. Portions of
the site may be exempt from these requirements with city approval where future development or expansion is planned within a reasonable period of
time. These areas shall either be graded and seeded with prairie or maintained grass in accordance with the city of Rosemount grading requirements
or remain as undisturbed natural areas containing existing viable natural vegetation that can be maintained free of foreign and noxious plant material
and will not produce soil erosion due to potential increases in storm water runoff.
8. Trash Handling: All trash, recycling and related handling equipment shall be stored in a manner consistent with the standards outlined in section 5-1-
3 of this code.
9. Signage: Only wall and freestanding ground monument signs shall be permitted in the district in accordance with the city of Rosemount's sign
regulations and these additional standards as follows:
a. Freestanding Ground Monument Signs: A freestanding ground monument sign shall be designed with a base structure of the same exterior
decorative materials as the principal structure on the site; and that extends from the sign copy area fully to the ground, except for architectural
relief treatments. All freestanding ground monument signs, if illuminated, shall use only indirect light with the light source fully diffused. These signs
shall be appropriately landscaped and subject to the same requirements for all landscaping on the property.
b. Wall Signs: Wall signs shall consist of permanent high quality materials with finished edges. No wood signs shall be permitted. Where more than
one wall sign is requested per building frontage (i.e., a multi-tenant center), a uniform sign criteria shall be prescribed by the building owner,
subject to review and approval by the city. The sign criteria shall, among other things, describe the uniform type of sign to be allowed, limitations of
placement on the building, the method of fastening, and the procedure for tenant sign approval.
10. Rooftop Utilities: The ground level view of all rooftop equipment, including, but not limited to, rooftop structures related to elevators and other
mechanical utilities, shall be screened from public right of way and adjacent or nearby residential uses and districts. Screening should be
accomplished by incorporating architectural building design features such as a parapet wall or sloping roof structures. Wood fencing shall not be
permitted. If due to factors unique to the property or the project, it is physically impossible or impractical to screen these utilities, the City's Planning
Commission may approve alternative solutions that render them aesthetically compatible with the building.
11. Underground Electrical Services: No building or structure located in the district shall be served other than by underground electric, telephone and
cable distribution facilities. Poles, wires or other aboveground distribution facilities may only be temporarily installed during site construction or repair
of the underground system. No changes in the grade or contours of land above or adjacent to these facilities, once installed, shall be made without
the approved written consent of the City Engineer and the utility company providing such services. (Ord. B-169, 4-4-2006)
11-4-16: GI GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: The purpose of the GI General Industrial District is to provide for the establishment of both light and medium manufacturing uses
along with warehouse, repair, and business uses. The GI General Industrial District is intended to include uses that may require outdoor and vehicle or
trailer storage but exclude heavy industrial uses. The General Industrial District is the preferred transition district between the Heavy Industrial District
and may be compatible with residential uses or include relatively higher on site populations, subject to higher performance standards. (Ord. B-174, 10-
17-2006)
B. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted uses in the GI District:
Adult uses as defined and regulated in section 11-7-5 of this title and title 3, chapter 8 of this Code.
Breweries, with or without associated taprooms, subject to:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 229/324
1. Outdoor seating is subject to the performance standards outlined for outdoor seating in section 3-1-14 of this Code and subsection 11-4-14D of
this chapter.
Commercial use antennas and towers, subject to the requirements of section 11-9-6 of this title.
Distilleries.
Essential services.
General building and trade contractor office uses.
General repair services, excluding automotive repair and the like.
Light or medium manufacturing, processing, and assembly uses.
Mineral extraction, subject to requirements of section 11-10-4 of this title.
Motor freight terminals.
Small wireless facilities within right-of-way, subject to the regulations contained in title 4, chapter 2 of this Code.
Testing, research and laboratory uses.
Transit stations/park and ride facilities.
Trucking terminals.
Warehousing, wholesaling and distribution uses. (Ord. B-174, 10-17-2006; amd. Ord. B-243, 5-20-2015; Ord. B-265, 11-21-2017)
C. Accessory Uses: The following uses shall be permitted accessory uses in the GI General Industrial District:
Off street parking or loading for a permitted, conditional or interim use.
Office uses accessory to a permitted or conditional use.
Outdoor display/storage or sales, subject to the following:
1. The outdoor display/storage or sales area shall be designed to limit its effects on adjacent properties and public right(s)-of-way.
2. The outdoor display/storage or sales area shall be surfaced with concrete or an approved equivalent to control dust.
3. The outdoor display/storage or sales area shall not take up, or interfere with access to, any required parking, loading, maneuvering or
pedestrian area.
4. The outdoor display/storage or sales area shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion.
5. No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district.
6. The outdoor display/storage or sales area shall be clearly identified on the approved site plan for the project, may only be located in either a side
or rear yard, and shall not encroach into any required accessory structure setback.
7. Any outdoor display/storage or sales area shall be completely enclosed by screening as follows:
a. Any portion of an outdoor display/storage or sales area adjacent to a public right-of-way or nonindustrial use or district shall be screened from
eye level view from the public right-of-way or nonindustrial use or district by a one hundred percent (100%) opacity screen to a height equal to
the items being screened but not more than thirty five feet (35'). Screening shall be accomplished by buildings, landscaping and berming, natural
topography, screening walls or a combination thereof. Any screening wall shall be made of the same materials as the principal building and shall
not extend more than seventy feet (70') without a change in architecture to reduce its mass and appearance.
b. The portion(s) of outdoor display/storage or sales area(s) adjacent to an industrial use or district shall be required to be screened from eye
level view from other industrial uses or districts by at least a fifty percent (50%) opacity screen to a height equal to the items being screened but
not more than thirty five feet (35'). Screening shall be accomplished by any of the items listed in subsection 7a of this use or fencing.
8. The outdoor display/storage or sales area is limited to an area equal to thirty percent (30%) of the gross area of the site.
9. The square footage of the outdoor display/storage or sales area(s) (except those areas used for vehicle storage and not considered a required
parking area) shall be included in calculation of required off street parking for the use.
10. The perimeter measurement of the outdoor display/storage or sales area shall be included in the calculation of required foundation plantings.
11. Outdoor display/storage or sales related to trailer, construction or agricultural machinery sales or rental shall be subject to those standards
identified elsewhere in this title specific to such use.
Outdoor structures. Functioning structures such as conveyor belt systems, cooling towers, storage silos or the like that are accessory and integral to
the principal use of the site may be exempt from the requirements of section 11-2-9, "Outdoor Storage", of this title, subject to the following:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 230/324
1. The applicant shall demonstrate that the outdoor structure or equipment cannot be integrated into a building design.
2. The site and building(s) shall be designed to screen and limit the effects of the outdoor structure or equipment (noise, vibrations, illumination,
particulate, or the like) on adjacent properties and public right(s)-of-way.
3. The outdoor structure or equipment shall be located on an approved surface in a remote location that is not adjacent to any public right-of-way
or nonindustrial use or district.
4. The aggregate area for outdoor structure or equipment shall be limited to an area equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the gross floor area of the
principal building and to a height not to exceed seventy feet (70'). Larger areas or taller structures or equipment may be approved by the City
through a conditional use permit.
5. The outdoor structure or equipment shall not take up, encroach upon or interfere with access to, any required yard, parking, loading,
maneuvering or pedestrian area.
6. The City may exempt outdoor structure or equipment from the site and building performance standards in subsection G of this section; however
all such structures or equipment must be functional and shall be made of high quality long lasting material compatible with both adjacent properties
and other buildings in the GI District.
Overnight sleeping facilities for security personnel.
Roof mounted or ground mounted solar energy systems, subject to section 11-2-12 of this title.
Up to two (2) fuel storage tanks with a maximum capacity of one thousand one hundred (1,100) gallons each and a thirty foot (30') setback from all
properties, on GI properties located west of Akron Avenue. (Ord. B-266, 2-20-2018)
D. Conditional Uses: The following uses are conditional uses in the GI General Industrial District and are subject to the conditional use permit provisions
outlined in this title:
Recycling operations, subject to the requirements of section 11-10-5 of this title.
Self-service storage facilities, subject to the requirements of the C-3 District in subsection 11-4-13D of this chapter except as follows:
1. All storage shall be maintained in the storage space and there shall be no outdoor storage of any products, equipment or other material within
the storage facility site; except that outdoor storage for licensed, operable recreation vehicles shall be permitted provided the amount is not more
than ninety percent (90%) of the area occupied by buildings.
Trailer, construction or agricultural machinery sales or rental, subject to the requirements of the C-3 District in subsection 11-4-13D of this chapter.
Truck stops, provided that:
1. Location: Truck stops shall be located east of Blaine Avenue (County Road 71) and within one-fourth (1/4) mile or one thousand three hundred
twenty feet (1,320') of a principal arterial roadway.
2. Installation Standards: Truck stops shall be installed in accordance with State and City standards. Additionally, adequate space shall be
provided to access gas pumps and allow maneuverability around the pumps. Underground fuel storage tanks are to be positioned to allow
adequate access by motor fuel transports and unloading operations which do not conflict with circulation, access and other activities on the site.
Fuel pumps shall be installed on pump islands.
3. Sanitary Dump: A sanitary dump shall be required at all truck stops. The sanitary dump must comply with all requirements of the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency (MPCA).
4. Canopy: A protective canopy structure may be located over the pump island(s) as a permitted accessory structure. The canopy shall meet the
following performance standards:
a. The edge of the canopy shall be seventy feet (70') or more from the front and/or side lot line, provided that adequate visibility both on site and
off site is maintained.
b. The canopy shall not exceed eighteen feet (18') in height and must provide fourteen feet (14') of clearance to accommodate a semitrailer truck
from passing underneath.
c. The canopy fascia shall not exceed three feet (3') in vertical height.
d. Canopy lighting shall consist of canister spotlights recessed into the canopy. No portion of the light source or fixture may extend below the
bottom face of the canopy. Total canopy illumination may not exceed one hundred fifteen (115) foot-candles below the canopy at ground level.
The fascia of the canopy shall not be illuminated.
e. The architectural design, colors, and character of the canopy shall be consistent with the principal building on the site.
f. Signage may be allowed on a detached canopy in lieu of wall signage on the principal structure, provided that:
(1) The individual canopy sign does not exceed more than twenty percent (20%) of the canopy facade facing a public right-of-way.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 231/324
(2) The canopy fascia shall not be illuminated, except for permitted canopy signage.
g. Canopy posts/signposts shall not obstruct traffic or the safe operation of the gas pumps.
5. Pump Islands: Pump islands must be elevated six inches (6") above the traveled surface of the site. Pump islands must be set at least
seventy feet (70') back from any property line. Setback between pump island curb face shall be sufficient for the servicing and maneuvering of
semitrucks with trailers.
6. Dust Control And Drainage: The entire site other than taken up by a building, structure, or plantings shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete,
cobblestone or paving brick. Plans for surfacing and drainage shall be subject to approval of the city engineer. Drainage from all fueling areas
shall be directed to an oil/grit separator. Minimum design standards for the oil/grit separator shall include the following:
a. A minimum of four hundred (400) cubic feet of permanent pool storage capacity per acre of drainage area.
b. A minimum pool depth of four feet (4').
c. A minimum oil containment capacity of eight hundred (800) gallons.
d. Minimum maintenance/inspection of two (2) times per year and/or after measurable spill events. A measurable spill shall be defined by the
Minnesota pollution control agency (MPCA). A measurable spill must be reported to the MPCA.
7. Access And Circulation: Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement. The site design must
accommodate adequate turning radius and vertical clearance for a semitrailer truck. A site plan must be provided to illustrate adequate turning
radius, using appropriate engineering templates.
8. Parking:
a. Parking for motor fuel service shall be in addition to that required for other uses on the site.
b. Parking spaces shall be determined on an individual basis by the city council. Factors to be considered in such determination shall include
(without limitation) size of building, type of use, number of employees, expected volume and turnover of customer traffic and expected
frequency and number of delivery or service vehicles.
c. Parking stalls for trucks and trailers shall be a minimum of twelve feet (12') wide and seventy feet (70') long, exclusive of drive aisles.
9. Pedestrian Traffic:
a. An internal site pedestrian circulation system shall be defined and appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from encroachments by
parked cars or moving vehicles.
10. Noise: Public address system shall not be audible at any property line. Play of music or advertisement from the public address system is
prohibited.
11. Outside Storage, Sales And Service: No outside storage or sales shall be allowed, except as follows:
a. Public phones may be located on site as long as they do not interrupt on site traffic circulation, and may not be located in a yard abutting
residentially zoned property.
b. Propane sales limited to twenty (20) pound capacity tanks may be located outside as long as the propane tanks are secured in a locker and
meet all state uniform building and fire codes.
c. A compressed air service area may be located on site as long as it does not interrupt on site traffic circulation.
12. Signs: A comprehensive sign plan must be submitted as part of a conditional use permit application. All signing and informational or visual
communication devices shall be minimized and shall be in compliance with chapter 8 of this title.
Wholesale landscape and horticultural services, subject to:
1. A principal structure must be built on the site.
2. Landscape and horticultural services are subject to the requirements of subsection C of this section for outdoor display/storage or sales.
Wholesale lumber and construction materials businesses, subject to:
1. A principal structure must be built on site.
2. Lumber and construction material businesses are subject to the requirements of subsection C of this section for outdoor display/storage or
sales.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 232/324
Other uses similar to those in this district as determined by the board of appeals and adjustments, subject to issuance of a conditional use permit.
(Ord. B-174, 10-17-2006; amd. Ord. B-248, 7-21-2015)
E. Interim Uses: The following uses are interim uses in the GI general industrial district and are subject to the interim use permit provisions outlined in this
title:
Asphalt plant, cement and concrete production and related processing of stockpile materials, subject to the following:
1. The asphalt, cement, or concrete plant and all equipment and materials associated with it shall be located a minimum of six hundred feet (600')
from any nongeneral industrial district land, and two thousand six hundred feet (2,600') from any residential or public district.
2. The plant and all equipment and materials associated with it shall be set back a minimum of seventy five feet (75') from any property boundary
line and screened by natural features including changes in elevation and vegetation. Year round one hundred percent (100%) opaque screening
with earthen berms and landscaping shall be required from ground level to the first thirty percent (30%) of the overall height and fifty percent (50%)
opaque to fifty percent (50%) of the overall height of the plant as viewed from eye level from surrounding right of way or roadways.
3. Asphalt plant, cement and concrete production may be exempt from conformance with the following standards of the zoning ordinance at the
discretion of the city council:
a. Supplementary regulations subsection 11-5-2A, "Building Type And Construction", of this title.
b. Subsection 11-6-1L, "Off Street Parking Design And Construction Standards", of this title.
c. Section 11-6-3, "Landscaping Requirements", of this title.
d. Subsection G, "Site And Building Standards", of this section.
e. Subsection F9b, "Minimum Building Size", of this section.
4. Traffic generated by these uses shall utilize haul routes approved by the city and other agencies as required. The plant owner shall be
responsible for road improvements and easements needed for ingress and egress subject to approval by the city, as well as the county highway
department or the Minnesota department of transportation as required.
5. Traffic generated by these uses shall enter onto streets consistent with city access and design standards. The owner of these uses shall be
responsible for all costs associated with road improvements required to serve the use.
6. Stockpiles associated with these uses shall be limited to a height of fifty feet (50').
7. No smoke or particulate matter shall be discharged that is darker than no. 1 classification of the Ringelmann smoke chart furnished by the U.S.
bureau of mines, or twenty percent (20%) opacity as determined by the MPCA. Further, emissions shall conform to standards set by EPA and
MPCA.
8. These uses shall operate so as not to discharge onto the soils of the lot, across the boundaries of the lot or through percolation into the subsoil
of the lot or beyond the boundary of the lot where such use is located, toxic or noxious matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or
endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare; or, cause injury or damage to property or business.
9. These uses shall operate in a way so as to prevent the emission of odorous matter of such quality as to be readily detectable beyond the lot line
of the site on which such use is located.
10. These uses shall comply with the applicable operating, special requirements and bonding for restoration standards for mineral extraction
specified in section 11-10-4 of this title.
Commercial outdoor recreation, subject to the following:
1. Commercial outdoor recreation uses may be exempt from conformance with the following standards of the zoning ordinance at the discretion of
the city council:
a. Supplementary regulations subsection 11-5-2A, "Building Type And Construction", of this title.
b. Subsection 11-6-1L, "Off Street Parking Design And Construction Standards", of this title.
c. Section 11-6-3, "Landscaping Requirements", of this title.
d. Subsection G, "Site And Building Standards", of this section.
e. Subsection F9b, "Minimum Building Size", of this section.
Community solar gardens or solar farms on properties outside the metropolitan urban service area (MUSA), subject to section 11-2-12 of this title.
Spent bauxite disposal facilities as an accessory use only.
Temporary buildings accessory to an approved construction project, subject to:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 233/324
1. Execution of an interim use permit agreement specifying the expiration of the IUP and removal of the temporary building(s).
2. Temporary buildings are subject to the interim use permit standards, findings and conditions specified in section 11-10-8 of this title.
3. Temporary buildings may be exempt from conformance with the following standards of the zoning ordinance at the discretion of the city council:
a. Supplementary regulations subsection 11-5-2A, "Building Type And Construction", of this title.
b. Subsection 11-6-1L, "Off Street Parking Design And Construction Standards", of this title.
c. Section 11-6-3, "Landscaping Requirements", of this title.
d. Subsection G, "Site And Building Standards", of this section.
e. Subsection F9b, "Minimum Building Size", of this section.
4. Temporary buildings shall conform to all other general industrial district standards specified within this title, and be set back a minimum of five
hundred feet (500') from adjoining public right of way or visually screened from public right of way, public/institutional or residential districts or uses.
If the building is not appropriately screened, the city may require additional landscaping or enhanced treatment of the temporary structure.
5. Temporary buildings are subject to building code permits and requirements.
6. Temporary buildings are subject to fire code permits and requirements.
7. The site must accommodate adequate parking for the intended use.
8. Site grading and drainage must comply with city ordinances and engineering guidelines. The city council may, at its discretion waive some of the
requirements if alternative solutions are acceptable.
Other uses similar to those in this district as determined by the board of appeals and adjustments, subject to issuance of an interim use permit. (Ord.
B-174, 10-17-2006; amd. Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014)
F. Lot And Building Requirements:
1. Minimum Lot Area: Five (5) acres.
2. Minimum Lot Width: n/a.
3. Maximum Lot Coverage: Seventy percent (70%).
4. Minimum District Size: Ten (10) acres.
5. Minimum Front Yard Setback:
a. Principal structure: Seventy five feet (75').
b. Accessory structure: Seventy five feet (75').
6. Minimum Side Yard Setback:
a. Principal structure: Fifty feet (50').
b. Accessory structure: Fifty feet (50').
7. Minimum Rear Yard Setback:
a. Principal structure: Fifty feet (50').
b. Accessory structure: Fifty feet (50').
8. Parking Setback:
a. Minimum front yard setback: Forty feet (40').
b. Minimum side yard setback: Twenty five feet (25').
c. Minimum rear yard setback: Fifty feet (50').
9. Building Size:
a. Maximum building height (principal or accessory): Seventy five feet (75').
b. Minimum building size: Ten percent (10%) of subject property, excluding protective wetlands.
10. Buffer Yard And Setback Increases: When a permitted, accessory, interim, or conditional use abuts any of the items listed in the table below, the
applicable setback increases shall apply:
Item Increased Minimum Setback
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 234/324
Parking And Circulation Structure
Any noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district 30 feet or 2 times building height1 30 feet or 2 times building height1
Railroad 10 feet 30 feet
Note:
1.Residential Uses/Districts: A buffer yard equal to 30 feet or 2 times the height of the building, whichever is greater, shall be required along any side or
rear property line abutting any noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district. This area shall contain landscaping and berming to provide a 90 percent
opacity screen to a height of at least 6 feet and shall not contain any structures, parking, off street loading or storage. Should landscaping and berming be
found ineffective by the city, the city council may approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an alternative. Screening walls shall be constructed
of the same materials as the principal building and shall not extend more than 35 feet without a change in architecture to reduce their mass and
appearance.
G. Site And Building Standards: To prevent urban blight and ensure quality long lasting construction compatible with both adjacent properties and those
throughout the district, all sites and buildings shall comply with the following standards, as well as applicable sections of this title:
1. Architectural Appearance: While variation in materials and colors that support the general theme may be allowed, nonearth tone materials shall be
limited to architectural accents. The color of the nonbrick or stone portion of the building shall match the predominant brick or stone color portion.
a. Entry Features: Building entrances facing a public right of way shall be accented by visually pleasing entry features. This feature shall extend a
minimum three hundred (300) square feet around a single entrance. Should the building have more than one entrance facing a public right of way,
this feature shall extend a minimum one hundred fifty (150) square feet around each individual entrance.
b. Corner Architectural Elements: Corner architectural elements are encouraged to define the edges of a building.
2. Building Massing: Facades facing a public right of way or residential use or district shall be articulated to reduce their mass and scale and provide
visual interest consistent with Rosemount's identity, character, and scale. Large uninterrupted building walls or elevations are prohibited. Any wall
facing a public right of way or residential uses or district more than one hundred feet (100') in length shall be divided into increments of no more than
fifty feet (50') through the articulation of the facade. This shall be achieved through combinations of the following techniques:
a. Divisions or breaks in the materials.
b. Arcades, entry features, window bays, or the like.
c. Variations in rooflines or slope plane.
d. Variation in building plane or setback.
e. Equivalent techniques approved by the city.
3. Permitted Materials: Any exterior wall surface facing a public right of way or residential uses or district shall be constructed of a combination of glass,
brick, natural stone, specialty integral colored concrete block (including textured, burnished, and rock faced block), tile (masonry, stone or clay),
architectural textured concrete panels cast in place, precast concrete panels or better. All other wall surfaces shall be constructed of at least forty
percent (40%) of these materials. The remaining sixty percent (60%) of these exterior wall surfaces may be finished steel or aluminum. Unadorned
materials are prohibited.
4. Pedestrian Circulation: Appropriate provisions shall be made to protect pedestrian areas from encroachments by parked or moving vehicles. Clear
and well lighted walkways shall extend throughout the site and parking area(s) connecting building entrances to adjacent public sidewalks and any
parking facilities located on the site.
a. A walkway at least six feet (6') wide shall extend along any facade featuring a building entrance and any facade abutting a required parking area.
b. A continuous and permanent concrete curb not less than six inches (6") above grade shall separate internal sidewalks from parking, loading,
stacking and maneuvering areas.
c. Concrete sidewalks, five feet (5') in width, shall be provided along any collector or arterial street.
5. Lighting: Lighting shall be consistent in character throughout the entire property site, in both design and bulb type.
a. Any light fixture must be placed in such a manner that no light emitting surface is visible from any residential area or public/private roadway,
walkway, trail or other public way when viewed at ground level.
b. Light shall be directed toward the ground. Externally lit signs, display, building and aesthetic lighting must be lit from the top and shine downward.
Lighting must be shielded to prevent direct glare.
c. The level of lighting shall not exceed 0.5 lumen at any residential property line or 1.0 lumen at any nonresidential property line.
d. The maximum height for exterior lighting shall be thirty feet (30'). The maximum height for exterior lighting within one hundred feet (100') of a
residential use or district shall be twenty feet (20').
e. All nonessential lighting will be required to be turned off after business hours, leaving only the necessary lighting for site security.
6. Parking And Loading Areas: To reduce the impact of large expanses of paved surfaces, provide screening, and supply adequate room for snow
storage, all parking areas (including driveways and drive aisles) adjacent to a public right of way or residential uses or districts shall be screened and
landscaped. Trees, shrubs, flowers and ground cover needed in these areas shall be in addition to the minimum number of the same required by this
title. These screening standards shall also apply to loading areas with the additional requirement that no loading area may face a public right of way
or nonindustrial use or district.
a. Screening: Landscaping and berming shall be the primary source for screening parking and loading areas. Should landscaping and berming be
found ineffective by the city, the city council may approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an alternative. Screening walls shall be
constructed of the same materials as the principal building and shall not extend more than seventy feet (70') without a change in architecture to
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 235/324
reduce their mass and appearance. Parking area screening shall provide a minimum fifty percent (50%) opacity screen to a height of at least four
feet (4'). Loading area screening shall provide a minimum ninety percent (90%) opacity screen to a height of at least eighteen feet (18').
b. Landscaping: A minimum of five percent (5%) of the parking area shall be landscaped. This landscaping shall be located on islands, peninsulas or
the like within the perimeter of the parking area.
(1) The islands or peninsulas shall be a minimum eight and one-half feet (8.5') wide and extend the length of the adjacent parking stall(s). These
dimensions may be altered to provide sufficient area for the proposed landscaping to mature.
(2) To ensure this landscaping is properly dispersed, a minimum of one island, peninsula or the like shall be located within each six thousand
(6,000) square feet of vehicular use area.
(3) A minimum of one tree shall be required for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet or fraction thereof, of required landscape area. Deciduous
trees shall have a clear trunk of at least five feet (5') above the ground and a caliper of at least two and one-half inches (2.5"). Coniferous trees
shall be at least four feet (4') in height. The remaining area shall be landscaped with shrubs or ground cover (not to include rocks or gravel
except as a mulch around shrubs and ground cover) not to exceed two feet (2') in height.
7. Landscaping: All areas of land other than those occupied by building or hard cover shall be landscaped with a combination of sod and plantings.
Rock or mulch may only be used as an accent material around sod or plantings. Trees, shrubs, flowers and ground cover needed in these areas
shall be in addition to the minimum number of trees and foundation plantings required by this title. All landscaped areas shall be irrigated. Portions of
the site may be exempt from these requirements with planning commission approval where future development or expansion is planned within a
reasonable period of time. These areas shall either be graded and seeded with prairie or maintained grass in accordance with the city of Rosemount
grading requirements or remain as undisturbed natural areas containing existing viable natural vegetation that can be maintained free of foreign and
noxious plant material and will not produce soil erosion due to potential increases in storm water runoff.
8. Trash Handling: All trash, recycling and related handling equipment shall be stored in a manner consistent with the standards outlined in section 5-1-
3 of this code.
9. Signage: Only wall and freestanding ground monument signs shall be permitted in the district in accordance with the city of Rosemount's sign
regulations and these additional standards as follows:
a. Freestanding Ground Monument Signs: A freestanding ground monument sign shall be designed with a base structure of the same exterior
decorative materials as the principal structure on the site; and that extends from the sign copy area fully to the ground, except for architectural
relief treatments. All freestanding ground monument signs, if illuminated, shall be only indirect with the light source fully diffused. These signs shall
be appropriately landscaped and subject to the same requirements for all landscaping on the property.
b. Wall Signs: Wall signs shall consist of permanent high quality materials with finished edges. No wood signs shall be permitted. Where more than
one wall sign is requested per building frontage (i.e., a multi-tenant center), a uniform sign criteria shall be prescribed by the building owner,
subject to review and approval by the city council. The sign criteria shall, among other things, describe the uniform type of sign to be allowed,
limitations of placement on the building, the method of fastening, and the procedure for tenant sign approval.
10. Underground Electrical Services: No building or structure located in the district shall be served other than by underground electric, telephone and
cable distribution facilities. Poles, wires or other aboveground distribution facilities may only be temporarily installed during site construction or repair
of the underground system. No changes in the grade or contours of land above or adjacent to these facilities, once installed, shall be made without
the approved written consent of the City Engineer and the utility company providing such services. (Ord. B-174, 10-17-2006)
11-4-16-1: HI HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: The purpose of the HI Heavy Industrial District is to provide for the establishment of uses that refine and store combustible or
explosive materials or blend, store, and distribute chemicals or fertilizer. Such uses may include large unscreened outdoor structures or equipment that
cannot be integrated into the building design or large scale outdoor storage. These uses typically generate noise, odor, vibration, illumination, or
particulate that may be offensive or obnoxious to adjacent land uses. As a result of these characteristics, these uses require large areas and setbacks
as well as significant screening and are not compatible with residential uses or high concentrations of people. Associated accessory, conditional, or
interim uses are subject to the site and building standards of the GI District, except as noted below. (Ord. B-175, 10-17-2006)
B. Permitted Uses: The following are permitted uses in the HI Heavy Industrial District:
Commercial use antennas and towers, subject to the requirements of section 11-9-6 of this title.
Essential services.
Heavy manufacturing (including large structures or equipment which: 1) refine or store combustible or explosive materials or 2) blend, store and
distribute chemicals or fertilizer).
Small wireless facilities within right-of-way, subject to the regulations contained in title 4, chapter 2 of this Code. (Ord. B-227, 5-21-2013; amd. Ord.
B-265, 11-21-2017)
C. Accessory Uses: The following uses are permitted accessory uses in the HI Heavy Industrial District. These uses are subject to the site and building
standards outlined in subsection 11-4-16G of this chapter of the General Industrial District, except as specifically exempted below:
Barge terminals.
Indoor bulk material storage.
Off street parking or loading for a permitted, conditional or interim use.
Office uses accessory to a permitted or conditional use.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 236/324
Outdoor storage, subject to the following:
1. Outdoor storage uses are exempt from the site and building standards outlined in subsection 11-4-16G of this chapter of the General Industrial
District.
2. The outdoor storage area shall be designed to limit its effects on adjacent properties and public right(s)-of-way.
3. The storage area shall be covered with paving, porous paving, gravel, vegetation, or a combination thereof. If necessary, this covering shall
include additional materials so as to comply with subsection 11-9-1C, "Dust, Dirt, Smoke, Odor, Gases", of this title.
4. The storage area shall not take up, or interfere with access to, any required parking, loading, maneuvering or pedestrian area.
5. The storage area shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion.
6. No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or nonindustrial use or district. This subsection shall not be read to prohibit or
proscribe safety alarms or sirens.
7. The storage area shall be clearly identified on the approved site plan for the project, may only be located in either a side or rear yard, and shall
not encroach into any required accessory structure or building setback.
8. All outdoor storage areas shall be set back and screened as outlined below. In no case shall any outdoor storage area be located within seventy
five feet (75') of any public right-of-way or property line.
a. If an outdoor storage area is located between seventy five feet (75') and three hundred feet (300') of a public right-of-way, it shall be screened
from eye level view from the public right of way by a one hundred percent (100%) opacity screen to a height equal to the items being screened,
but not more than thirty five feet (35'). Screening shall be accomplished by buildings, structures, landscaping and berming, natural topography,
screening wall, or a combination thereof. Any screening wall shall be made of a masonry material and shall not extend more than one hundred
feet (100') without a change in architecture to reduce its mass and appearance.
b. If an outdoor storage area is located between three hundred feet (300') and one thousand feet (1,000') from a public right of way, it shall be
screened from the eye level view from the public right of way by a seventy five percent (75%) opacity screen to a height equal to the items being
screened but not more than thirty five feet (35'). Screening shall be accomplished by buildings, structures, landscaping and berming, natural
topography, screening wall, or a combination thereof. Any screening wall shall be made of a masonry material and shall not extend more than
three hundred feet (300') without a change in architecture to reduce its mass and appearance.
c. If an outdoor storage area is located more than one thousand feet (1,000') from a public right of way, no screening shall be required.
Overnight sleeping facilities for security or safety personnel, subject to the site and building standards of the GI district in subsection 11-4-16G of this
chapter.
Roof mounted or ground mounted solar energy systems, subject to section 11-2-12 of this title. (Ord. B-175, 10-17-2006; amd. Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014)
D. Conditional Uses: The following uses are conditional uses in the HI heavy industrial district and are subject to the conditional use permit provisions
outlined in this title. These uses are also subject to the site and building standards outlined in subsection 11-4-16G of this chapter of the general
industrial district, except as specifically exempted below:
Combined heat and power plants, subject to:
1. The combined heat and power plant is customarily incidental and subordinate to the primary use of the site and must support existing processes
within the facility. A minimum of eighty percent (80%) of power generated by the CHP plant must be utilized by the facility.
2. For the sale of power from the combined heat and power plant to remain incidental and subordinate to the primary use (i.e., the refinery), the
sale of excess power cannot exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total amount of power needed to operate the principal use. This thirty percent
(30%) limit, however, cannot be calculated based upon the total amount of power that can theoretically be generated by the CHP plant. Rather, the
thirty percent (30%) sale limitation must be based upon: a) the critical load and ancillary load demand of the refinery itself; and b) necessary
redundancy power.
3. The owner/operator of the combined heat and power plant may not sell any power in excess of the maximum power sale amounts set forth
herein without the advance consent of the city; the city shall only consider such a request by the owner/operator of the facility in the event of a
crisis or casualty (i.e., a tornado, or other similar disaster).
4. The facility must have a single owner at all times.
5. The owner/operator of the combined heat and power plant is prohibited from selling, transferring or otherwise providing power to any third party
user directly, and shall only sell, transfer, or otherwise provide power, if at all, to the city, Xcel Energy, Dakota Electric, and shall only export power
through an interconnection with the regional electric grid.
6. Maximum height of any structure cannot exceed that allowed by the zoning ordinance or that of any existing structures within the facility,
whichever is lower.
7. The project must comply with all other applicable zoning code provisions for the HI heavy industrial zoning district with regard to site and
building requirements as well as performance standards.
8. The project must comply with all requirements of state and federal agencies.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 237/324
9. Landscaping plans must take into account sightlines from neighboring rights of way and land uses that differ from the project.
10. The CHP plant cannot exceed the principal structure in square footage, height, or massing as determined by the city.
11. The parcel where the CHP plant is located must be greater than one hundred (100) acres.
Motor freight terminals.
Truck stops subject to the requirements outlined in the GI district in subsection 11-4-16D of this chapter.
Warehousing, wholesaling and distribution of nonheavy manufacturing materials.
Other uses similar to those in this district as determined by the board of appeals and adjustments, subject to issuance of a conditional use permit.
(Ord. B-252, 8-16-2016)
E. Interim Uses: The following uses are interim uses in the HI heavy industrial district and are subject to the interim use permit provisions outlined in
section 11-10-8 of this title. These uses are also subject to the site and building standards outlined in subsection 11-4-16G of this chapter of the general
industrial district, except as specifically exempted below:
Asphalt plant, cement and concrete production and related processing of stockpile materials, subject to the following:
1. The asphalt, cement, or concrete plant and all equipment and materials associated with it shall be located a minimum of six hundred feet (600')
from any nonindustrial district land, and two thousand six hundred feet (2,600') from any residential or public district.
2. The plant and all equipment and materials associated with it shall be set back a minimum of three hundred feet (300') from any property
boundary line and screened by natural features including changes in elevation and vegetation. Year round one hundred percent (100%) opaque
screening with earthen berms and landscaping shall be required from ground level to the first thirty percent (30%) of the overall height and fifty
percent (50%) opaque to fifty percent (50%) of the overall height of the plant as viewed from eye level from surrounding right of way or roadways.
3. Asphalt plant, cement and concrete production may be exempt from conformance with the following standards of the zoning ordinance at the
discretion of the city council:
a. Supplementary regulations, subsection 11-5-2A, "Building Type And Construction", of this title.
b. Subsection 11-6-1L, "Off Street Parking Design And Construction Standards", of this title.
c. Section 11-6-3, "Landscaping Requirements", of this title.
d. Subsection 11-4-16G, "Site And Building Standards", of this chapter for the GI general industrial district.
4. Traffic generated by these uses shall utilize haul routes approved by the city and other agencies as required. The plant owner shall be
responsible for road improvements and easements needed for ingress and egress subject to approval by the city, as well as the county highway
department or the Minnesota department of transportation as required.
5. Traffic generated by these uses shall enter onto streets consistent with city access and design standards. The owner of these uses shall be
responsible for all costs associated with road improvements required to serve the use.
6. Stockpiles associated with these uses shall be limited to a height of fifty feet (50').
7. No smoke or particulate matter shall be discharged that is darker than no. 1 classification of the Ringelmann smoke chart furnished by the U.S.
bureau of mines, or twenty percent (20%) opacity as determined by the MPCA. Further, emissions shall conform to standards set by EPA and
MPCA.
8. These uses shall operate so as not to discharge onto the soils of the lot, across the boundaries of the lot or through percolation into the subsoil
of the lot or beyond the boundary of the lot where such use is located, toxic or noxious matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or
endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare; or, cause injury or damage to property or business.
9. These uses shall operate in a way so as to prevent the emission of odorous matter of such quality as to be readily detectable beyond the lot line
of the site on which such use is located.
10. These uses shall comply with the applicable operating, special requirements and bonding for restoration standards for mineral extraction
specified in section 11-10-4 of this title.
Community solar gardens or solar farms on properties outside the metropolitan urban service area (MUSA), subject to section 11-2-12 of this title.
Outdoor bulk material storage and processing, subject to the following:
1. The bulk material is essential to the operation of the principal use of the site.
2. Processing of the bulk material is limited to changing the size of the material or changing the state of the material from liquid to solid. No
blending or otherwise changing the chemical composition of the material is permitted to occur outdoors.
3. The bulk material is nonputrescible.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 238/324
4. The leachate from the bulk material is contained, collected, and treated through a wastewater treatment system in compliance with state,
county, and local regulations.
5. The area used for bulk material storage is no more than fifteen percent (15%) of the land area used by the principal structure.
6. The height of any stockpile of bulk material stored outdoors shall not exceed fifty feet (50').
7. All outdoor bulk material storage shall be set back and screened as outlined below. In no case shall the outdoor storage of bulk material be
located within three hundred fifty feet (350') of any public right of way or property line.
a. If an outdoor storage area is located between three hundred fifty feet (350') and six hundred feet (600') of a public right of way, it shall be
screened from eye level view from the public right of way by a one hundred percent (100%) opacity screen to a height equal to the items being
screened, but not more than thirty five feet (35'). Screening shall be accomplished by buildings, structures, landscaping and berming, natural
topography, screening wall, or a combination thereof. Any screening wall shall be made of a masonry material and shall not extend more than
three hundred feet (300') without a change in architecture to reduce its mass and appearance.
b. If an outdoor storage area is located between six hundred feet (600') and one thousand feet (1,000') from a public right of way, it shall be
screened from the eye level view from the public right of way by a seventy five percent (75%) opacity screen to a height equal to the items being
screened but not more than thirty five feet (35'). Screening shall be accomplished by buildings, structures, landscaping and berming, natural
topography, screening wall, or a combination thereof. Any screening wall shall be made of a masonry material and shall not extend more than
three hundred feet (300') without a change in architecture to reduce its mass and appearance.
c. If an outdoor storage area is located more than one thousand feet (1,000') from a public right of way, no screening shall be required.
Spent bauxite disposal facilities as an accessory use only.
Temporary buildings accessory to an approved construction project, subject to:
1. Execution of an interim use permit agreement specifying the expiration of the IUP and removal of the temporary building(s).
2. Temporary buildings are subject to the interim use permit standards, findings and conditions specified in this title.
3. Temporary buildings may be exempt from conformance with the following standards of the zoning ordinance at the discretion of the city council:
a. Supplementary regulations, subsection 11-5-2A, "Building Type And Construction", of this title.
b. Subsection 11-6-1L, "Off Street Parking Design And Construction Standards", of this title.
c. Section 11-6-3, "Landscaping Requirements", of this title.
d. Subsection 11-4-16G, "Site And Building Standards", of this chapter for the GI general industrial district.
4. Temporary buildings shall conform to all other heavy industrial district standards specified within this title, and be set back five hundred feet
(500') from adjoining public right of way or visually screened from public right of way, public/institutional or residential districts or uses. If the
building is not appropriately screened, the city may require additional landscaping or enhanced treatment of the temporary structure.
5. Temporary buildings are subject to building code permits and requirements.
6. Temporary buildings are subject to fire code permits and requirements.
7. The site must accommodate adequate parking for the intended use.
8. Site grading and drainage must comply with city ordinances and engineering guidelines. The city may, at its discretion waive some of the
requirements if alternative solutions are acceptable.
Other uses similar to those in this district as determined by the board of appeals and adjustments, subject to issuance of an interim use permit. (Ord.
B-175, 10-17-2006; amd. Ord. B-201, 6-16-2009; Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014)
F. Lot And Building Requirements: For the purpose of this section, principal use (including large structures or equipment which: 1) refine or store
combustible or explosive materials or 2) blend, store and distribute chemicals or fertilizer) shall comply with lot and building standards for principal
structures. Similarly, accessory uses comply with the lot and building standards for accessory structures.
1. Minimum Lot Area: Twenty five (25) acres.
2. Minimum Lot Width: n/a.
3. Maximum Lot Coverage: Seventy percent (70%).
4. Minimum District Size: Twenty five (25) acres.
5. Minimum Setback Standards For All Structures (Buildings Or Equipment):
SETBACK STANDARDS FOR ALL STRUCTURES
WITHIN THE HI HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 239/324
Height Of Structure Setback Standard
Less than or equal to 35 feet or any structure that contains a nonheavy manufacturing use and meets the site and
building standards outlined in subsection 11-4-16G of this chapter of the general industrial district
75 feet
Structures up to 50 feet and storage tanks up to 35 feet 150 feet
Structures up to 250 feet 300 feet
Structures greater than 250 feet May be allowed through
a conditional use permit
6. Parking Setback:
a. Minimum front yard setback: Seventy five feet (75').
b. Minimum side yard setback: Seventy five feet (75').
c. Minimum rear yard setback: Seventy five feet (75').
7. Building Size:
a. Maximum building height (principal or accessory): Seventy five feet (75').
b. Maximum structure height: Two hundred fifty feet (250'). (The city council may allow structures to exceed this height through issuance of a
conditional use permit.)
G. Site And Building Standards: To prevent urban blight and ensure quality long lasting construction compatible with both adjacent properties and those
throughout the district, all accessory, conditional or interim uses allowed under the heavy industrial district, except those with specific exemptions, shall
comply with the site and building standards outlined in subsection 11-4-16G of this chapter of the general industrial district as well as applicable
sections of this title. The city council may waive some or all of these standards for nonexempt uses based on the following:
1. The proposed building will be located in a remote location that does not abut a public right of way or a nonindustrial use or district.
2. The proposed building will be made of high quality long lasting material compatible with both adjacent properties and other buildings in the HI district.
3. The provision of pedestrian faculties is unnecessary based on the use of the proposed building.
4. Parking, loading, and trash handling facilities are supplied by the surrounding site and do not abut a public right of way or a nonindustrial use or
district.
5. The applicant agrees to provide the required number and species of landscaping along the perimeter of the site.
6. The proposed building will not have separate ground or wall signage. (Ord. B-175, 10-17-2006)
11-4-17: WM WASTE MANAGEMENT DISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: This district is intended to accommodate waste industries and the inherent environmental problems associated with waste
management. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
B. Uses Permitted By Interim Use Permit:
Composting.
Construction demolition waste facility subject to the following restrictions:
1. Recycling operations subject to requirements of section 11-10-5 of this title.
2. The facility is developed, operated and maintained in accordance with an approved interim use permit by the City of Rosemount and all other
applicable local, State and Federal laws.
3. Permits for the facility by the State of Minnesota and Dakota County are pending or have received approval.
Nonhazardous industrial waste containment facility.
Small wireless facilities within right-of-way, subject to the regulations contained in title 4, chapter 2 of this Code.
Waste processing facility.
Waste transfer station. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989; amd. Ord. B-64, 6-18-1996; Ord. B-126, 3-6-2003; Ord. B-224, 6-5-2012; Ord. B-226, 3-19-2013; Ord. B-
265, 11-21-2017)
11-4-18: PI PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 240/324
A. Purpose And Intent: This district is primarily intended to accommodate major public and institutional uses of a governmental, educational, and
recreational nature that serve the entire community. Where available, structures shall be serviced by the public sewer and water systems. (Ord. B-219,
4-17-2012)
B. Uses Permitted By Right:
Colleges or universities.
Public auditoriums, civic centers, community centers or the like.
Public or governmental services, including City offices, public administration buildings and the like.
Public parks owned and operated by a governmental unit, including recreational facilities and structures consistent with the public area.
Secondary schools.
Small wireless facilities within right-of-way, subject to the regulations contained in title 4, chapter 2 of this Code. (Ord. B-219, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord.
B-265, 11-21-2017)
C. Accessory Uses: The following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:
Community gardens.
Fences as regulated by this title.
Off street parking as regulated by this title.
Roof mounted or ground mounted solar energy systems, subject to section 11-2-12 of this title.
Signs as regulated by this title. (Ord. B-219, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014)
D. Conditional Uses: The following uses are conditional uses in the PI District and are subject to the conditional use permit provisions in section 11-10-7 of
this title:
Cemeteries in accordance with the standards of section 11-10-10 of this title.
Inflatable domes, stadiums and structures, subject to:
1. Domes that are incompatible with residential districts shall be located a minimum of five hundred feet (500') from any residential district or use.
Other uses similar to those listed in this subsection as determined by the Board of Appeals and Adjustments and approved by the City Council,
subject to issuance of a conditional use permit. (Ord. B-219, 4-17-2012)
E. Interim Uses:
Community solar gardens or solar farms on properties outside the metropolitan urban service area (MUSA), subject to section 11-2-12 of this title.
Temporary classroom type structure for use by public or private institutions for up to a three (3) year term.
Other uses similar to those listed in this subsection as determined by the Board of Appeals and Adjustments and approved by the City Council,
subject to issuance of a conditional use permit. (Ord. B-219, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014)
F. Minimum Lot Requirements And Setbacks:
1. Maximum Lot Coverage: Seventy percent (70%).
2. Minimum Front Yard Setback: Thirty feet (30').
3. Minimum Side Yard Setback: Thirty feet (30').
4. Minimum Rear Yard Setback: Thirty feet (30').
5. Parking Setbacks:
a. Minimum front yard setback: Twenty feet (20').
b. Minimum rear yard setback: Ten feet (10').
c. Minimum side yard setback: Ten feet (10').
d. When there exists an easement for a shared private roadway or drive, the required setback is ten feet (10') from the easement.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 241/324
6. Buffer Yard: A buffer yard equal to thirty feet (30') or two (2) times the height of the building, whichever is greater, shall be required along any side or
rear property line abutting any residential use. This area shall contain landscaping and berming to provide a ninety percent (90%) opacity screen to a
height of at least six feet (6') and shall not contain any structures, parking, off street loading or storage. Should landscaping and berming be found
ineffective by the city, the city may approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an alternative. Screening walls shall be constructed of the
same materials as the principal building and shall not extend more than twenty five feet (25') without a change in architecture to reduce their mass
and appearance.
7. Maximum Building Height: Fifty feet (50').
G. Site And Building Standards: To prevent urban blight and ensure quality long lasting construction that does not detract from adjacent properties and is
compatible with those throughout the district, all sites and buildings, except public parks, shall comply with the following standards, as well as
applicable sections of this title:
1. Architectural Appearance: While variation in materials and colors that support the general theme may be allowed, the overall building should have
"360 degree" architecture. Any variations shall focus the highest level of architectural detail, material variation, facade articulation, or roofline
enhancements on those elevations that face a public right of way. Non-earth tone materials shall be limited to architectural accents. The color of the
nonbrick or stone portion of the building shall match the predominant brick or stone color portion.
a. Entry Features: Primary entrances facing a public right of way or abutting a required parking area shall be accented by visually pleasing entry
features. This feature shall extend a minimum three hundred (300) square feet around a single entrance. Should the building have more than one
entrance facing a public right of way or abutting a required parking area, this feature shall extend a minimum one hundred fifty (150) square feet
around each individual entrance.
2. Building Massing: Facades shall be articulated to reduce their mass and scale and provide visual interest consistent with Rosemount's identity,
character, and scale. Large uninterrupted building walls or elevations are prohibited. Corner architectural elements are encouraged to define the
edges of a building. A building more than one hundred feet (100') in width shall be divided into increments of no more than thirty feet (30') through
the articulation of the facade. This shall be achieved through combinations of the following techniques:
a. Divisions or breaks in the materials.
b. Arcades, entry features, window bays, or the like.
c. Variations in rooflines or slope plane.
d. Variation in building plane or setback.
e. Equivalent techniques approved by the city.
3. Permitted Materials: The exterior wall surfaces of all buildings shall be constructed of at least fifty percent (50%) brick or natural stone. The
remaining fifty percent (50%) of the wall surface may be specialty integral colored concrete block (including textured, burnished, and rock faced
block), tile (masonry, stone or clay), architectural textured concrete panels cast in place, or better. EIFS or masonry stucco may be used for
architectural accents totaling no more than ten percent (10%) of the nonglass, brick or stone portion of the building. Unadorned concrete is
prohibited.
4. Pedestrian Circulation: Appropriate provisions shall be made to protect pedestrian areas from encroachments by parked or moving vehicles. Clear
and well lighted walkways shall extend throughout the site and parking area(s) connecting building entrances to adjacent public sidewalks and any
parking facilities located on the site.
a. A walkway at least six feet (6') wide shall extend along any facade featuring a primary entrance and any facade abutting a parking or maneuvering
area.
b. A continuous and permanent barrier concrete curb not less than six inches (6") above grade shall separate internal sidewalks from parking,
loading, stacking and maneuvering areas.
5. Lighting: Exterior lighting shall be consistent in character throughout the entire site.
a. Light shall be directed toward the ground. Externally lit signs, display, building and aesthetic lighting must be lit from the top and shine downward.
Lighting must be shielded to prevent direct glare.
b. The level of lighting shall not exceed 0.5 lumens at any residential use property line or 1.0 lumen at any nonresidential use property line.
c. The maximum height for exterior lighting shall not exceed the following:
(1) The maximum height for ball field lights is eighty feet (80'). The minimum setback for such lights shall be no less than the height of the light.
(2) The maximum height for all other exterior lights is thirty feet (30'). The maximum height of such lights within one hundred feet (100') of a
residential use or district shall be twenty feet (20').
d. All nonessential lighting will be required to be turned off after business hours, leaving only the necessary lighting for site security.
6. Parking Lots: To reduce the impact of large expanses of paved surfaces, provide a more pedestrian friendly environment and provide adequate room
for snow storage, all parking areas (including driveways and drive aisles) shall be screened and landscaped. Trees, shrubs, flowers and ground
cover needed in these areas shall be in addition to the minimum number of trees and foundation plantings required by this title.
a. Screening: Landscaping and berming shall be a primary source for screening parking areas. Should landscaping and berming be found ineffective
by the city, the city may approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an alternative. Screening walls shall be constructed of the same
materials as the principal building and shall not extend more than twenty five feet (25') without a change in architecture to reduce their mass and
appearance. The screening source (landscaping and berming or walls and/or decorative fencing) shall provide a minimum fifty percent (50%)
opacity screen to a height of at least four feet (4').
b. Landscaping: A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the parking area shall be landscaped. This landscaping shall be located on islands, peninsulas
or the like within the perimeter of the parking area.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 242/324
(1) The islands or peninsulas shall be a minimum eight and one-half feet (8.5') wide and extend the length of the adjacent parking stall(s). The city
council may approve altered dimensions to ensure sufficient area for the proposed landscaping to mature.
(2) To ensure this landscaping is properly dispersed, a minimum of one island, peninsula or the like shall be located within each six thousand
(6,000) square feet of vehicular use area.
(3) A minimum of one tree shall be required for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet or fraction thereof, of required landscape area. Deciduous
trees shall have a clear trunk of at least five feet (5') above the ground and a caliper of at least two and one-half inches (2.5"). Coniferous trees
shall be at least four feet (4') in height. The remaining area shall be landscaped with shrubs or ground cover (not to include rocks or gravel
except as a mulch around shrubs and ground cover) not to exceed two feet (2') in height.
7. Landscaping: All areas of land other than those occupied by building or hardcover shall be landscaped with a combination of turf and plantings. Rock
or mulch may only be used as an accent material around sod or plantings. Trees, shrubs, flowers and ground cover needed in these areas shall be in
addition to the minimum number of trees and foundation plantings required by this title. Portions of the site may be exempt from these requirements
where future development or expansion is planned. These areas shall either be graded and seeded with prairie grass in accordance with the city of
Rosemount grading requirements or remain as undisturbed natural areas containing existing viable natural vegetation that can be maintained free of
foreign and noxious plant material and will not produce soil erosion due to potential increases in stormwater runoff. (Ord. B-219, 4-17-2012)
11-4-19: FP FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: The floodplain district is designed to provide floodplain management for the city of Rosemount in accordance with Minnesota
statutes1. The intent of the floodplain district is to regulate the flood hazard areas for the purposes of reducing the risk of loss of life, loss of property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
B. National Flood Insurance Program Compliance: This section is adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of the national flood insurance program
codified as 44 code of federal regulations parts 59-78, as amended, so as to maintain the community's eligibility in the national flood insurance
program.
C. Definitions: The following terms and associated definition apply specifically to the floodplain district:
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include the term "recreational
vehicle".
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. For the purposes of this section, the term recreational
vehicle shall be synonymous with the term travel trailer/travel vehicle.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Within any consecutive three hundred sixty five (365) day period, any reconstruction, rehabilitation (including
normal maintenance and repair), repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred
"substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
2. Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure".
For the purpose of this section, "historic structure" shall be as defined in 44 code of federal regulations, part 59.1.
D. General Provisions:
1. Establishment Of Zoning District: The floodplain areas within the jurisdiction of this title shall include the zone AE areas shown on the flood insurance
rate map panels adopted in this subsection D1. The boundaries of this district shall be shown on the official zoning map. The official zoning map
together with all materials attached thereto is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this title. The attached materials shall include
the flood insurance study for Dakota County, Minnesota and incorporated areas, flood insurance rate map index number 27037 C IND 4A and flood
insurance rate map panels therein numbered 27037 C 0119E, 27037 C 0138E, 27037 C 0208E, 27037 C 0209E, 27037 C 0228E, 27037 C 0229E,
27037 C 0233E and 27037 C 0253E all the documents being dated December 2, 2011, and prepared by the federal emergency management
agency. The floodway and the flood fringe areas delineated on the flood insurance rate map panels comprise the area designated as the floodplain
zoning district on the official zoning map. A copy of the official zoning map and all other maps referenced herein shall be on file in the office of the city
clerk.
2. Rules For Interpretation Of Floodplain District Boundary: The boundary of the floodplain district established by this section shall be determined by
scaling distances on the official zoning map. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundary of the district as shown on the
official zoning map or there is a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the board of appeals and adjustment shall make the
necessary interpretation. All decisions will be based on the ground elevations that existed on the site at the time the community adopted its initial
floodplain ordinance or the date of the first national flood insurance program map that placed the site in the floodplain if earlier, elevations on the
regional (100-year) flood profile and other available technical data. Persons contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to present their case to the board of appeals and adjustments and to submit technical evidence.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 243/324
3. Compliance: No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be constructed, located, extended, converted, or structurally
altered without full compliance with the terms of this section and other applicable regulations that apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this title.
Within the floodplain district, all uses not listed as permitted uses or conditional uses are prohibited. In addition, a caution is provided here that:
a. Modifications, additions, structural alterations or repair after damage to existing nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses of structures or
land are regulated by the general provisions of this section and specifically subsection D8 of this section; and
b. As built elevations for elevated or floodproofed structures must be certified by ground surveys and floodproofing techniques must be designed and
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as specified in the general provisions of this section and specifically as stated in section
11-10-9 of this title.
4. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: This section does not imply that areas outside the floodplain district or land uses permitted within such districts
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This section shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employees for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
5. Severability: As with any provision herein, this section is subject to the severability clause in section 1-2-4 of this code.
6. Subdivision: No land may be subdivided that is unsuitable for the reasons of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment
facilities. All lots within the floodplain district may be able to contain a building site outside of the floodplain district at or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation. All subdivisions must have water and sewage treatment facilities that comply with the provisions of this section and have road
access both to the subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower than two feet (2') below the regulatory flood protection elevation. For all
subdivisions in the floodplain, the floodway and flood fringe district boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the required elevation of
all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting documents.
7. Annexation: The flood insurance rate map panels adopted by reference in this section may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the corporate
boundaries of Rosemount at the time of adoption of this section. If any of these floodplain areas are annexed into Rosemount after the date of this
section, the newly annexed floodplain lands shall be subject to the provisions of this section immediately upon the date of annexation into
Rosemount.
8. Nonconforming Uses: No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity.
a. Any structural alteration to a nonconforming structure or nonconforming use that would result in increasing the flood damage potential of that
structure or use shall be protected to the regulatory flood protection elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or floodproofing
techniques (i.e., FP-1 through FP-4 floodproofing classifications) allowable in the state building code, except as further restricted in subsection D8c
of this section.
b. If any nonconforming use or structure is substantially damaged, as defined in subsection C of this section, it may not be reconstructed except in
conformity with the provisions of this title. The applicable provisions for establishing new uses or new structures in this section will apply.
c. If a "substantial improvement" occurs, as defined in subsection C of this section, from any combination of a rehabilitation, reconstruction,
alteration, or other improvement to the inside dimensions of an existing nonconforming building, then the existing nonconforming building must
meet the requirements of this section for new structures.
E. FP Floodplain District Regulations:
1. Uses Permitted By Right: The following uses are permitted within the floodplain district. These uses shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood
elevations. In addition, these uses shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or storage of materials or equipment.
Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and
wild crop harvesting.
Industrial-commercial loading and parking areas.
Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps,
swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and single or multiple
purpose recreational trails. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles are prohibited.
Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
2. Uses Permitted By Conditional Use Permit: The following uses shall be permitted upon issuance of a conditional use permit subject to the
procedures and standards set forth in section 11-10-9 of this title. These uses shall not be permitted if they will cause any increase in the stage of the
regional flood or increase the potential for flood damage in the reach or reaches affected.
Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other materials.
Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and water control structures.
Placement of fill.
Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and pipelines.
Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials.
Structures accessory to the uses listed in subsection E1 of this section and this subsection E2.
3. Additional Standards For Floodplain Conditional Uses:
a. Standards For Fill:
(1) Fill, dredge spoil and all other similar materials deposited or stored in the floodplain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover,
mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 244/324
(2) Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations are not allowed unless a long term site development plan is submitted that includes an
erosion/sedimentation prevention element to the plan.
(3) As an alternative, and consistent with subsection E3a(2) of this section, dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel operations may allow
temporary, on site storage of fill or other materials which would have caused an increase to the stage of the 100-year or regional flood but only
after the planning commission has received an appropriate plan that assures the removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the
flood warning time available.
b. Standards For Accessory Structures:
(1) Structures shall not be designed for human habitation.
(2) Structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of floodwaters:
(A) Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow, and
(B) So far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
(C) Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally dry floodproofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 floodproofing classifications
in the state building code. As an alternative, an accessory structure may be floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 floodproofing classification in the
state building code provided the accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed five hundred (500) square feet in size,
and for a detached garage, the detached garage must be used solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage. All floodproofed accessory
structures must meet the following additional standards, as appropriate:
(i) The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure and shall be designed to
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls;
(ii) Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or properly
floodproofed; and
(iii) To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must be a minimum of two (2) "automatic" openings in the outside walls of the
structure having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. There must be
openings on at least two (2) sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings must be no higher than one foot (1') above the lowest
adjacent grade to the structure. Using human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy the requirement for
automatic openings.
c. Standards For Storage Of Materials And Equipment:
(1) The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life
is prohibited.
(2) Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in
accordance with a plan approved by the planning commission.
(3) No garbage and waste disposal sites shall be issued for floodway areas and there shall be no further encroachment upon the floodway at
existing sites.
d. Standards For Flood Control:
(1) Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current or cross section of protected wetlands or public waters shall be subject to
the provisions of Minnesota statutes, chapter 103G. Community wide structural works for flood control intended to remove areas from the
regulatory floodplain are not allowed in the floodway.
(2) A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway shall not cause an increase to the 100-year or regional flood and the technical analysis
must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream.
e. Standards For Public Utilities, Railroads, Roads And Bridges:
(1) Public Utilities: All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the floodplain shall be
floodproofed in accordance with the state building code or elevated to above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
(2) Public Transportation Facilities: Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located within the floodplain shall comply with this title. Elevation to
the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be provided where failure or interruption of these transportation facilities would result in danger to
the public health or safety or where such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be
constructed at a lower elevation where failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health or safety.
(3) On Site Sewage Treatment And Water Supply Systems: Where public utilities are not provided: a) on site water supply systems must be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and b) new or replacement on site sewage treatment systems must
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters and they shall
not be subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment system designed in accordance with the state's
current statewide standards for on site sewage treatment systems shall be determined to be in compliance with this section.
F. Administration And Enforcement:
1. Permit Required: All permits issued by the city in conformity with the provisions of this title shall be secured prior to the erection, addition,
modification, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), or alteration of any building, structure, or portion thereof; prior to the use or
change of use of a building, structure, or land; prior to the construction of a dam, fence, or on site septic system; prior to the change or extension of a
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 245/324
nonconforming use; prior to the repair of a structure that has been damaged by flood, fire, tornado, or any other source; and prior to the placement of
fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of materials or equipment within the floodplain.
2. Application For Permit: Application for a permit shall be made in duplicate to the planning department and shall include the following where
applicable: a) plans in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the lot; b) existing or proposed
structures, fill, or storage of materials; and c) the location of the foregoing in relation to the stream channel.
3. State And Federal Permits: Prior to granting a local permit or processing an application for a conditional use permit or variance, the planning
department shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal permits.
4. Certificate Of Zoning Compliance For A New, Altered, Or Nonconforming Use: It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of
any building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, altered, or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate
of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the planning department stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of
this title.
5. Construction And Use To Be Provided On Applications, Plans, Permits, Variances, And Certificates Of Zoning Compliance: Permits, conditional use
permits, or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and
construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Any use, arrangement, or
construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this title, and punishable as provided by section 11-10-2 of this title.
6. Certification: The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a licensed professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land
surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this title. Floodproofing measures shall
be certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect.
7. Record Of First Floor Elevation: The planning department shall maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the floodplain. The planning department shall also maintain a record of the elevation to
which structures and alterations or additions to structures are floodproofed.
8. Notification Of Watercourse Alternations: The zoning administrator shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the commissioner of
the department of natural resources prior to the community authorizing any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. If the applicant has applied for a
permit to work in the beds of the public waters pursuant to Minnesota statutes, chapter 103G, this shall suffice as adequate notice to the
commissioner of the department of natural resources. A copy of said notification shall also be submitted to the Chicago regional office of the federal
emergency management agency (FEMA).
9. Notification To FEMA When Physical Changes Increase Or Decrease The 100-Year Flood Elevation: As soon as is practicable, but no later than six
(6) months after the date such supporting information becomes available, the zoning administrator shall notify the Chicago regional office of FEMA of
the changes by submitting a copy of said technical or scientific data.
10. Penalties For Violations: As with any provision of this section, this section is subject to the general penalties outlined in title 1, chapter 4 of this
code.
G. Variances: The variance provisions in section 11-12-2 of this title shall apply to this section, in addition to the following findings:
1. No variance shall provide for a lesser degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection for the particular area or permit standards lower
than those required by state law. The following additional variance criteria of the federal emergency management agency must be satisfied:
a. Variances may not be issued within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
b. Variances may only be issued by a community upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
c. Variances may only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
2. Notice of any application for a variance shall be submitted to the commissioner of natural resources at least ten (10) days prior to the date of hearing
on the variance. Such notice shall specify the time, place and subject matter of the hearing and shall be accompanied by such supporting information
as is necessary to indicate the nature and effect of the proposed use. A copy of all decisions granting a variance under this section shall be
forwarded to the commissioner of natural resources within ten (10) days of such action.
H. Flood Insurance Notice And Recordkeeping: The Planning Department shall notify the applicant for a variance that:
1. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and
2. Such construction below the 100-year or regional flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record
of all variance actions. A community shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances
issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program.
I. Amendments To This Section: The floodplain designation on zoning maps shall not be removed from floodplain areas unless it can be shown that the
designation is in error or that the areas are filled to an elevation at or above the flood protection elevation and are contiguous to other lands lying
outside the floodplain district. Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner of Natural Resources if the Commissioner
determines that, through other measures, lands are protected adequately for the intended uses.
All amendments must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of Natural Resources prior to adoption. Changes in the official zoning map
must meet the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) technical conditions and criteria and must receive prior FEMA approval before
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 246/324
adoption. The Commissioner of Natural Resources must be given ten (10) days' written notice of all hearings to consider an amendment to this section,
and said notice shall include a draft of the ordinance amendment or technical study under consideration.
All requests to change a special flood hazard area designation shall meet the criteria established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(Ord. B-217, 11-15-2011)
11-4-20: IP INDUSTRIAL PARK DISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: This district is intended to accommodate new, modern, high performance, light industrial uses which are planned as a unit and
include an internal circulation system. This district is located within the MUSA and is intended to be served by the public utility systems. Uses shall be
conducted completely within structures except as provided for herein. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
B. Uses Permitted By Right:
Business and professional offices.
Machine and repair shops.
Manufacturing, custom.
Manufacturing, warehousing, wholesaling, distribution, processing, packaging, assembly, compounding and accessory uses.
Outdoor storage of materials, supplies and finished or semifinished products provided such storage shall be completely screened from view from
public streets and adjacent properties by a wall or fence.
Small wireless facilities within right-of-way, subject to the regulations contained in title 4, chapter 2 of this Code.
Support commercial uses provided they are located within the same structure as the principal use, and are incidental to the principal use, and do not
have an entrance except from within the principal building.
Television and radio studios.
Testing and research laboratories. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989; amd. Ord. B-265, 11-21-2017)
C. Accessory Uses:
Roof mounted or ground mounted solar energy systems, subject to section 11-2-12 of this title. (Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014)
D. Uses Permitted By Planned Unit Development (PUD): Industrial developments involving multiple parcels, structures or uses shall be required to use the
PUD procedure. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989; amd. Ord. B-231, 3-4-2014)
Chapter 5
DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
11-5-1: DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS:
For additional requirements, refer to section 11-5-2, "Supplementary Regulations", of this chapter; chapter 6, "Off Street Parking, Loading And
Landscaping", and chapter 7, "Special Overlay Regulations", of this title. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS TABLE
Minimum Lot Size
(Feet) Minimum Yards (Feet)9 Other Standards
Districts
Zone
Width
(Feet)
Area
Depth
Front Side5 Rear
Maximum
Density
Maximum Building
Height (Feet)
Maximum Lot
Cover10
GUOS/Unit
(Square
Feet)
AG n/a 300 2.5 ac
n/a 50 30 30 1/40 ac 50 n/a n/a
AG-P n/a 300 40 ac n/a 50 30 30 1/40 ac 50 n/a n/a
RR n/a U-300
P-200
U-5 ac
P-2.5
ac
n/a 40 30 30 1/5 ac 35 n/a n/a
RL n/a 110 20,000
180 30 15 30 n/a 35 30% n/a
R-1 n/a C-95
I-80
C-
12,000
I-
125 303 10 30 n/a 35 30% n/a
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 247/324
10,000
R-1A n/a C-95
I-80
C-
12,000
I-
10,000
125 303 T-10
S-5
25 n/a 35 30% n/a
R-21
R-22
n/a
n/a
100
120
12,000
18,000
120
150
303
303
10
30
30
30
6/ac
6/ac
35
35
%4
75%
n/a
n/a
R-3 n/a 150 22,500
150 303 30 30 12/ac 35 75% 500
R-4 n/a 150 22,500
150 303 30 30 40/ac 35 75% 500
C-1 1 ac5
150 20,000
125 303 106 106 n/a 35 75% n/a
DT n/a None
None n/a None11
None11
None11
n/a 45 90% n/a
C-3 2 ac
120 1 ac n/a 303 106 106 n/a 35 75% n/a
C-4 1 ac
120 20,000
n/a 303 106 106 n/a 35 75% n/a
BP 1 ac
120 1 ac n/a 30 106 106 n/a 40 75% n/a
LI 5 ac
240 3 ac n/a 30 106 106 n/a 40 75% n/a
GI 10
ac
n/a 5 ac n/a 75 506 506 n/a 75 70% n/a
HI 25
ac
n/a 25 ac n/a 758 758 758 n/a 75 70% n/a
WM 10
ac
n/a 5 ac n/a 75 507 507 n/a 75 50% n/a
P n/a n/a n/a n/a 30 307 307 n/a 40 75% n/a
FP n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
U - Unplatted C - Corner lot T - Two-story
P - Platted I - Interior lot S - Single story
Notes:
1.Single- and two-family.
2.Multiple-family, including townhomes.
3.Refer to subsection 11-5-2C4a of this chapter for established front yards.
4.Two-family dwellings: 30 percent.
Single-family detached dwellings: 40 percent.
Single-family attached dwellings: 70 percent.
5.See subsections 11-5-2C2a and C2d of this chapter.
6.30 foot minimum side or rear yard where abutting a noncommercial or nonindustrial district (see district regulations).
7.Refer to subsection 11-5-2C2c of this chapter for buildings exceeding 35 feet in height.
8.Minimum 75 foot setback. See district regulations for specific setback requirements.
9.See district regulations for setback increases.
10.See definition for impervious surfaces in section 11-1-4 of this title.
11.A 10 foot buffer yard is required adjacent to any residential district.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 248/324
(Ord. B-211, 1-4-2011)
11-5-2: SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS:
A. Building Type And Construction:
1. General Provisions:
a. No galvanized or unfinished steel, galvalum or unfinished aluminum buildings (walls or roofs), except those specifically intended to have a
corrosive designed finish such as Cor-ten steel shall be permitted in any zoning district, except in association with farming activities.
b. Buildings in all zoning districts shall maintain a high standard of architectural and aesthetic compatibility with surrounding properties to ensure that
they will not adversely impact the property values of the abutting properties or adversely impact the community's public health, safety and general
welfare.
c. Exterior building finishes shall consist of materials comparable in grade and quality to the following:
(1) Brick.
(2) Natural stone.
(3) Decorative concrete block - "rock face", "breakaway" or other types of decorative block.
(4) Cast in place concrete or precast concrete panels.
(5) Wood, provided the surfaces are finished for exterior use and wood of proven exterior durability is used, such as cedar, redwood, cypress.
(6) Curtain wall panels of steel, fiberglass and aluminum (nonstructural, nonload bearing), provided such panels are factory fabricated and finished
with a durable nonfade surface and their fasteners are of a corrosion resistant design.
(7) Glass curtain wall panels.
(8) Stucco. (Ord. B-53, 4-18-1995)
2. Commercial Districts (C-1, DT, C-3, C-4): The permitted materials for commercial buildings are detailed in each individual commercial district and
applicable sections of this title. (Ord. B-211, 1-4-2011)
3. Business Park District (BP): The permitted materials for business park buildings are detailed in the BP business park district and applicable sections
of this title. (Ord. B-180, 12-19-2006)
4. Industrial Districts (LI, GI, And HI): The permitted materials for industrial buildings are detailed in each individual industrial district and applicable
sections of this title. (Ord. B-181, 12-19-2006)
5. Single-Family Dwelling Requirements: All single-family detached dwellings shall be constructed according to the following minimum standards:
a. All dwellings shall have a minimum width of twenty four feet (24').
b. All dwellings shall have a frost free foundation as defined by the applicable building code. Split level, split entry and earth sheltered homes shall be
considered to comply with this requirement.
c. Main roofs shall have a minimum pitch of three to twelve (3:12) per definition of the applicable building code.
d. Roofs shall be shingled with asphalt, wood, tiles, sod or other comparable materials as approved by the applicable building code.
e. Metal siding, with exposed panels exceeding sixteen inches (16") in width, shall not be permitted.
f. Earth sheltered homes will be permitted on the basis of site conditions, which are conducive to such housing, or in areas where changes to existing
site conditions are complementary to the site and adjacent properties and the existing character of property and structures in the area. (Ord. B, 9-
19-1989)
6. Accessory Buildings: Prefabricated metal storage buildings are limited to one hundred twenty (120) square feet maximum area in the R-1, R-1A, R-2,
RL, RR, and AG (under 20 acres and/or for nonagricultural use west of Akron Avenue) districts.
a. Maximum aggregate total for any accessory building(s), excluding attached garage, is one thousand (1,000) square feet in R-1, R-1A, R-2, and RL
districts.
b. Maximum aggregate total for any accessory building(s), excluding attached garage, is one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet in the RR or
AG (under 20 acres and/or for nonagricultural use west of Akron Avenue) districts.
(1) Exceptions: In the RR or AG (under 20 acres and/or for nonagricultural use west of Akron Avenue) districts accessory structures may exceed
one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet under the following circumstances:
(A) The maximum aggregate area for accessory structures shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the ground floor area of the principal building,
including attached garage.
(B) Maximum lot coverage shall not exceed ten percent (10%) impervious surface. (Ord. B-46, 9-23-1994)
c. Any accessory building in the R-1, R-1A, R-2, RL, RR, or AG (under 20 acres and/or for nonagricultural use west of Akron Avenue) districts over
one hundred fifty (150) square feet must be constructed of materials comparable with and complementary to the principal structure. Comparable
treatment includes the following requirements:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 249/324
(1) A minimum three to twelve (3:12) roof pitch.
(2) Roofs shall be shingled with asphalt, wood, or tile to match the home (principal building).
(3) Adequate number of windows shall be provided to break up the solid plane or exterior walls to simulate the character of the home (principal
building).
(4) Siding which is identical or closely matches the home (principal building) shall be incorporated into the design of the accessory building.
d. Accessory buildings to be constructed in the AG (agriculture) or AG-P (agricultural preserves) districts east of Akron Avenue are limited to a
maximum aggregate total of two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet of area for properties under twenty (20) acres in size or if the building
is for nonagricultural use.
e. In RR or AG districts (under 20 acres and/or for nonagricultural use west of Akron Avenue) existing accessory structures may be exempted from
aforementioned comparable exterior materials and maximum aggregate total standards. This exemption applies only in the case of structures
originally constructed for agricultural use, being in existence at the time of adoption hereof and qualifying as a barn under this title. This exemption
does not apply to prefabricated structures and does not permit the expansion of the structure's footprint.
(1) Properties with structures (barns) qualifying for this exemption are located at the following addresses:
13345 Bonaire Path
12101 Dodd Boulevard
12391 Dodd Boulevard
3270 McAndrews Road
13429 South Robert Trail
(2) Any exterior improvements to these barns must replicate the original appearance or agricultural character of the existing structure and shall be
approved by the planning commission.
(3) Exterior materials shall be limited to wood, metal, vinyl, brick or better and be comparable with the existing conditions of the barn in the areas
of: a) color, b) texture or grain, c) orientation of siding (vertical or horizontal), and d) lap width. Metal siding shall be noncorrugated and have a
thickness of at least nineteen millimeters (19 mm) while vinyl siding shall have a gauge of at least 0.044 inches. In addition, metal or vinyl siding
shall have a manufacturer's guarantee of at least twenty five (25) years.
(4) Roof materials shall be noncorrugated standing seam metal, asphalt shingles, or better and shall be comparable to the original roof.
Substitution of new materials will only be allowed in the case of replacing obsolescent roofing materials. (Ord. B-131, 7-15-2003)
Dimensional Standards For Accessory
Buildings And Surface Parking
Accessory Buildings Maximum
Building
Height
(Feet)
Surface Parking
Minimum Yards (Feet) Minimum Yards (Feet)
Districts Front Side Rear Front Side Rear
AG 50 30 30 75 501 52 51
AG-P 50 30 30 75 501 52 51
RR 40 303 30 35 401 52 51
RL 30 15 15/304 18 301 52 51
R-1 305 103 5/304 18 301 102 101
R-1A 305 53 5/254 18 301 102 101
R-2 (2F)
(3+F)
305
305
103
103
5/304
10
18
18
301
30
52
10
51
10
R-3 305 103 10 18 30 10 10
R-4 505 103 10 18 30 10 10
C-1 Same as for principal buildings 18 20 10 10
DT 18 None6 None6 None6
C-3 25 20 10 10
C-4 25 20 10 10
BP 40 207 107 107
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 250/324
LI 40 20 10 10
GI 75 40 25 50
HI See district regulations 757 75 75 75
WM
Same as for principal buildings
75 40 25 50
P 40 20 20 20
FP n/a n/a n/a n/a
Notes:
1.Except parking may occur within a normal driveway that crosses a required yard.
2.Driveways shall comply with yard setback requirements for surface parking.
3.See subsections C2a and C2d of this section.
4.120 square feet or less in R-1 and R-2 districts: 5 foot setback; R-1A district: 5 foot setback; in RL district: 15 foot setback; except double
frontage or corner lots: 30 foot setback. Over 120 square feet: 30 foot setback.
5.Or the required front yard as may be prescribed by subsection C4a, "Established Front Yards", of this section.
6.A 10 foot buffer yard is required adjacent to any residential district.
7.See district regulations for setback increases.
(Ord. B-211, 1-4-2011)
B. Supplementary Height Regulations:
1. Permitted Exceptions: Except as specifically provided in a business park or industrial district, the following structural appurtenances shall be
permitted to a height not to exceed twenty five feet (25') in addition to the maximum height permitted for the district, provided they do not impair the
solar access of buildings on adjoining properties and are not used for human occupancy or commercial enterprise:
a. Ornamentation such as church spires, belfries, bell towers, cupolas, domes, monuments and flagpoles.
b. Mechanical appurtenances such as chimneys, smokestacks, elevator and stairwell penthouses, antennas, transmission towers and other
necessary structures.
c. In all districts, setbacks for all freestanding tower antennas shall be equal to the height of the antenna and its supporting structure. (Ord. B-231, 3-
4-2014)
C. Supplementary Yard Regulations:
1. Permitted Yard Encroachments: No yard or required open space shall be so reduced in area or dimension so as to make any such area or
dimension less than required by this title. If already less than the minimum required, a yard shall not be further reduced. The following
encroachments into required yards shall be permitted:
a. Special Structural Elements: Special structural elements attached to the principal building such as chimneys, solar collectors, flues, belt courses,
sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, eaves and gutters provided they do not extend more than two and one-half feet (21/2') into a
yard.
b. Yard Lights: Yard lights in R districts not closer than five feet (5') to the front lot line and lights in all districts for illuminating parking areas, loading
areas or yards for safety and security purposes provided the direct source of light is not visible from the public right of way or adjacent residential
property. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
c. Decorative Landscaping: Decorative landscaping, trees, shrubs and other aesthetic or sculptural elements including arbors and trellises within the
front, side, street side and rear yards except within sight triangles adjacent to intersections on corner lots.
d. Accessory Appendages:
(1) Terraces, steps and stoops to the front (main) entrance of a structure may encroach into the required front, street side or side yards by not
more than fifteen feet (15'). However, in no case shall they be closer than five feet (5') to a lot line or encroach into a utility easement, whichever
is more restrictive.
(2) Balconies, decks, and uncovered porches may encroach into a required yard area as follows:
(A) Front Yards: If the balcony, deck, or uncovered porch is less than two feet (2') in height above finished grade (not including railings)
measured vertically at the face of the principal structure, it may encroach into the required street front yard area fifteen feet (15'). Balconies,
decks and uncovered porches higher than two feet (2') may only encroach into required street front yards by five feet (5'). In no case shall any
balcony, deck or uncovered porch be closer than five feet (5') to a lot line or encroach into a utility easement, whichever is more restrictive.
(B) Street Side Yards: If the balcony, deck or uncovered porch is less than two feet (2') in height above finished grade (not including railings)
measured vertically at the face of the principal structure, it may encroach into the required street side yard area fifteen feet (15'). Balconies,
decks and uncovered porches higher than two feet (2') may only encroach into required street side yards by five feet (5'). In no case shall any
balcony, deck or uncovered porch be closer than five feet (5') to a lot line or encroach into a utility easement, whichever is more restrictive.
(C) Rear Yards: Fifteen feet (15') into a required rear yard area but no closer than fifteen feet (15') to a rear lot line or encroach into a utility
easement, whichever is more restrictive.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 251/324
(D) Side Yards: Five feet (5') into a required side yard area but no closer than five feet (5') to a lot line or encroach into a utility easement,
whichever is more restrictive. (Ord. B-33, 2-11-1994)
(3) Covered deck or porches may encroach into the required front yard setback as follows:
Single-family homes built prior to January 1, 1980, may have an open single-story porch that encroaches into the required front yard a distance
not exceeding ten feet (10'), provided they maintain a minimum front yard setback of twenty feet (20'). The ten feet (10') shall include the
roofline, support columns, and steps. The porch area may have a railing, but not a solid wall, that conforms to the Minnesota state building code
standards but shall not exceed 3.5 feet in height. The porch area shall not be enclosed nor screened with mesh, glass, or other similar material
but may have dividers, spindles or lattice no higher than 3.5 feet from the base of the porch with no more than fifty percent (50%) opacity. (Ord.
B-146, 11-26-2004)
e. Fences And Walls: Fences and walls not exceeding six feet (6') in height, are permitted in any district in the side or rear yards, but shall not
exceed forty two inches (42") in front yards or forty eight inches (48") in street side yards of corner lots that abut another front yard, provided that
no structure shall interfere with sight distances for vehicles approaching intersections. Fences not exceeding eight feet (8') in height are permitted
in all commercial districts except along property lines adjacent to residential districts.
(1) Easements: All fences located in recorded easements are the sole risk of the property owner; and the cost of any removal, relocation, or
placement of said structures caused by any activity permitted in said easements is the sole responsibility of the property owner.
(2) Materials And Construction: Every fence shall be constructed in a workmanlike manner of substantial materials widely accepted in the fencing
industry and reasonably suited for the purpose for which the fence is intended. No plywood boards, canvas, plastic sheeting, metal sheeting or
similar materials shall be used for any fence construction. Link fences shall be constructed in a manner that no barbed ends shall be at the top.
The side of any fence considered to be its "face" (i.e., the finished side having no structural supports) shall face the abutting property or street
right of way. Barbed wire and electric boundary fences not exceeding six feet (6') in height shall only be permitted in the AG, AG-P, and RR
districts when related to agricultural or permitted uses relative to animal husbandry.
(3) Temporary Or Seasonal Fences: Temporary or seasonal fences (such as snow fences, erosion control fences, fences to protect newly seeded
areas and the like) are allowed without a permit provided: a) no such fence may be left in place for more than six (6) months without written city
approval; b) any such fence must be removed within fifteen (15) days of the city providing written notice to the landowner that the city has
determined the fence no longer serves its originally intended, temporary or seasonal purpose.
(4) Maintenance: All fences shall be maintained in accordance with section 9-4-7, "Public Nuisance Defined", of this code and all other applicable
sections of this code. (Ord. B-245, 6-16-2015)
f. Picnic Shelters, Gazebos, Recreation Equipment, Etc.: Picnic shelters, gazebos, pool houses, stairs, fire escapes and recreation equipment may
be placed only in side or rear yard areas and shall conform to the requirements of subsection A6, "Accessory Buildings", of this section.
Exception: Recreational equipment such as basketball backstops, hockey nets, skateboard ramps (less than 36 inches in overall height), bicycle
ramps (less than 36 inches in overall height), and other small recreational play equipment associated with residential use may be used and stored
in the driveway area of a residence. No recreational play equipment may be stored, or installed in the right of way, any easement, public or private
street, cul-de-sac, alley, path or sidewalk. Larger recreational equipment such as swimming pools, trampolines, or sport courts are not exempted.
(Ord. B-129, 6-3-2003)
g. Satellite Dishes: Satellite dishes in R districts shall not be closer than ten feet (10') from a side or rear lot line and shall not be placed in front or
street front yards. (Ord. B-33, 10-19-1993)
Exception: Satellite dish antennas less than one meter (39.7") in diameter are exempted from this requirement. (Ord. B-129, 6-3-2003)
h. Security Fences: Security fences not exceeding eight feet (8') in height are permitted in the GI general industrial and WM waste management
districts but shall be a conditional use in the PI public/institutional. Said security fences are subject to the applicable standards listed below and
throughout this title: (Ord. B-159, 10-18-2005; amd. Ord. B-174, 10-17-2006)
(1) The conditional use standards in section 11-10-7 of this title.
(2) Barbed wire may be permitted on top of a security fence where the applicant demonstrates the barbed wire is necessary for greater security
and will not be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of the community.
(3) The barbed wire portion of the fence may not have more than three (3) strands, the lowest of which shall be at least six feet (6') from finished
grade.
(4) No portion of the barbed wire shall project over the public right of way or any adjacent public or private property.
(5) No security fence (with or without barbed wire) shall be constructed without issuance of the applicable city permit. (Ord. B-159, 10-18-2005)
2. Required Side And Rear Yard Enlargement:
a. Corner Lots: Where a side yard abuts a street which is adjacent to the front yard of one or more residential lots on the same block, such side yards
shall meet the front yard setback requirement of the district. The same yard dimension determined for such a side yard shall apply to structures in
the rear yard.
b. Through Lots: Through lots shall provide the required front yard on both streets.
c. Commercial, Industrial And Public Buildings: For commercial, industrial and public buildings exceeding thirty five feet (35') in height and located on
a lot adjoining an R district, any such building shall be set back from the interior side or rear lot line abutting said R district a minimum of one
additional foot for each foot of building height in excess of thirty five feet (35'). Where there is an intervening alley, one-half (1/2) the alley right of
way may be subtracted from this computation.
d. Yards Abutting Dissimilar Districts: Rear or side yards for dissimilar abutting districts shall meet the requirements of the more restrictive of the two
(2) districts.
3. Side Yards; Permitted Reduction: No side yard shall be required between attached housing units.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 252/324
4. Front Yards; Permitted Reduction And Required Expansion:
a. Established Front Yards: Where forty percent (40%) or more of the lots on any block are developed with buildings, the average front yard for the
block shall be computed.
(1) Established R District Front Yards: Where the average is less than the required front yard, the average or twenty feet (20'), whichever is
greater, shall be the required front yard. Where the average is greater than the required front yard, the average shall be the required front yard.
(2) Established C District Front Yards: The average front yard shall be the required front yard. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
5. Visibility At Intersections: A minimum sight triangle shall be established on each corner lot at every street intersection through which motorists shall
have reasonable unobstructed view. The minimum sight triangle shall be defined as a triangle located at the corner of intersecting streets. The
adjacent sides shall be located along the street right of way line (and adjacent property lines) of the intersecting streets and shall be twenty five feet
(25') in length. The third side shall be a straight line joining the end points of the adjacent sides. The city shall have the authority to order the removal
of vision obstructions located within the minimum sight triangle. (Ord. B-21, 6-16-1992)
6. Scope: The following supplementary yard regulations shall apply to all subdivisions except lots platted or developments granted preliminary plat
approval prior to the adoption date hereof.
a. Residential principal structures shall be set back a minimum of thirty feet (30') from any easement boundary on a lot or a parcel of land that abuts
or is traversed by an easement intended for or containing high voltage transmission lines.
b. Residential lot dimensional standards and principal structure setbacks shall be increased on the side adjacent to freeways, arterial and collector
streets, and railroad rights of way or easements. Driveways, surface parking and accessory structures shall have increased setbacks adjacent to
freeways and arterial highways. The following standards shall be in addition to existing setback criteria and dimensional standards to provide
space for earthen berms, buffer yards or planting strips:
Side Adjacent To
Principal Structures
And Increased
Dimensional Standards
Accessory Structures,
Driveways And
Surface Parking
Collector street1 10 feet n/a
Minor arterial highway1 20 feet 10 feet
Principal arterial (freeways)1 30 feet 20 feet
Railroads 30 feet n/a
Note:
1.As designated by the transportation element of the comprehensive guide plan.
c. No accessory or principal structure shall be constructed within any easement. (Ord. B-58, 3-6-1996)
d. In commercial, business park, industrial, multi-family residential and single-family developments, site plans or plats, no driveway from private
property serving a commercial, business park, industrial, multi-family residential or single-family attached residential use entering a public or
private street shall be less than twenty four feet (24') nor more than thirty six feet (36') in width (not including medians). One-way driveways shall
be no less than twelve feet (12') wide. Single-family detached residential driveways are subject to the following requirements when connecting to
and within the street right of way:
(1) Maximum Width: They shall not exceed twenty two feet (22') in width (curb cut radii excluded).
(2) Encroachment: Curb cut radii shall not encroach upon the boulevard of abutting properties.
(3) Number Of Curb Cuts: Only one curb cut shall be permitted from a street, provided:
(A) The required driveway setback shall be a minimum of five feet (5') from interior lot lines, and the greater of the applicable front yard setback
or the required sight triangle from the street side yard property line on corner lots. In the event that a lot of record does not have sufficient
width to meet the applicable driveway standards, the width and placement of the required driveway shall be subject to the approval of the city
engineer.
(B) The proposed curb cut is in compliance with subsection 11-6-1G1 of this title.
(C) All district setback regulations for surface parking and impervious surface limitations are met. (Ord. B-158, 9-20-2005)
Chapter 6
OFF STREET PARKING, LOADING AND LANDSCAPING
11-6-1: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 253/324
A. Purpose And Intent: It is the intent of these regulations that off street parking be provided and maintained by each property owner for the use of
occupants, employees and patrons. These regulations are further intended to promote the safe and efficient storage, circulation and channelization of
motor vehicles on site to avoid undue congestion of the public streets.
B. Compliance Required: In all districts except where exempt by subsection K of this section, off street parking shall be provided as follows:
1. New Construction: Full off street parking compliance is required for all newly erected buildings.
2. Enlargement: Whenever a use or building requiring off street parking is increased in floor area or when interior building modifications or structural
alterations result in an increase in effective capacity for any use, additional parking shall be provided in proper ratio to the increase in floor area or
capacity.
3. Change In Use: Whenever a building or use or part thereof is changed in usage, such that the new use requires more parking than the old, the
extent to which the use is changed shall be required to comply fully with the provisions of this title.
4. Parking Lot Construction And Expansion: All new parking lots and improvements and extensions to existing lots shall comply fully with the
requirements of this title.
C. Permits And Improvement Guarantees Required:
1. Permits: Building permits shall be required for parking lot construction in all districts except for one- and two-family residences.
2. Improvement Guarantees: For any parking improvement for which a building permit is required, a performance bond, letter of credit or other financial
guarantee, as approved by the city attorney, in the amount of one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the estimated construction cost shall be
submitted prior to issuance of a building permit and retained until said parking improvement is completed and acceptable to the city. Where plant
materials are used in lieu of a masonry screen wall, this portion of the financial guarantee shall remain in effect for a period of not less than one year
after planting to ensure plant material life. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
D. Limitations On Use:
1. No commercial repair work or service of any kind, or sale or display thereof, or the storage of new or used vehicles which are not for the use of the
occupant, employees and patrons shall be conducted in such parking area.
2. Off street parking once designated as required off street parking shall not be changed to any other use until equal facilities as required by this code
are provided elsewhere.
3. Off street parking existing at the date of adoption hereof in connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an
amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building or use.
4. Except while loading, unloading, or rendering a service in a designated loading area, no commercial trucks, truck-tractor, or semitrailer combinations
shall be parked and/or stored longer than twenty four (24) hours. Semitrailers may not be used for outdoor sales, storage or display. (Ord. B-164, 11-
15-2005)
E. Joint Use Of Parking Areas: Two (2) or more buildings or uses may collectively provide off street parking in which case the required number of parking
spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the individual uses computed separately. In the case of the joint use of off street parking
spaces where operating hours do not overlap, the board of appeals and adjustments may grant an exception to allow the total parking required to be
reduced below the sum total of the individual uses provided a copy of an agreement between joint users is filed with the application.
F. Location: All off street parking required by this chapter shall be located on the same lot as the use of the property intended to be served. Said off street
parking shall be located in the same district as the use it is intended to serve. In the R districts, all required parking shall be located on the lot it is
intended to serve. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
G. Backing Into A Street:
1. One-family and two-family dwellings having a driveway on a street listed in this subsection G, shall be provided with, and shall maintain, a driveway
that has a paved turnout or turnaround area that is so designed and located as to allow the safe and convenient turning of vehicles on the lot of the
dwelling so that cars may avoid backing into such streets. No certificate of occupancy will be issued for any such dwelling until such driveway is
completed. The requirement of this subsection applies to dwellings that have not been issued a certificate of occupancy before the effective date
hereof. This requirement applies to lots having a driveway on any of the following streets:
Akron Avenue
Auburn Avenue
Bacardi Avenue
Bloomfield Path
Chippendale Avenue
Connemara Trail
County Road 38
County Road 42
County Road 46
County Road 73
Diamond Path
Emery Avenue
Evermoor Parkway
Fahey Avenue
Fischer Avenue
McAndrews Road
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 254/324
Pine Bend Trail
Rich Valley Boulevard
Shannon Parkway
South Robert Trail
STH 3
STH 52
STH 55
126th Street W
130th Street W
140th Street W
145th Street W
160th Street W
(Ord. B-113, 3-6-2001)
H. Off Street Parking Required: The minimum number of off street parking spaces required shall be as follows:
Minimum Parking Required
Residential uses:
Accessory apartments 1 per unit
Boarding and rooming houses 2 per 3 persons
Daycare centers, nursery and Montessori schools 1 per 20 individuals plus 1 per teacher and employee
Group and foster homes 1 per 6 individuals plus 1 per employee
Mobile homes (in mobile home parks) 2 per dwelling unit
Multiple dwellings 2 per dwelling unit
One- and two-family units 2 per dwelling unit
Senior citizens housing 0.5 per dwelling unit
Public and quasi-public uses:
Churches 1 per 3 seats in largest assembly room
Clubs and lodges, social and fraternal 2 persons, based upon occupancy rating
Elementary and junior high schools 1 per classroom plus 1 per 20 students
Golf and country clubs 6 per hole
Government offices 1 per 200 square feet GFA
Hospitals and extended care facilities 1 per bed plus 1 per employee
Museums, libraries and art galleries 1 per 500 square feet GFA
Nursing homes 1 per employee
Post-high schools 1 per teacher and employee plus 1 per 5 students
Senior high schools 1 per classroom plus 1 per 20 students
Stadiums, arenas, auditoriums accessory to a school 1 per 6 seats
Stadiums, arenas, theaters and auditoriums 1 per 3 seats plus 1 per employee
Business uses:
Accessory car washes 2
Animal clinics 1 per 400 square feet GFA
Assembly halls 1 per 3 seats
Athletic and weight reduction facilities:
Racquetball/tennis
All other
6 per court
1 per 200 square feet GFA
Auto repair and sales, repair shops and wholesale establishments 3 per 1,000 square feet GFA plus 1 per employee
Banks 1 per 400 square feet
Beauty and barber shops 3 per operator and employee
Bowling alleys 5 per lane
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 255/324
Breweries, distilleries and farm wineries 1 per 500 GFA
Business and general office 5 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Car washes (principal use) 1 per employee
Convenience grocery stores 7 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Drive-up restaurants 1 per 3 seats
Funeral homes and mortuaries 1 per 3 seats in largest parlor or chapel
Gasoline stations 1 per employee
Home furnishing stores 1 per 300 square feet GFA plus 1 per employee
Hotels and motels 1 per guestroom plus 1 per employee
Medical, dental offices and clinics 5 per doctor plus 1 per employee
Movie theaters 1 per 4 seats
Musical instrument sales, floral, jewelry and shoe stores 1 per 300 square feet GFA
Outdoor recreation 3 patron capacity
Pool halls, roller and ice rinks, exhibition halls 2 persons based on occupancy rating
Restaurants, cafes, bars, cocktail rooms and taprooms 1 per 3 seats
Retail sales and services, except as specified herein 6 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Shopping centers 5 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Industrial uses:
Custom manufacturing 1 per 300 square feet retail space plus 1 per employee
Manufacturing, printing, publishing, processing, packaging, assembly 1 per 300 square feet GFA
Office 1 per 200 square feet GFA
Testing and research 1 per 500 square feet GFA
Warehousing 1 per 2,000 square feet GFA
Notes:
1.Employee = Maximum number of employees on largest shift.
2.GFA = Gross floor area.
3.Uses with multiple functions may be required to provide parking in accordance with more than 1 minimum standard.
(Ord. B, 9-19-1989; amd. Ord. B-66, 6-18-1996; Ord. B-164, 11-15-2005; Ord. B-243, 5-20-2015)
I. Drive-Through Facilities:
1. Conformance To Standards: All drive-through facilities shall conform to the standards outlined in sections 11-4-13, "C-3 Highway Commercial
District", 11-4-14, "C-4 General Commercial District", and 11-10-7, "Conditional Use Permits (CUP)", of this title. (Ord. B-236, 7-15-2014)
J. Fractional Spaces: When determining the number of required parking spaces results in a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half (1/2)
shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half (1/2) shall be rounded to require one additional space.
K. Off Street Parking Exceptions:
1. Compact Cars: Up to fifteen percent (15%) of the parking required for a given use may be designed specifically for compact cars, provided:
a. Signage is erected at appropriate locations indicating "For Compacts Only".
b. Compact stalls are located in one continuous area and signage is erected at the parking lot entry showing directions to compact only parking.
c. The minimum design and construction standards apply.
2. Proof Of Parking Required: Establishments shall be capable of providing the number of on site parking spaces required by this chapter at any time
said parking is needed. However, all such required parking need not be constructed initially if it is demonstrated by the owner to be in excess of the
real parking demand. Future parking sufficient in quantity to meet the ordinance requirement shall be shown on the official site plan for which a
building permit request is made and said parking shall be constructed at the discretion of the city if it proves to be needed later. (Ord. B-139, 5-18-
2004)
3. Central Business District: Uses constructed in the DT downtown district shall be exempt from this section except that all such parking provided shall
comply with the parking design standards in subsection L of this section. (Ord. B-211, 1-4-2011)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 256/324
L. Off Street Parking Design And Construction Standards:
Minimum Requirements
Parking Angle (Degrees) 0 30 45 60 75 90
Full size cars1:
Maneuvering lane width
Parking space width
Parking space length
Bay dimension (1 tier)
Bay dimension (2 tiers)
12'
8'
22'
20'
28'
12'
8.5'
18'
29'
46'
14'
8.5'
18'
41'
61'
18'
8.5'
18'
38'
58'
21'
8.5'
18'
41'
61'
24'
8.5'
19'
43'
62'
Compact cars:
Maneuvering lane width
Parking space width
Parking space length
Bay dimension (1 tier)
Bay dimension (2 tiers)
12'
7.5'
20'
19.5'
27'
12'
8'
16'
27'
42'
12'
8'
16'
29'
46'
16'
8'
16'
34'
52'
19'
8'
16'
37'
55'
22'
8'
17'
39'
56'
Note:
1.Handicapped parking shall be provided as required by applicable building code.
1. Bumper Overhang: The minimum parking space length may be decreased by up to two feet (2') for spaces which allow the bumper of the auto to
project beyond the terminus of the parking space without obstructing other parking spaces or vehicle circulation.
2. Maneuvering Lanes: All maneuvering lanes shall permit only one-way traffic movements with the exception of the ninety degree (90) pattern where
two-way traffic may be permitted. Each parking space shall have direct unimpeded access to a maneuvering lane and dead end maneuvering lanes
shall only be permitted with the ninety degree (90) pattern which is designed to accommodate two-way traffic.
3. Surfacing: All parking lots and drives other than for a single-family residence without public sewer shall be paved with a concrete or bituminous
surface in accordance with standards as established by the city. All parking spaces shall be striped with suitable paint in accordance with approved
plans except for single-family residences.
4. Curb And Gutter And/Or Barriers: All lots shall have curb and gutter or other suitable parking bumpers or barriers to channelize the flow of traffic and
clearly define parking spaces in the interest of efficient lot utilization and conflict minimization.
5. Drainage: All parking lots shall have a drainage system which is approved by the city.
6. Screening: When a required off street parking lot for six (6) or more cars is located adjacent to an R district, landscaping and berming to meet ninety
percent (90%) opacity year round must be provided along the R district property line. In certain situations, the city may consider, but not necessarily
approve, installation of a fence or screen wall not more than six feet (6') in height but not within the required front yard. (Ord. B-139, 5-18-2004)
7. Lighting: Lighting shall be so arranged to deflect the light away from R districts and public streets.
8. Maintenance: It shall be the joint responsibility of the operator and owner of any principal use to maintain, in a neat and aesthetic manner, the
parking space, accessway, landscaping and required fences and walls. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
9. Exception: The off street parking and design and construction standards may be waived by the city upon issuance of an interim use permit (IUP) for
temporary buildings in the general industrial district. (Ord. B-144, 11-5-2004)
M. Driveways On Certain Corner Lots: Driveways for one- and two-family dwellings on corner lots having one side on a street named in this subsection
and one side on a street having a lower volume of traffic shall be constructed and maintained to the street with the lower volume of traffic and no closer
than sixty three feet (63') from the corner of the lot nearest the intersection of the two (2) streets. This requirement shall apply to such corner lots
having one frontage on any of the following streets:
Akron Avenue
Auburn Avenue
Bacardi Avenue
Bloomfield Path
Chippendale Avenue
Connemara Trail
County Road 38
County Road 42
County Road 46
County Road 73
Diamond Path
Emery Avenue
Evermoor Parkway
Fahey Avenue
Fischer Avenue
McAndrews Road
Pine Bend Trail
Rich Valley Boulevard
Shannon Parkway
South Robert Trail
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 257/324
STH 3
STH 52
STH 55
126th Street W
130th Street W
140th Street W
145th Street W
160th Street W
(Ord. B-112, 3-6-2001)
11-6-2: OFF STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Minimum Requirements:
1. Loading facilities shall be provided for every retail establishment, warehouse, manufacturing or industrial use, in excess of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet gross floor area, with a general requirement of one dock or berth per seventy five thousand (75,000) square feet gross floor area (loading
facilities include docks, berths and maneuvering area).
2. All docks shall be located within the perimeter of the structure housing the principal or accessory use and shall be completely enclosed.
3. Off street loading spaces shall be equal to at least ten feet by forty feet (10' x 40'), excluding maneuvering area.
4. At no time shall any vehicle be permitted to extend into a pedestrianway or public right of way while loading or unloading.
5. All berths shall be screened from view of all dissimilar abutting zoning districts by plant materials, walls, earthen berms, fences or combinations
thereof. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
11-6-3: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
Detailed landscaping plans shall be required in all development proposals requiring site plan review. Landscaping plans shall be prepared consistent with
the general site plan requirements in section 11-10-3 of this title.
A. Landscaping Plan Content:
1. Planting schedule containing:
a. Symbols.
b. Quantities.
c. Common and botanical names.
d. Sizes of material at planting and mature material sizes.
e. Root specifications (bare root, B and B, potted, etc.).
f. Dates or seasons to plant material.
g. Special planting instructions.
2. Identify existing trees and shrubbery by common name and size, which of these will remain in the final site design and how they will be protected
during construction.
3. Include typical sections or details of fences, tie walls,planter boxes, picnic areas, berms and the like.
4. Include typical sections of landscape islands and planter beds with identification of material used.
5. Include details of planting beds and foundation plantings.
6. Delineate square footage of both sodding and seeding areas.
7. Describe and detail methods of controlling soil erosion during and after construction. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
B. Minimum Number Of Plantings:
Zoning District
Overstory Trees
Foundation Plantings
AG None None
AG-P None None
RR 1 tree per unit/frontage1 None
RL 1 tree per unit/frontage1 None
R-1 1 tree per unit/frontage1 None
R-1A 1 tree per unit/frontage1 None
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 258/324
R-2 1 tree per unit/frontage2 None
R-3 1 tree per open space unit exposure3 See note 4
R-4 8 trees minimum plus 1 tree per unit5 See note 4
R-4 8 trees minimum plus 1 tree per 2 units6 See note 4
All Cs 8 trees or 1 per 3,000 square feet land area7 See note 4
BP 8 trees or 1 per 3,000 square feet land area7 See note 4
PB 8 trees or 1 per 3,000 square feet land area7 See note 4
LI 8 trees or 1 per 3,000 square feet land area7 See note 4
GI 8 trees or 1 per 3,000 square feet land area7 See note 4
HI 8 trees or 1 per 3,000 square feet land area7 See note 4
IP 8 trees or 1 per 3,000 square feet land area7 See note 4
Notes:
1. Trees shall be deciduous, planted at the boulevard of each tree exposure.
2. 2-family dwellings: Trees shall be deciduous, planted at the boulevard of each street exposure.
3. Other attached dwellings: Trees shall be deciduous; spacing must include trees at the boulevard at 50 foot intervals.
4. 1 foundation planting per 10 linear feet of building (principal or accessory) perimeter.
5. 1- to 3-story building: Spacing must include trees at the boulevard at 50 foot intervals.
6. Over 3-story building: Spacing must include trees at the boulevard at 50foot intervals.
7. Whichever is greater: Spacing must include trees at the boulevard at 50 foot minimum intervals.
(Ord. B-190, 7-17-2007)
C. Minimum Planting Standards:
1. Overstory Trees; Minimum Planting Size:
a. Deciduous trees: 2.0-2.5 inches as measured six inches (6") aboveground.
b. Coniferous trees: Six feet (6') in height.
2. Foundation Plantings; Minimum Planting Size: Coniferous and deciduous shrubs shall be planted a minimum of one-third (1/3) the mature spread
and height of typical growth habits.
3. Planting Materials: All planting materials used in site developments shall be indigenous to the appropriate hardiness zone and physical
characteristics of the site.
4. Boulevard Trees: All boulevard trees proposed to satisfy the minimum requirements shall be long lived hardwood species and guaranteed for no less
than one full growing season from completion of site planting.
5. Percentage Of Deciduous Trees: In meeting the overstory tree requirements at least seventy five percent (75%) of the total stock shall be deciduous
trees. All boulevard trees shall be of shade or flowering tree types.
6. Shade Trees: When entire streets or blocks are proposed for development, shade tree species must be diversified so as each side of a city block
would contain at least three (3) different varieties of tree genera with at least two (2) different species (if same genus used more than once).
7. Materials In Healthy Condition: All planting materials shall be disease free and able to survive in assigned locations in a healthy condition with the
benefit of only minor maintenance.
8. Standards: All stock to be planted (shade and flowering trees, deciduous shrubs, coniferous evergreens, broad leaf evergreens, roses, vines and
ground covers and fruit trees) must follow the standards set forth by the "American Standards For Nursery Stock" as adopted by the American
Association of Nurserymen.
9. Grade: Final grades in all developments shall not exceed a three to one (3:1) ratio unless plans for retaining walls, terraces or similar controls have
been approved by the city.
10. Screening: Where natural materials such as trees or hedges are approved in lieu of required screening by means of walls or fences, the density
and species of such plantings shall be suchto achieve ninety percent (90%) opacity year round. Conifers used for screening must meet overstory
planting requirements.
11. Credit For Existing Trees: Credit for the retention of existing trees which are of acceptable species, size and location may be given to satisfy the
minimum number of requirements set forth in this chapter. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
12. Exception: The required plantings may be waived by the city council upon issuance of an interim use permit (IUP) for temporary buildings in the
general industrial district. (Ord. B-144, 11-19-2004)
D. Special Planting Conditions: Planting materials within landscape designs shall be compatible with planned site use. As a result, trees and shrubs
(except low creeping shrubs) shall not be planted:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 259/324
1. Under existing or planned utility lines when the mature height and spread of the planting may conflict with utility lines.
2. Over existing or planned utility lines so that upon plant maturity the root system conflicts with the utility lines.
3. So that upon mature height and width of plant growth its form conflicts with local vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
4. So that upon mature height and width of the plant its growth habits would conflict with any public service or safety device such as stop signs, traffic
lights, streetlights, etc.
5. Any closer than fifteen feet (15') from any fireplug.
6. Any closer than thirty feet (30') from any intersection, measured back from curb line. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
E. Tree Preservation:
1. Findings And Purpose Statement: The city council finds it is in the best interest of the city to protect, preserve, and enhance the natural environment
of the community and to encourage a resourceful and prudent approach to the development and alteration of wooded areas. In the interest of
achieving these objectives, the city has established the comprehensive tree preservation regulations herein to promote the furtherance of the
following:
a. Protection and preservation of the environment and natural beauty of the city;
b. Assurance of orderly development within wooded areas to minimize tree and habitat loss;
c. Evaluation of the impacts to trees and wooded areas resulting from development;
d. Establishment of minimal standards for tree preservation and the mitigation of environmental impacts resulting from tree removal;
e. Provision of incentives for creative land use and environmentally compatible site design which preserves trees and minimizes tree removal and
clear cutting during development; and
f. Enforcement of tree preservation standards to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community.
2. Definitions: For purposes of this subsection E, the following definitions shall apply:
CANOPY OF TREE: The horizontal extension of a tree's branches and foliage in all directions from its trunk and upper layer of green crown.
CONIFEROUS TREE: A woody plant bearing seeds and cones oftentimes, but not always, retaining foliage throughout the year.
CONSTRUCTION AREA: Any area in which movement of earth, alteration in topography, soil compaction, disruption of vegetation, change in soil
chemistry, or any other change in the natural character of the land occurs as a result of site preparation, grading, building construction or any other
construction activity.
DECIDUOUS TREE: A woody plant which has a defined crown, and which loses leaves annually.
DEVELOPER: Any person or entity who undertakes to improve a parcel of land, by platting for the purposes of establishing two (2) or more
dwelling units, or grading which requires a grading permit.
DIAMETER OF CONIFEROUS TREE: Every two feet (2') in height of a coniferous tree is equivalent to one caliper inch of diameter.
DIAMETER OF DECIDUOUS TREE: The length of a straight line measured in caliper inches through the trunk of a tree at four and one-half feet
(4.5') above the ground.
DRIP LINE OR ROOT ZONE OF A TREE: An imaginary vertical line which extends from the outermost branches of a canopy to the ground.
FORESTER: A person holding at least a Bachelor's Degree in Forestry from an accredited four (4) year college of forestry or any official appointed
by the city.
HARDWOOD DECIDUOUS TREE: Includes ironwood, catalpa, oak, maple (hard), walnut, ash, hickory, birch, black cherry, hackberry, locust and
basswood.
HEALTHY TREE: Average or better condition and vigor for area as may be determined by the forester.
HERITAGE TREE: A healthy hardwood deciduous tree measuring equal to or greater than twenty seven inches (27") in diameter or a healthy
coniferous evergreen tree greater than fifty feet (50') in height.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT: A person licensed by the state of Minnesota as a landscape architect.
NEW DEVELOPMENT: A piece of property that is being platted for the purpose of establishing urban residential use with two (2) or more dwelling
units or is being improved by grading which requires a grading permit. This definition does not apply to agricultural lot splits or to public street/utility
projects.
NURSERYMAN: A person licensed by the state of Minnesota as a nurseryman.
PROPERTY OWNER: The owner of a buildable property who is constructing or expanding a dwelling or a business on that property.
SIGNIFICANT TREE: A healthy deciduous hardwood tree measuring a minimum of six (6) caliper inches in diameter, a healthy softwood
deciduous tree measuring a minimum of twelve (12) caliper inches, or a healthy coniferous tree measuring a minimum of twelve feet (12') in
height.
SOFTWOOD DECIDUOUS TREE: Includes cottonwood, poplars/aspen, box elder, willow, silver maple and elm.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 260/324
3. Application: The provisions of this subsection E shall apply to all subdivision, grading permits or construction, except for preliminary plats approved
by the city prior to the adoption hereof.
4. Process:
a. For Developers: Unless otherwise determined by the city council, the following process for preserving trees shall be required from the developer:
(1) Prepare a tree preservation plan which shall be incorporated on the grading plan.
(2) Implement the tree preservation plan prior to and during site development.
(3) Submit a performance of financial guarantee for compliance with the approved tree preservation plan.
(4) Comply with the city's tree replacement procedure.
The tree preservation plan shall be submitted withpreliminary plat plans or as part of the application for a grading permit. The tree preservation
plan must be certified by a forester, landscape architect, or nurseryman retained by the developer.
The plat and grading plans will not be approved by the city without an approved tree preservation plan. In the case of grading permit
applications, the tree preservation plan will be approved by city staff. This decision may be appealed directly to the city council.
b. For Home And Business Owners: The following process for preserving trees shall be required from the home and business owner if trees are
being removed during grading or construction:
(1) Identify the significant trees and heritage trees on the property.
(2) Identify the significant trees and/or heritage trees removed due to grading or construction.
(3) Identify the protection measures used to protect the preserved trees during grading or construction.
(4) Comply with the city's tree replacement procedure.
The tree preservation plan shall be submitted with the grading permit or building permit application. The tree preservation plan may be prepared
by the applicant of the grading permit or the building permit. The tree preservation plan will be approved by city staff. This decision may be
appealed directly to the board of appeal and adjustments.
5. Tree Preservation Plan: The developer shall be responsible for implementing the tree preservation plan prior to and during site grading and plan
development. The tree preservation plan will be reviewed by city staff to assess the best overall design for the project taking into account significant
trees and ways to enhance the efforts of the developer to mitigate corresponding damage. The developer is encouraged to meet with staff prior to
submission of the preliminary plat application or prior to application for the grading permit, whichever is sooner, to determine the placement of
buildings, parking, driveways, streets, storage and other physical features which result in the fewest significant trees being destroyed or damaged.
The tree preservation plan shall include the following items:
a. The name(s) and address(es) of property owners and developers.
b. Delineation of the buildings, structures, or impervious surfaces situated thereon or contemplated to be built thereon.
c. Delineation of all areas to be graded and limits of land disturbance.
d. Size, species, and location of all significant trees locatedwithin the area to be platted or the parcel of record.
e. Identification of all significant trees on all individual lots. (The developer shall be required to submit a list of all lot and block numbers identifying
those lots.)
f. Measures to protect significant trees.
g. Identification of all significant trees proposed to be removed within the construction area, including the contouring of all areas to be clear cut.
h. Size, species, and location of all replacement trees to be planted on the property in accordance with the tree replacement schedule.
i. Signature of the person preparing the plan and statement which includes acknowledgment of the fact the trees to be used as replacements are
appropriate species with respect to survival of the replacement trees.
6. Mandatory Protection: Measures to protect significant trees shall include:
a. Installation of snow fencing, silt fence, or polyethylene laminate safety netting placed at the drip line of significant trees to be preserved.
b. Identification of any oak trees requiring pruning between April 15 and July 1; any oak trees so pruned shall be required to have any cut areas
sealed with an appropriate tree wound sealant.
7. Discretionary Protection: Measures to preserve or protect significant trees, which may be required by the city, include, but are not limited to:
a. Installation of retaining walls or tree wells to preserve trees by eliminating the filling or cutting of soil within drip zones.
b. Placement of utilities in common trenches outside of the drip line of significant trees, or use of tunneled installation.
c. Prevention of change in soil chemistry due to concrete washout and leakage or spillage of toxic materials, such as fuels or paints.
d. Use of tree root aeration, fertilization, and/or irrigation systems.
e. Transplanting of significant trees into a protected area for later moving into permanent sites within the construction area.
f. Safety pruning.
8. Significant Tree Removal:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 261/324
a. Heritage Trees: Heritage trees are unique trees to Rosemount due to their size and age. All possible measures will be taken to preserve these
trees. Heritage trees removal may occur only when there is not a practical alternative, such as the alignment of a collector or arterial street or the
installation of a trunk utility corridor. There is a zero percent (0%) removal threshold on heritage trees, meaning every caliper inch of heritage tree
removed will require replacement in accordance with the standards of subsection E10 of this section.
b. Significant Tree Removal For Developments: Although the applicant must retain the maximum amount of woodland possible, the city recognizes
that a certain amount of significant trees and tree cover removal is an inevitable consequence of the urban development process. Therefore,
twenty five percent (25%) of the existing caliper inches of trees can be removed during development without obligation of replacement. Any
removal beyond twenty five percent (25%) will require replacement as described in subsection E10 of this section.
c. Significant Tree Removal For Home And Business Owners: The majority of tree removal occurs during the grading and installation of infrastructure
during subdivision. The city recognizes that additional tree removal may occur after subdivision to construct new houses or business, or the
expansion of existing homes or business, but to a lesser degree than the original subdivision. Therefore, ten percent (10%) of the existing caliper
inches of trees can be removed during home or business construction without obligation of replacement. Any removal beyond ten percent (10%)
will require replacement as described in subsection E10 of this section.
d. Trees Exempt From Replacement: The following types of trees do not need to be included as part of the tally of tree removals:
(1) Dead, diseased, or dying trees; or
(2) Trees that are transplanted from the site to another appropriate area within the city; or
(3) Trees that were planted as part of a commercial business such as a tree farm or nursery.
9. Financial Guarantee: Refer to subsection G of this section.
10. Tree Replacement Formula: Replacement of removed or disturbed trees in excess of the percentage allowed by this subsection shall be according
to the following guidelines:
a. For development which exceeds the percentage of allowable removal of significant trees, all significant trees shall be replaced at the ratio of onehalf
(0.5) caliper inch per one caliper inch removed.
b. For each heritage tree removed by the developer, all heritage trees shall be replaced at the ratio of one caliper inch per onecaliper inch removed.
11. Size, Types And Diversification Of Replacement Trees: Replacement trees shall be of a similar species to those that are removed, but also shall be
a minimum of twenty five percent (25%) conifers and twenty five percent (25%) deciduous hardwoods. Required heritage tree replacement must be
of the same species as the heritage tree removed. Replacement trees must be no less than the following sizes:
a. Deciduous trees shall be no less than two and one-half (2.5) caliper inches; and
b. Coniferous trees shall be no less than six feet (6') high.
12. Acceptable Tree Replacement Species: The following list of trees are acceptable for tree replacement species. The city may, at its discretion,
approve additional species if circumstances such as soil conditions, hydrology, topography, or recent tree diseases warrant.
Ash
Black cherry
Cedar
Fir
Hickory
Linden
Maple (except silver maples)
Oak
Pine
Spruce
Walnut
13. Other Replacement Tree Requirements: Choice of replacement trees species and location of the trees should also be contingent on the following
information:
a. Soil Composition: Comparisons should be made between soil conditions and the ecology of the proposed species to make sure they are
compatible.
b. Spatial Requirements: The potential height and crown spread of the proposed replacement trees should be known. Usually, half of the adult tree
crown diameter is the amount of distance a tree should be planted from any aboveground objects.
c. Diseases And Insect Problems: Appropriate replacement choices shall also consider insect and disease problems that may be common with
particular species in the part of the state in which the city of Rosemount is located.
14. Fee In Lieu Of Tree Replacement Or Replacement Trees Planted In Public Areas: The city recognizes that there may be instances where the total
amount of tree replacement required cannot occur on site or that there are some land uses (such as refining) that are not compatible with trees. In
those instances, the city may,at its option, accept a fee in lieu of tree placement or allow the planting of replacement trees in public areas. Tree
replacement is encouraged to happen on site as much as possible and fee in lieu of tree replacement should be used only when replacement cannot
occur on site. The fee in lieu of tree replacement will be determined annually by the city council through the city fee schedule.
F. Parking Lot Landscaping: The need for internal parking lot landscaping will be subject to planning commission site review. When such landscaping is
required, it will be to lessen the monotony, heat and wind associated with large parking lots. When the internal planting islands are required, the island
boundaries must be constructed with concrete or of nondegradable material. The interior depth and total area of the island must allow the root zone of
all planted materials to develop to their natural growth potential.
G. Landscaping Performance Security: The city may, at its option, withhold occupancy certification or require cash, a letter of credit or a bond satisfactory
to the city in the amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the value of the landscaping, securing the full performance of landscaping requirements.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 262/324
The amount of the security shall be determined by the contract value of the required improvements and may be held by the city for one full year from
the date improvements were completed. (Ord. B-190, 7-17-2007)
Chapter 7
SPECIAL OVERLAY REGULATIONS
11-7-1: IN GENERAL:
In addition to the requirements of the applicable zoning district, the following special overlay restrictions as laid out in this chapter shall apply. (Ord. B, 9-
19-1989)
11-7-2: SHORELAND OVERLAY REGULATIONS:
A. Purpose And Intent: It is the intent of these shoreland overlay regulations to impose restrictions in addition to those required by the underlying zoning for
the protection of shoreland areas, the preservation and enhancement of the quality of surface waters and the wise utilization of water and related land
resources.
B. Shoreland Classification:
1. Recreational development waters: Keegan Lake (19-11).
2. General development waters: Mississippi River, U.S. lock and dam, pool #2 (19-5).
3. Natural environment waters:
a. Unnamed T115, R19, section 16 (19-8).
b. Unnamed T115, R19, section 16 and 21 (19-9).
c. Unnamed T115, R19, section 17 (19-10).
d. Unnamed T115, R19, section 21 (19-12).
C. Shoreland Development Standards:
Natural
Development
Waters
Recreational
Development Waters
General
Development Waters
S U S U S U
Lot area:
Waterfront lots
Other lots
20,000 sq.
ft.
10,000 sq.
ft.
2.5
acres 20,000 sq.
ft.
10,000 sq.
ft.
2.5
acres 20,000 sq.
ft.
10,000 sq.
ft.
2.5
acres
Water frontage/lot width 110 ft. 150 ft. 110 ft. 150 ft. 110 ft. 150 ft.
Building setback from OHWE 150 ft. 200 ft. 75 ft. 100 ft. 50 ft. 75 ft.
Minimum building setback from streets and highways 50 feet for federal, state or county
20 feet for municipal or private
Minimum building setback from top of bluff According to ordinance XVII.39
(Mississippi River corridor ordinance)
Elevation of lowest floor above highest known water level 3 ft. 3 ft. 3 ft. 3 ft. 3 ft. 3 ft.
Maximum building height
Maximum lot coverage with impervious surface See sections 11-5-1 and 11-5-2 of this title.
Sewage system setback from OHWE n/a 150 ft. n/a 150 ft. n/a 150 ft.
Sewage system elevation above highest ground water level, bedrock or
impervious soils
n/a 4 ft. n/a 4 ft. n/a 4 ft.
Notes:
OHWE=Ordinary high water elevation/mark
S=Sewered area
U=Unsewered area
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 263/324
Whenever the underlying zoning is more restrictive, the requirements of the zoning district shall apply.
D. Shoreland Alterations:
1. Natural Vegetation: The removal of natural vegetation shall be restricted to prevent erosion into public waters, to consume nutrients in the soil and to
preserve shoreland aesthetics. Removal of natural vegetation in the shoreland overlay district shall be in accordance with the following criteria:
a. Selective removal of natural vegetation shall be allowed, provided that sufficient vegetative cover remains to screen cars and structures when
viewed from the water.
b. Clear cutting of natural vegetation shall be prohibited except as necessary for placing public roads, utilities, structures and parking areas.
c. Natural vegetation shall be restored insofar as is feasible after any construction project is completed.
2. Grading And Filling: Grading and filling in shoreland areas or any alterations of the natural topography where the slope of the land is toward a public
water or watercourse leading to public water must be authorized by the city in accordance with the following criteria:
a. The smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for as short a time as feasible.
b. Temporary ground cover, such as mulch, is used and permanent ground cover, such as sod, is planted.
c. Methods to prevent erosion and trap sediment are employed.
d. Fill is stabilized to accepted engineering standards.
3. Alteration Of Beds Of Public Waters:
a. Excavation on shorelands where the intended purpose is connection to a public water shall require approval from the city before construction is
begun. Such approval may be obtained only after the commissioner has issued a permit for work in the bed of a public water.
E. Planned Unit Development: To encourage more creative design and greater environmental sensitivity in the development of land, planned unit
development (PUD) may be utilized in the shoreland overlay district. PUD within the shoreland overlay district is subject to both the requirements of
these regulations and additional standards established by the state of Minnesota, department of natural resources (DNR). Where requirements differ
DNR standards shall take precedence.
F. Administration And Enforcement:
1. Permits Required: Before any construction, subdivision of land, installation of sewer and water facilities, grading and filling or removal of vegetation
within any shoreland area is commenced, a permit shall be issued by the city.
2. Applications: Application shall be made by the owner on forms provided by the city. Said application shall be accompanied by plans drawn to scale
showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the lot and all proposed structures and such other information as shall be required by the
director of community development.
3. Variances: All requests for variances shall be referred to the board of appeals and adjustments.
4. Lots Of Record: Lots of record which do not meet the requirements of this section shall not be required to comply herewith.
5. Referral To DNR:
a. Notices: Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider variances, amendments or conditional uses relating to shoreland management
shall be received by the commissioner at least ten (10) days prior to such hearings. Notices of hearings to consider proposed plats must include
copies of the plats.
b. Final Decisions: A copy of approved amendments and plats, and final decisions granting variances or conditional uses with regard to the
shoreland shall be received by the commissioner within ten (10) days of final action. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
11-7-3: WETLAND OVERLAY REGULATIONS:
A. Purpose And Intent: It is the intent of this section to protect designated public waters from the potential adverse effects of filling; excavation; structural
encroachments; water level manipulation; and the construction of bridges, culverts and utilities.
B. Permit Required: Any alteration of any type 3, 4 or 5 wetland as depicted on the official city zoning map shall require the issuance of a "protected waters
permit" by the DNR prior to the issuance of a building permit by the city of Rosemount. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
11-7-4: MISSISSIPPI RIVER CORRIDOR CRITICAL AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT:
A. Intent And Purpose:
1. Findings: The city finds that the Mississippi River corridor within the metropolitan area of the city is a unique and valuable resource. The river is
essential to local, regional, state, and national transportation, sewer and water, recreation, industry and serves important biological and ecological
functions. The prevention and mitigation of irreversible damage to this resource and the preservation and enhancement of its natural, aesthetic,
cultural, and historic values is in furtherance of the health, safety, and general welfare of the city.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 264/324
2. Purpose And Intent: It is the purpose and intent of this section to prevent and mitigate irreversible damage to this unique national resource, to
preserve and enhance its value to the public, and protect and preserve the system as an essential element in the city's development of
transportation, sewer and water, recreation, and industry in accordance with the following policies:
a. The Mississippi River corridor shall be managed as a multipurpose public resource by continuing use of the river channel for transportation;
conserving the scenic, environmental, recreational, industrial, economic, cultural, and historic resources and functions of the river corridor; and
providing for the continued development of a variety of urban uses within the river corridor.
b. The Mississippi River corridor shall be managed in a manner consistent with its natural characteristics and existing development.
c. The Mississippi River corridor shall be managed in accordance with the critical areas act of 1973; the Minnesota environmental policy act of 1973;
the governor's critical area designation order, executive order no. 130 (as amended) dated November 23, 1976; and pursuant to Minnesota
statutes, chapter 116G.
d. Designation of suitable land use districts along the bluff land and shoreland of the Mississippi River.
3. Establishment Of Critical Area Overlay District: A critical area overlay district with its attendant regulations is hereby established. This district shall
overlay the zoning districts established in this title so that any parcel of land lying in the overlay district shall also lie in one or more of the underlying
established zoning districts. Territory within the overlay district shall be subject to the requirements established in this section, as well as the
restrictions and requirements established by other applicable ordinances and regulations of the city. Within the overlay district, all uses shall be
permitted in accordance with the regulations for the underlying zoning district(s) provided, however, that such uses shall not be entitled to or be
issued the appropriate development permit until they have first satisfied the additional requirements established in this section.
4. District Boundaries: This overlay section shall apply to the critical areas district which is specially delineated on the official zoning map of the city. For
purposes of determining the application of this section to any particular parcel of land, the above referenced map shall be on file in the office of the
city clerk or city planner.
5. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, certain phrases and words are hereby defined as follows:
ACCESSORY USE: A use subordinate to and serving the principal use on the same lot and customarily incidental thereto, such as vegetative
cutting, grading, and filling.
ACT: The critical areas act of 1973, Minnesota statute, sections 116G.01 to 116G.14.
ADJACENT: Having a boundary which physically touches or adjoins.
BARGE LOADING FACILITY: A facility and related equipment located on the riverfront for the loading or unloading of a barge, either as part of
transshipment of goods or related specifically to a product manufactured, stored, excavated or utilized at the site.
BARGE SLIP: The basin, usually adjacent to a wharf, jetty, dock or other cargo handling facility, where barges are brought for the purpose of loading
or unloading cargo.
BLUFF LINE: The line delineating the top of a slope connecting the points at which the slope becomes less than eighteen percent (18%). More than
one bluff line may be encountered proceeding landward from the water. All setbacks required herein shall be applicable to each bluff line.
CLEAR CUTTING: The removal of an entire stand of trees and shrubs.
CRITICAL AREA: The Mississippi River corridor critical area as designated by the governor in executive order no. 130 (as amended) dated
November 23, 1976.
HARBOR: The portion of a body of water along or landward of the natural shoreline deep enough for recreational watercraft navigation, and so
situated with respect to shoreline features as to provide protection from winds, waves, ice, and currents. Natural harbors consist of bays and
estuaries, while artificial harbors are constructed by dredging.
LIFT STATION: A facility, usually including pumping facilities, for the lifting of sewage or storm water runoff to a higher sewage or storm water runoff
facility.
MARINA: An area of concentrated small craft mooring, where ancillary facilities may be provided for such services as fueling, sewage pump out, boat
launching, repair and storage. Marina does not mean temporary docks associated with riparian residential development if the mooring area is of a
size not to exceed the resource limitations of the site and the needs of the residents of the development.
MISSISSIPPI RIVER CORRIDOR: That area within the described boundaries of the Mississippi River corridor critical area and as shown on the
official zoning map.
NATURAL RATE OF ABSORPTION: The amount of storm water absorbed into the soil during a storm of once in twenty (20) year occurrence.
NORMAL HIGH WATER MARK: The mark delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave
evidence upon the landscape. The normal high water mark is commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominately aquatic
to predominately terrestrial. In areas where the normal high water mark is not evident, setbacks shall be measured from the stream bank of the
following water bodies that have permanent flow or open water; the main channel, adjoining side channels, backwaters, and sloughs.
PIPELINE: A line of pipe either aboveground or underground including associated pumps, valves, control devices and other structures utilized for
conveying liquids, gases, sewage, or other finely divided solids from one point to another.
PLEASURE CRAFT: A boat or yacht used primarily for recreational activity.
RETAINING WALL: A structure utilized to hold a slope in a position which it would not naturally remain in.
RIVERFRONT: Every lot or parcel of land which is immediately adjacent to the Mississippi River.
SELECTIVE CUTTING: The removal of single scattered trees or shrubs. Selective cutting shall not be construed to mean the removal of all trees or
shrubs in a given area resulting in the clearing of the land.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 265/324
SEPTIC TANK: Any device for the treatment and disposal of human waste which utilizes the percolation of the liquid portion of the waste into the soil,
including all portions of said system which are not contained inside a building.
SLOPE: The inclination of the natural surface of the land from the horizontal.
STRUCTURE: Anything manufactured, constructed or erected which is normally attached to or positioned on land, including portable structures.
SUBSTANDARD LOT: Any lot which does not meet the minimum lot area, length, depth, width or other dimensional standards of this title.
TRANSMISSION SERVICES: Electric power, telephone, and telegraph lines, cables, or conduits used to transport large blocks of power between
two (2) points. In the case of electrical power, this will generally mean sixty nine kilovolts (69 kV) or more. For mains or pipelines for gas, liquids or
solids in suspension, this means those that are used to transport large amounts of gas, liquids or solids in suspension between two (2) points.
UTILITY FACILITY: The physical facilities associated with electric, telephone, telegraph, cable television, water, sewer, solid waste, gas, and similar
service operations.
WATER BODY: Any lake, stream, pond, wetland or river.
WATER RELATED USE: Uses which, in order to exist or function, require a location on or use of the riverfront. Such uses include, but are not limited
to: barge loading and fleeting areas; marinas; industries which receive or ship goods or materials by water as an essential part of their operation;
boat and barge construction, dismantling, and repair; riverfront recreation; intakes and outfalls; and water monitoring and measuring facilities.
WETLAND: Land which is seasonably wet or flooded, including all marshes, bogs, and swamps.
B. Site Planning Requirements:
1. Site Plan Required: No building permit, zoning approval or subdivision approval permit or certificate shall be issued for any action located in an area
covered by this section until a site plan has been prepared and approved in accordance with the provisions of this section.
2. Exceptions:
a. The city of Rosemount planning commission may waive certain requirements of subsection B4 of this section if portions are not applicable to the
proposed action.
3. Site Plan Application: A written application for site plan approval shall be filed with the city clerk or city planner as required by section 11-10-3 of this
title and this subsection as follows.
4. Site Plan Contents:
a. Site plans shall be prepared to a scale appropriate to the size of the project and suitable for the review to be performed.
b. Site plans shall include information as required for planning commission review of site plans in section 11-10-3 of this title and additional
information as follows:
(1) A topography map clearly delineating bluff lines and streams including intermittent streams and swales, rivers, water bodies, and wetlands
located on the site including information on depth of water and bottom slope, a description of body materials and all vegetation found in the
water body, a statement of water turbidity, a statement of water quality, and the classification given to the water body by the Minnesota
department of natural resources (DNR) and the Minnesota pollution control agency (PCA), if any. The topography map shall also indicate the
floodway and/or flood fringe lines and shall indicate the normal high water mark of the river if the property fronts on the river.
(2) A description of soils with a map indicating soil types.
(3) A description of existing drainage delineating the direction, volume, and rate at which storm water is conveyed from the site, and setting forth
those areas of the site where storm water collects and is gradually percolated into the ground or slowly released to stream or lake.
(4) A proposed drainage plan of the developed site delineating the direction, volume, and rate at which storm water will be conveyed from the site,
and setting forth the areas of the site where storm water will be allowed to collect and gradually percolate into the ground or be slowly released
to stream or lake.
(5) A description of any features, buildings or areas which are of historic significance.
(6) Landscape plans with dimensions, distances, and the location, type, and description of existing vegetation. This shall clearly locate and
describe vegetation proposed for removal and proposed landscape materials which will be added to the site as part of the development.
(7) A description of the method to provide vehicular and pedestrian access to the proposed development and public access to the river and/or
public river view opportunities both before and after development; a description of the development's impact on existing views of and along the
river.
(8) A description of all parking facilities provided as part of the development of the site including an analysis of parking needs generated by the
proposed development.
(9) A delineation of any potential area or areas to be dedicated for public use.
(10) A delineation of the location and amounts of excavated soils to be stored on the site during construction.
(11) Other information pertinent to the particular project which, in the opinion of the city of Rosemount or the applicant is necessary or helpful for
the review of the project.
5. Site Plan Approval Standards: Site plans shall meet the following standards for approval:
a. Dredging and filling of water bodies shall be permitted only when there is no adverse effect on the ecological and hydraulic characteristics of the
water body, unless no other feasible alternative exists for the removal or replacement of dredge spoils or fill and the activity is consistent with the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 266/324
Mississippi River corridor critical area plan and the underlying zoning district.
b. Development shall be permitted on land having a slope before alteration in excess of twelve percent (12%) but not greater than eighteen percent
(18%) if the applicant meets the following conditions:
(1) The foundation and underlying material of any structure, including private roads, shall be adequate for the slope condition and soil type.
(2) Adequate controls and protection exist uphill from the proposed development such that there is no danger of structures or roads being struck
by falling rocks, mud, uprooted trees or other materials.
(3) The proposed development presents no danger of falling rock, mud, uprooted trees or other materials to structures downhill.
(4) The view of the developed slope from the river and opposite riverbank shall be consistent with the natural appearance of the undeveloped
slope, consistent with any historic areas nearby, and compatible with surrounding architectural features. To the maximum extent possible, the
use of natural devices, including vegetation management, shall be preferred over the construction of artificial devices, including culverts, holding
ponds, walls, and terracing.
(5) All structures other than buildings, warehouses, pipelines, conveyors, transmission services, utility facilities, storage tanks, and roadway
surfaces, but including retaining walls, shall meet the following design requirements:
(A) Retaining walls or terrace contours shall not exceed five feet (5') in height.
(B) The minimum space in between terraces and retaining walls shall be twenty feet (20').
(C) Construction shall be of native stone or wood. In those situations where the use of metal pilings, metal tiebacks, metal retaining walls and
precast or cast in place concrete retaining walls is necessary, they shall not be exposed.
(6) No septic tank shall be placed on a slope of greater than twelve percent (12%). The natural slope may not be altered in any way where the
septic tank system or part thereof is to be located. The drain lines shall be located parallel to contour lines.
(7) In no case shall natural slopes in excess of eighteen percent (18%) be developed, except for conveyors, pipelines, and transmission services.
c. Wetlands and other water bodies shall not be used as primary sediment traps during or after construction.
d. The proposed development will minimize both increases in the natural rate of runoff and decreases in the natural rate of absorption of storm water.
e. The development is consistent with the reasonable preservation of the view of the river corridor from other properties and by the public, and the
walling off of views of the river corridor from other properties and public rights of way has been minimized.
f. Erosion protection measures shall make maximum use of natural in place vegetation rather than placing new vegetation on the site to control
erosion. The use of natural erosion control devices shall be preferred to the maximum extent over the construction of artificial drainage devices
including culverts, holding ponds, and ditches.
g. The development shall be located so as to minimize the removal of vegetation and alteration of the natural topography.
h. The grades of streets shall not exceed seven percent (7%), except those referenced in subsection B5b of this section.
i. The applicant shall demonstrate that there are no feasible or prudent alternatives to cutting trees on the site, and if trees are cut, the density of
trees shall be restored to that which existed before development. The applicant shall demonstrate that all grading which takes place will be
conducted in a manner that preserves the root zone aeration and stability of existing trees and provides an adequate watering area equal to at
least one-half (1/2) of each tree's crown cover.
j. The applicant shall demonstrate that the types and densities of land use proposed shall be suited to the site and soil conditions and shall not
present a threat to the maintenance of the ground water quality; a potential increase in maintenance cost of utilities, parking area or roads; and
shall not be subject to problems due to soil limitations, including, but not limited to, soil bearing strength, shrink/swell potential and excessive frost
movement.
k. The quality of water runoff and water infiltrated to the water table or aquifer shall be undisturbed after development to the maximum extent
practicable.
l. The proposed development shall be adequate and consistent with local transportation and thoroughfare planning.
m. The proposed development shall not lessen existing public access to and along the riverbank, nor shall it lessen public opportunity to view the
river from within the corridor.
n. Adequate parking facilities shall be provided to service the proposed development. The construction of said parking facilities shall be consistent
with the character of the river corridor, screened from river view by natural vegetation, and not in excess of that reasonably foreseen to be required
by the development proposal.
o. The conduct of all grading, landscaping, structure placement, and street routing shall be consistent with and, to the maximum extent, in
furtherance of the goals and policies for the development of the river corridor in the Mississippi River critical area plan.
C. Overlay District Designations:
1. Because the river shall be managed as a multiple purpose resource, and because it possesses a variation in both natural characteristics and type of
urban and rural development, that portion of the Mississippi River corridor located in the city has been segmented into the following overlay districts:
a. Rural open space.
b. Urban diversified.
2. The rural open space and urban diversified districts have been established because they represent a distinct difference in development patterns
which the city desires to continue, as is reflected in the corridor area plan.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 267/324
3. The boundaries of the Mississippi River corridor and the urban diversified and rural open space districts within the corridor include all of the land
riverward of the boundary line and as shown on the map designated as the official zoning map for the city.
4. Boundaries of the Mississippi River corridor and the urban diversified and rural open space districts on the map designated as the official zoning
map for the city is made a part of this section and is on file with the city clerk and city planner.
D. Overlay Districts Dimensional Requirements:
1. Objectives: The objectives of dimensional requirements are: to maintain the aesthetic integrity and natural environment of certain districts, to reduce
the effects of poorly planned shoreline and bluff line development, to provide sufficient setback for sanitary facilities, to prevent pollution of surface
and ground water, to minimize flood damage, to prevent soil erosion and to implement metropolitan plans, guides, and standards.
2. Substandard Lot: A proposed new structure or changes to an existing structure on a substandard lot may be approved when the following findings
are made:
a. The lot was recorded in the office of the county recorder prior to the effective date of the state of Minnesota governor's executive order, November
23, 1976, designating the Mississippi River corridor critical area.
b. The lot was in separate ownership from all abutting land on November 23, 1976.
c. The proposed use is consistent with the provisions of these regulations and other city ordinances.
d. It can be demonstrated that a proper and adequate sewage disposal system can be installed according to regulations of the health department
and pollution control agency (PCA).
e. The lot size is within sixty percent (60%) of the size required in the underlying zoning district as specified in the dimensional standards of section
11-5-1 of this title.
3. Lot Size: In the urban diversified and rural open space districts the minimum lot size shall be consistent with the requirements of the underlying
zoning district as specified in the dimensional standards of section 11-5-1 of this title.
4. Structure Setback:
a. All required setbacks shall be applicable to both the bluff line and one hundred feet (100') from the normal high water mark.
b. All new structures and roads shall meet the following minimum setbacks:
(1) In the rural open space district, no structure or road shall be placed less than two hundred feet (200') from the normal high water mark and no
less than one hundred feet (100') from the bluff line.
(2) In the urban diversified district, the structure or road shall be placed no less than forty feet (40') from the bluff line.
c. Exceptions to setback provisions shall be:
(1) Public safety facilities, public bridges and their roadway approaches, railroad sidings, barge facilities, and minor public and private roadways
serving water related uses on the riverfront.
(2) Pipelines, conveyors, and other devices used to move materials or products to or from transportation facilities on the riverfront, structures and
facilities used to store such materials or products, and related equipment.
(3) Public recreation facilities, scenic overlooks, public observation platforms, the regional trail system, docks, and boat launching facilities.
(4) Approved river crossings of essential service and essential services distribution systems which are primarily underground, except for terminal
and metering devices not exceeding six feet (6') in height and supporting structures for transmission crossing spans.
(5) The construction of aboveground pumping stations for sewer lines which shall be screened from view of the river.
(6) The reconstruction or restoration of historical structures or sites on the inventory of the State Historical Society or the National Register of
Historic Places.
5. Heights Of Structures:
a. In the rural open space district:
(1) New structures and additions to existing structures shall be limited to a maximum of thirty five feet (35').
(2) The following exceptions to height limits shall be permitted:
(A) Barns, silos, and similar farm structures.
(B) Essential service distribution systems.
(C) Bridges, bridge approach roadways, and transmission services.
(D) Restoration or reconstruction of historical structures and sites on the inventory of the State Historical Society or the National Register of
Historic Places.
b. In the urban diversified district height standards shall comply with the established underlying zoning district standards.
6. Placement Of Structures: Unless otherwise indicated, the following standards shall apply in both districts:
a. No new structures except conveyors, pipelines, and transmission services shall be placed on slopes which are eighteen percent (18%) or greater.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 268/324
b. Structures may be permitted on slopes in excess of twelve percent (12%) but not greater than eighteen percent (18%) when the site plan approval
standards of subsection B5 of this section are met.
c. Structure placement shall be governed by section 11-7-1 of this chapter regulating shoreland development.
d. In the urban diversified and rural open space districts no development shall be permitted on presently undeveloped islands, except those
developments specifically related to wildlife preservation, recreation open space uses, and other water related uses.
7. Line Of Sight: In the rural open space district, the development of permitted uses shall be allowed if it cannot be seen from the normal high water
mark on the opposite side of the Mississippi River. Water related uses are not subject to this requirement.
E. Permitted Uses In Urban Diversified And Rural Open Space Districts:
1. Residential Development: Residential development shall be permitted in both districts, consistent with the underlying zoning as established in this
title. All structures and accessory uses or appurtenances of residential development shall be subject to the dimensional standards and criteria in
subsection D of this section.
2. Commercial And Industrial Uses:
a. In the rural open space district the development of commercial and industrial uses shall not be permitted.
b. In the urban diversified district, new and expanded industrial and commercial developments shall be allowed if they meet the dimensional
standards and criteria in subsection D of this section, if they do not require premature expansion of metropolitan public services, and if they meet
the site plan requirements of subsection B of this section.
3. Agricultural Uses: All agricultural uses except new feedlots may be permitted in both districts.
4. Mining And Extraction:
a. In both districts:
(1) New mining and extraction may be permitted and shall be subject to the dimensional standards and criteria in subsection D of this section.
(2) New and, where practicable, existing extraction uses shall be appropriately screened from view of the river by establishing and maintaining
natural screening.
(3) The unscreened boundaries of mining and extraction areas shall be limited to the loading area.
(4) Existing and future extractive uses shall be required to submit land reclamation and reforestation plans compatible with these regulations.
(5) Only one barge loading area, which shall be limited to the minimum size practicable, shall be permitted for each mining or extraction operation.
(6) All mining and extraction shall meet the standards of section 11-10-4 of this title, as amended, regulating mineral extraction.
5. Recreational Uses: In both districts, recreational uses and structures and accessory uses or appurtenances shall be permitted subject to the
dimensional standards and criteria in subsection D of this section. Water related commercial recreation uses shall be subject to the dimensional
standards and criteria in subsection D of this section.
6. Signs:
a. In the rural open space district, general advertising signs shall be prohibited.
b. In the urban diversified district, general advertising signs are permitted.
c. All signs permitted in the established districts shall conform to all applicable standards of chapter 8 of this title, as amended, regulating signage
within the city.
F. Specific Permitted Facilities:
1. Transmission Services: In both districts, the construction of new and reconstruction of existing transmission services shall meet the following
standards:
a. Transmission services of under two hundred kilovolts (200 kV) which cross lands within the river corridor shall meet the standards set forth in this
section.
b. When routing transmission services of under two hundred kilovolts (200 kV), the following shall be avoided where practicable:
(1) Steep slopes.
(2) Scenic intrusions into streams, valleys, and open exposures of water.
(3) Scenic intrusions into areas such as ridge crests and high points.
(4) Creating tunnel vistas by, for example, building deflections into the route.
(5) Wetlands.
(6) Forests by running along the fringe rather than through them. If necessary to route through forests, open areas should be utilized in order to
minimize cutting.
(7) Soils susceptible to erosion which would create sedimentation and pollution problems.
(8) Areas of unstable soils which would be subject to extensive slippages.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 269/324
(9) Areas with high water tables, especially if construction requires excavation.
(10) Open space recreation areas.
c. Transmission services shall be subject to the dimensional standards and criteria in subsection D of this section, except at crossing points.
d. Structural design of transmission services. When locating overhead or underground utilities:
(1) Primary considerations shall be given to underground placement in order to minimize visual impact. When considering overhead placement,
the proposers shall explain the economic, technological or topographical factors which make underground placement infeasible. Economic
considerations alone shall not justify overhead placement.
(2) If overhead placement is necessary, the crossing should be hidden from view as much as practicable.
(3) Structures shall be made to appear as compatible with the natural area as practicable with regard to height, width, materials used, and color.
(4) With regard to the width of the right of way, the cleared portion of the right of way should be kept to a minimum.
(5) The location shall be in or adjacent to existing transmission service corridors whenever practicable.
e. In the construction of transmission services, the following guidelines shall be applied whenever practicable:
(1) Construction in wetlands shall minimize damage to vegetation and prevent erosion and sedimentation.
(2) Construction shall be undertaken at times when local fish and wildlife are not spawning or nesting.
(3) Effective erosion and sedimentation control programs shall be conducted during all clearing, construction or reconstruction operations in order
to prevent degradation of the river and adjacent lands.
f. Developers must adhere to applicable federal and state safety regulations, both with regard to prevention (such as safety valves and circuit
breakers) and with regard to emergency procedures in the event of failure (fire suppression, oil spill cleanup).
g. Right of way maintenance:
(1) If possible, natural vegetation that is of value to fish or wildlife and does not pose a hazard to or restrict reasonable use of the utility shall be
allowed to grow in the right of way.
(2) Where vegetation has been removed, new vegetation consisting of native grasses, herbs, shrubs, and low growing trees shall be planted and
maintained on the right of way.
(3) Chemical control of vegetation should be avoided when practicable, but where such methods are necessary, the chemicals used and the
manner of their use must be in accordance with the rules, regulations, and other requirements of all state and federal agencies with authority
over their use.
2. Pipelines: Pipeline facilities shall be permitted in both districts and shall be subject to the following standards:
a. All pipelines and underground facilities shall be subject to the site planning requirements set forth in subsection B of this section.
b. The facilities shall be located so as to minimize damage to wetlands, vegetation, and woodlands, and prevent soil erosion and sedimentation.
c. All underground placement of facilities and pipelines shall be followed by revegetation and rehabilitation to the conditions which existed on the site
prior to development.
d. All pipelines shall be located in or adjacent to existing pipeline corridors whenever practicable.
3. Sewage Treatment Plants: In both districts sewage treatment plants shall, wherever practicable, conform with the dimensional standards and criteria
in subsection D of this section.
4. Essential Services And Public Safety Facilities:
a. Essential services and public safety facilities are permitted in both districts.
b. All essential services and public service facilities shall be subject to the site planning requirements set forth in subsection B of this section.
c. New essential services and public service facilities shall be compatible in height, scale, building materials, and landscaping with the natural
environment in the Mississippi River corridor.
5. Transportation Facilities: The construction or reconstruction of all public transportation facilities and railroads shall be permitted in both districts,
subject to the following standards and criteria:
a. The following guidelines shall be applied whenever practicable in selecting routes for public transportation facilities and railroads:
(1) Careful consideration should be given to the provision of scenic overlooks for motorists and safe pedestrian crossings and pathways along the
river.
(2) If possible, access to the riverfront should be in public ownership and allow reasonable public use of the land between the river and the
transportation facility.
(3) New roads should be located so as to avoid cuts and fills and to blend into the natural terrain.
(4) The following shall be avoided where practicable:
(A) Steep slopes.
(B) Scenic intrusion into stream, valley, and open exposures of water.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 270/324
(C) Scenic intrusion into areas such as ridge crests and high points.
(D) Wetlands.
(E) Forests by running along fringes of forests rather than through them. If it is necessary to route through forests, open areas should be utilized
in order to minimize destruction of commercial forest.
(F) Soils whose high susceptibility to erosion would create sedimentation and pollution problems during and after construction.
(G) Areas of unstable soils which would be subject to extensive slippage.
(H) Areas with high water tables, especially if construction requires excavation.
(I) Open space recreation areas.
b. Public transportation facilities and railroads shall be subject to the dimensional standards and criteria in subsection D of this section, except at
crossing points.
c. The following guidelines shall be applied when practicable in constructing public transportation facilities and railroads:
(1) Reconstruction of an existing public road or railroad should be performed in a manner that would minimize any adverse effect on the natural
beauty and environment of the river.
(2) Effective erosion and sedimentation control programs shall be conducted during all clearing, construction or reconstruction operations in order
to prevent the degradation of the river and its adjacent lands.
(3) Construction across wetlands shall take place in a manner which minimizes damage to vegetation and prevents erosion and sedimentation.
(4) Construction shall occur at times when local fish and wildlife are not spawning and nesting.
d. Developers must adhere to applicable federal and state safety regulations with regard to new public road construction or reconstruction of an
existing public road.
e. The following guidelines shall be applied when practicable for right of way maintenance:
(1) If possible, natural vegetation that is of value to fish or wildlife and which does not pose a safety hazard shall be allowed to grow in the roadside
right of way.
(2) Where vegetation has been removed, new vegetation consisting of native grasses, herbs, shrubs, and trees shall be planted and maintained on
the roadside right of way.
(3) Chemical control of vegetation is discouraged. But where such methods are justified, the chemicals used and the manner of their use must be
in accordance with the rules, regulations, and other requirements of all state and federal agencies with authority over their use.
6. Private Roads: Private roads necessary for river access for water related commercial or industrial uses shall be permitted in the urban diversified
district.
a. Private roads necessary for river access for water related commercial or industrial uses and pipelines, conveyors, and other devices used to move
materials or products to or from transportation facilities on the riverfront shall be permitted on any slope, provided that steps are taken to minimize
erosion and manage vegetation to control runoff in compliance with provisions of subsection B of this section.
7. Barge Facilities:
a. New barge loading facilities and barge slips shall not be permitted in the rural open space district.
b. Barge loading facilities and barge slips are permitted for industrial or commercial land operations in the urban diversified district.
c. Barge fleeting facilities related to on land industrial or commercial uses are permitted in the urban diversified district.
G. Earthwork And Vegetation:
1. Grading And Filling: In both districts, the following provisions shall apply to grading and filling:
a. Grading, filling, excavating or otherwise changing the topography landward of the normal high water mark shall not be conducted without a permit,
except for the maintenance or repair of existing facilities. All grading and filling activities requiring a permit shall comply with the site planning
standards in subsection B of this section.
b. A separate grading and filling permit is not required for grading, filling or excavating the minimum area necessary for a building site, essential
services, sewage disposal systems, private roads, and parking areas undertaken pursuant to a validly issued building permit.
2. Vegetation Management:
a. In the rural open space district, clear cutting is prohibited on developed islands, public recreation lands, the slope or face of bluffs, within two
hundred feet (200') of the normal high water mark of the river, and within the area forty feet (40') landward from bluff lines.
b. On all other lands within the rural open space district, and in the urban diversified district, clear cutting shall be guided by the following provisions:
(1) Clear cutting shall be conducted only where clear cut blocks, patches or strips are shaped and blended with the natural terrain where
practicable.
(2) The size of clear cut blocks, patches or strips shall be kept at the minimum necessary.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 271/324
(3) Where feasible, all clear cuts shall be conducted between September 15 and May 15. If natural regeneration will not result in adequate
vegetative cover, areas in which clear cutting is conducted shall be replanted to prevent erosion and to maintain the aesthetic quality of the area.
Where feasible, replanting shall be performed in the same spring or the following spring.
c. The selective cutting of trees greater than six inches (6") in diameter is permitted when the cutting is appropriately spaced and staged so that a
continuous natural cover is maintained.
d. These vegetative management standards shall not prevent the pruning and cutting of vegetation to the minimum amount necessary for the
construction of bridges and roadways and for the safe installation, maintenance, and operation of facilities, essential services, and permitted utility
transmission services.
H. General Provisions:
1. Nonconforming Uses And Structures:
a. Any structure or use existing upon the effective date hereof which does not conform to the restrictions of a particular use district shall automatically
continue as a nonconforming structure or use under the provisions of section 11-11-2 of this chapter regulating the alteration, maintenance,
reconstruction, and abandonment of nonconforming uses.
b. Any extension, enlargement or alteration of an existing nonconforming structure or sanitary facility shall meet all the setback standards of this title.
2. Sanitary Standards And Criteria: The following standards shall apply to both districts:
a. All parts of on site sewage disposal systems shall be set back at least seventy five feet (75') from the normal high water mark.
b. No on site sewage disposal system shall be placed within designated floodplains.
c. No person, firm or corporation shall install, alter, repair or extend any individual sewage disposal system without first obtaining a permit from the
building inspector for the specifically approved installation, alteration, repair or extension.
3. Marinas And Boat Launching Ramps:
a. Boat Launching Ramps:
(1) Boat launching ramps may be located only where access streets are adequate to handle the traffic load generated by the facility.
(2) Shared or joint use accessory parking will be preferred. Loading will be permitted only at ramps. Parking areas must be screened from the river
and adjoining residential property and located at least twenty five feet (25') from the normal high water mark.
(3) The impact of the accessory parking must not adversely affect the environmental quality of the site or the surrounding land uses.
(4) Boat launching ramps and minor accessory buildings and haul off facilities must be in character and scale with the surrounding land uses and
the intent of the Mississippi River corridor designation.
b. Public Marinas: Public marinas shall be permitted subject to the following:
(1) The marina must have on site lavatory facilities adequate to serve the marina clientele.
(2) Off street parking areas should be provided in accordance with the requirements set for boat launching ramps.
(3) Areas for the winter storing of boats should be naturally screened from view from the river and from upland lots.
(4) The marina shall be designed for and used only by pleasure craft.
(5) Maximum height of any buildings or structures shall be thirty five feet (35').
(6) Accessory uses customarily incidental to public marinas, including fuel stations, may be permitted provided they are consistent in scale and
intensity with the marina and surrounding uses and meet required standards of the department of natural resources, pollution control agency,
and the U.S. army corps of engineers.
4. Riverfront Uses: Riverfront uses shall be preferred in the following order:
a. Water related.
b. Nonwater related with public pedestrian access.
c. Nonwater related without public pedestrian access.
5. Pilings, Dredging, And Filing: No pilings shall be driven into the riverbed except as is necessarily incident to water dependent uses. Landfill and
dredging shall not be permitted except as incident to a water dependent use when no feasible alternative exists. Dryland disposal of dredge spoils
shall be authorized on shore sites which contain no unique or valuable resources. Dryland disposal of dredge spoils shall be subject to the site
planning requirements set forth in subsection B of this section.
I. Subdivision:
1. No land shall be subdivided which is found by the city to be unsuitable for reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, soil and rock formations with
severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential, unfavorable topography, inadequate water supply or sewer disposal capabilities or any
other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety or welfare of the future residents of the proposed subdivision or the community. The city, in
applying the provisions of this section, shall, in writing, cite the particular features upon which it bases its conclusions that the land is not suitable for
the proposed use and afford the subdivider an opportunity to present evidence regarding such suitability at a public hearing. Thereafter, the city may
affirm, modify or withdraw its determination of unsuitability.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 272/324
2. All subdivision of property shall comply with the applicable provisions of the underlying zoning district standards and subdivision regulations of the
city.
3. In the rural open space district the minimum lot size for residential units shall meet the minimum lot size requirements in the underlying zoning
district as specified in this title.
J. Administration:
1. Procedures: In addition to applicable administrative procedures set forth in section 11-10-1 of this title, the following procedures shall be
implemented with respect to land use, subject to this section:
a. A public hearing shall be held by the city of Rosemount for all underlying zoning district amendments, rural open space and urban diversified
district amendments, plats, and variances to this section.
b. The city shall notify the environmental quality board (EQB) of applications for amendments filed with the city for the following:
(1) The amendment of the urban diversified and rural open space district boundaries.
(2) An amendment to this section.
c. The city council shall give due consideration to the comments, if any, received from the EQB concerning the application in making its decision.
d. Within ten (10) days after the final action, the city council shall notify the EQB of its final action on the application.
e. The city shall give notice of the purpose, time, and place of any such public hearing to all property owners as specified in subsection 11-10-11B4
of this title, affecting townships, and the municipal council of any municipality within two (2) miles of the affected property at least ten (10) days
prior to the date of the hearing.
2. Variances:
a. Variances shall only be granted where there are particular hardships which make the strict enforcement of this section impractical and where the
variance will not alter the essential character of the locality. Conditions may be imposed in the granting of a variance to ensure compliance and to
protect adjacent properties and the public interest, especially in regard to the view from the river.
b. The formal public hearing for a variance shall be held as set forth in chapter 12 of this title providing for actions before the board of appeals and
adjustments.
3. Requirements Of The Applicant For A Public Hearing:
a. The applicant shall submit sufficient copies of the following information, and additional information as requested, to the city thirty (30) days prior to
the public hearing on the application for a variance, platting of property, and rezonings:
(1) Property survey showing the property location, boundaries, dimensions, elevations, bluff lines, utility and roadway corridors, the ordinary high
water mark, floodway, and floodplain.
(2) The most recent aerial photo of the property with property lines drawn in.
(3) Location of existing and proposed structures including height and setback dimensions.
(4) Location of existing and proposed alterations of vegetation and topography.
(5) Adjoining water related uses.
(6) Suitability of soils for on site waste disposal and information on the type, size, and location of the system.
(7) Water supply system.
b. Factors to be considered:
(1) When considering a proposal or zoning amendment within the Mississippi River corridor, the city shall address the following items in making its
decisions:
(A) Preserving the scenic and recreational resources of the Mississippi River corridor, especially in regard to the view from and use of the river;
(B) The maintenance of safe and healthful conditions;
(C) The prevention and control of water pollution, including sedimentation; and
(D) The location of the site with respect to floodways, floodplains, wetlands, slopes, and bluff lines.
K. Violations And Penalties:
1. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as provided in section 11-10-2,
"Violations And Penalties", of this title.
2. In the event of a violation or threatened violation of this section, the city may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct
or abate such violations or threatened violations. It is the duty of the city attorney to institute such action. (Ord. B-15, 10-1-1991)
11-7-5: ADULT USE ESTABLISHMENT REGULATIONS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 273/324
A. Incorporation Of Findings And Definitions: The findings, purpose and definitions in sections 3-8-1 and 3-8-2 of this code are incorporated and relied
upon in this section.
B. Permitted Locations: Adult establishments as defined and regulated in title 3, chapter 8 of this code are permitted in an overlay district which is
established in the general industrial (GI) zone east of Akron Avenue and north of CSAH 42 in the city of Rosemount. Adult uses will conform to the
general industrial (GI) zone standards. Adult establishments may be located within the overlay district provided they meet the following criterion: adult
establishments may not be located within five hundred feet (500') of a residential structure, or within one thousand feet (1,000') from the property line of
a park, school, church, library, commercial daycare center, cemetery, or within one thousand feet (1,000') of another adult establishment. (Ord. B-227,
5-21-2013)
Chapter 8
SIGNS
11-8-1: FINDINGS, PURPOSE AND EFFECT:
A. Findings: The city council hereby finds as follows:
1. Exterior signs have a substantial impact on the character and quality of the environment.
2. Signs provide an important medium through which individuals may convey a variety of messages.
3. Signs can create traffic hazards, aesthetic concerns and detriments to property values thereby threatening the public health, safety and welfare.
4. The city's zoning regulations have since as early as 1972, included the regulation of signs in an effort to provide adequate means of expression and
to promote the economic viability of the business community while protecting the city and its citizens from a proliferation of signs of a type, size,
location, and character that would adversely impact upon the aesthetics of the community and threaten the health, safety and welfare of the
community. The regulation of the physical characteristics of signs within the city has had a positive impact on traffic safety and the appearance of the
community.
B. Purpose And Intent: It is not the purpose or intent of this sign ordinance to regulate the message displayed on any sign nor is it the purpose or intent of
this chapter to regulate any building design or any display not defined as a sign or any sign which cannot be viewed from outside a building. The
purpose and intent of this chapter is to:
1. Regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination and other physical characteristics of signs within the city in order to promote the public health,
safety and welfare.
2. Maintain, enhance and improve the aesthetic environment of the city by preventing visual clutter that is harmful to the appearance of the community.
3. Improve the visual appearance of the city while providing for effective means of communication consistent with constitutional guarantees and the
city's goals of public safety and aesthetics.
4. Provide for fair and consistent enforcement of the sign regulations set forth herein under the zoning authority of the city.
5. Promote the economic development and welfare of the city and its residents by allowing for the temporary promotion of the sale and use of real
estate.
6. Protect individual property rights consistent with constitutional guarantees.
7. Safeguard and enhance property values.
8. Encourage signs which by their design are integrated with and harmonious to the surrounding environment and the buildings and sites they occupy.
9. Control nuisances.
10. Eliminate or minimize hazards to motorists and pedestrians using the public streets, sidewalks, and rights of way.
11. Promote the use of new and changing technology to enhance variety and flexibility in signage, while maintaining certain restrictions to protect the
public safety and welfare.
C. Effect: A sign may be erected, mounted, displayed or maintained in the city if it is in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. The effect of this
chapter as more specifically set forth herein is to:
1. Allow a wide variety of sign types in commercial zones and a more limited variety of signs in other zones subject to the standards set forth in this
sign ordinance.
2. Allow certain small unobtrusive signs incidental to the principal use of a site in all zones when in compliance with the requirements of this sign
ordinance.
3. Prohibit signs whose location, size, type, illumination or other physical characteristics negatively affect the environment and where the
communication can be accomplished by means having a lesser impact on the environment and the public health, safety and welfare.
4. Provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this sign ordinance. (Ord. B-200, 6-2-2009)
11-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 274/324
BANNERS: Attention getting devices which resemble flags and are of a paper, cloth or plastic like consistency.
FLAG: A rectangular piece of fabric of distinctive design which is mounted on a pole that is used as a symbol (as a nation), signaling device (nautical), or
attention getting device (advertising, commercial or noncommercial).
HEIGHT: The height of a sign shall be measured from the centerline of the street or highway toward which the sign is principally displayed to the top of the
sign.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign which displays only the name, address and title of an occupant or the name and address of a building or development.
NIT: A measure of luminance equal to the total amount of light emitted from a sign divided by the surface area of the sign (candelas per square meter).
PENNANT: A flag or banner which tapers to a point.
SIGN: Any letter, work, symbol, model, printed, projected or affixed device, poster, picture, reading matter, or other representation in the nature of an
advertisement, announcement, direction or informative device including structural and component parts.
SIGN AREA: The area of a sign includes the space inside a continuous line drawn around and enclosing all letters, designs and background materials
exclusive of border, trim and structural supports. For the purpose of calculating the area of multiple faced or back to back signs, the stipulated maximum
sign area shall refer to a single face.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY: A sign or portion thereof that has a reader board for the display of text information in which each alphanumeric character,
graphic or symbol is defined by objects not consisting of an illumination device and may be changed or rearranged manually or mechanically with
characters, illustrations, letters or numbers that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or surface of the sign structure.
SIGN, DYNAMIC: Any sign, except official signs, with characteristics of a sign that appear to have movement or that appear to change, caused by any
method other than physically removing and replacing the sign or its components, whether the apparent movement or change is in the display, the sign
structure itself, or any other component of the sign. This includes a display that incorporates a technology or method allowing the sign face to change the
image without having to physically or mechanically replace the sign face or its components. This also includes any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing,
blinking, or animated display and any display that incorporates rotating panels, LED lights manipulated through digital input, "digital ink" or any other
method or technology that allows the sign face to present a series of images or displays.
SIGN, FLASHING: A directly or indirectly illuminated sign or portion thereof that exhibits changing light or color effect by any means, so as to provide
intermittent illumination that changes light intensity in sudden transitory bursts and creates the illusion of intermittent flashing light by streaming, graphic
bursts showing movement, or any mode of lighting which resembles zooming, twinkling or sparkling.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: Any sign that is attached directly to the ground or is supported vertically by any structure having a source of support independent
of any building existing on the premises on which the sign is located.
SIGN, LEGAL NONCONFORMING: Any sign lawfully in existence on the effective date hereof or any sign lawfully in existence on the date of any
amendment to this chapter which does not conform to the regulations affecting signs for the district in which the sign is situated.
SIGN, NONCOMMERCIAL OPINION: A sign that does not advertise products, goods, businesses, or services and that expresses an opinion or other point
of view.
SIGN, NONCONFORMING: Any sign which does not conform to the regulations of this chapter.
SIGN, OFF PREMISES: A commercial speech sign which directs the attention of the public to a business, activity conducted, or product sold or offered at
a location not on the same lot where such sign is located. For purposes of this sign ordinance, easements and other appurtenances shall be considered to
be outside such lot and any sign located or proposed to be located in an easement or other appurtenance shall be considered an off premises sign.
SIGN, OFFICIAL: Signs of a public noncommercial nature including public notification signs, safety signs, traffic signs, direction to public facilities when
erected by or on behalf of a public official or employee in the performance of official duty.
SIGN, ON PREMISES: Any sign that directs attention to the name of the building, premises, or to the name of the building management firm, or to the
business, principal product, service, entertainment, or activity conducted, sold or offered upon the premises on which such sign is located or to
noncommercial speech.
SIGN, PORTABLE: A sign so designed as to be movable from one location to another, and which is not permanently attached to the ground, sales display
device or structure.
SIGN, PROJECTING: Any sign which is affixed to the outside of the exterior wall or soffit of any building and is not parallel to the plane of the wall or soffit.
SIGN, ROOF: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and above the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above
the highest portion of the roof.
SIGN, ROOF INTEGRAL: Any building sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, so
that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and so that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a
space of more than six inches (6").
SIGN, ROTATING: A sign or portion of a sign which turns about on an axis.
SIGN, SEARCHLIGHT: Searchlights shall be considered signs if they announce, direct attention to, or advertise business, professional, commodity,
service or entertainment activities.
SIGN, SHIMMERING: A sign which reflects an oscillating sometimes distorted visual image.
SIGN, SIDEWALK: A portable sign for temporary placement on a sidewalk in the public right of way, intended for a building or business located adjacent to
the right of way with no front yard or a front yard that will not accommodate a permanent freestanding sign as permitted by this chapter.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 275/324
SIGN, TEMPORARY: A sign, banner, pennant, portable changeable copy sign, portable sign, searchlight sign, or similar device designed and/or displayed
to promote brief business, professional, commodity, service or entertainment activities such as, but not limited to, grand openings, sales, or special
promotions or events.
SIGN, TIME AND TEMPERATURE: A sign that displays only current time and temperature information.
SIGN, WALL: A sign which is affixed to the exterior wall, mansard roof or soffit of a building and which is parallel to the building wall. A wall sign does not
project more than twelve inches (12") from the surface to which it is attached, nor extend beyond the top of the parapet wall.
SPEECH, COMMERCIAL: Speech advertising a business, profession, commodity, service or entertainment.
SPEECH, NONCOMMERCIAL: Speech dissemination of messages not classified as commercial which include, but are not limited to, messages
concerning political, religious, social, ideological, public service and informational topics. (Ord. B-200, 6-2-2009)
11-8-3: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Permit Required: Except as noted in subsection B of this section, no sign shall be erected, altered, improved, reconstructed, maintained or moved in the
city without first securing a permit from the city:
1. The content of the message or speech displayed on the sign shall not be reviewed or considered in determining whether to approve or deny a sign
permit.
2. Application for an administrative permit shall be filed by the property owner or designated agent with the community development department's
designee on forms provided by the city.
3. Application for a permit shall include sufficient information regarding the number, location, size, illumination and other physical characteristics of the
sign(s) to fully and clearly review the proposed construction and placement. Specifically, all applications shall contain the following information,
unless waived by the city:
a. Names and addresses of the applicant, owners of the sign and lot.
b. The address at which any signs are to be erected.
c. The lot, block and addition at which the signs are to be erected and the street on which they are to front.
d. Type and size of sign (e.g., wall sign, pylon sign).
e. A site plan to scale showing the location of lot lines, building structures, parking areas, existing and proposed signs and any other physical
features.
f. Plans, location and specifications and method of construction and attachment to the buildings or placement method on the ground.
g. Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing that the structure is designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount
required by this and all other laws and ordinances of the city.
h. Written consent of the owner or lessee of any site on which the sign is to be erected.
i. Any electrical permit required and issued for the sign.
j. A detailed description of any electronic or electrical components that are proposed to be added to the sign.
k. Other information to demonstrate compliance with this and all other ordinances of the city.
4. The applications shall be accompanied by a fee as established by city council resolution.
5. The community development department designee shall notify the applicant, in writing, of an incomplete application within fifteen (15) days of the
date of submission.
6. The community development department designee shall review the application and related materials and shall determine whether the proposal is in
compliance with all applicable evaluation criteria, codes, ordinances, and applicable performance standards set forth in this title within sixty (60) days
of submission of a complete application in accordance with Minnesota statutes, section 15.99.
B. Permit Not Required: The following signs shall not require a permit and are allowed in addition to those signs allowed by sections 11-8-4 and 11-8-6 of
this chapter. These exemptions, however, shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the responsibility of its erection and
maintenance, and its compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any other law or ordinance regulating the same.
1. Painted Or Printed Signs: The changing of the display surface on a painted or printed sign only. This exemption, however, shall apply only to poster
replacement and/or on site changes involving sign painting elsewhere than directly on a building.
2. Address Signs: New and existing buildings shall have building address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street
or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals. Numbers shall be a
minimum of four inches (4") high with a minimum stroke width of one-half inch (1/2"). These numbers shall be affixed to the principal structure, except
in nonsewered areas where address numbers shall be affixed to mailboxes or a separate structure plainly legible and visible from the street or road
fronting the access to the property.
3. Garage Sale Signs: Garage sales are subject to the standards contained in section 11-2-13, "Garage Sales", of this title. Garage sales operating in
conformance with these standards may have temporary signs subject to the following standards:
a. Permission To Place: Such signs are permitted on private property only and may be placed only upon approval of the property owner.
b. Duration: These signs are prohibited, except from four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. Thursdays to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Mondays.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 276/324
c. Size And Height: These signs are limited to four (4) square feet in size and three feet (3') in height.
d. Distance: These signs shall not be placed farther than six (6) blocks or a 1.5 mile radius, whichever is greater, from the garage sales.
e. Setback: These signs shall be set back at least five feet (5') from the street surface and shall not be located within the twenty five foot (25') sight
triangle of an intersection.
f. Number And Spacing: These signs are limited to two (2) signs per garage sale per intersection. These signs shall not be located closer than one
block from another sign containing information about the same garage sale except that these signs may be located on the opposite corners of the
same intersection.
g. Conformance With Other Standards: These signs shall conform to all other applicable zoning and building code standards. (Ord. B-200, 6-2-2009)
4. Sidewalk Signs: Sidewalk signs in the DT downtown district, subject to the following standards: (Ord. B-211, 1-4-2011)
a. Signs shall be limited to two feet (2') in width and three and one-half feet (3.5') in height, including support members.
b. No sign shall have more than two (2) faces.
c. Signs shall not limit the normal pedestrian use of the sidewalk, and a minimum passable contiguous space of three feet (3') shall be maintained at
all times.
d. One sign is permitted for each building adjacent to the public right of way, unless multiple businesses within one building allow separate business
signs to be spaced no closer than thirty feet (30') from another sidewalk sign.
e. A business or building with two (2) right of way frontages may display a sidewalk sign on either frontage.
f. All signs must be removed from the sidewalk at the end of each business day.
g. No sidewalk sign shall be lighted by attached external or individual internal lights.
5. Noncommercial Opinion, Speech Sign: In addition to all other signs permitted under this chapter, noncommercial speech signs are allowed, subject
to the following:
a. Elections: All noncommercial signs of any size posted in any number from August 1 in a state general election year until ten (10) days following
general election, and thirteen (13) weeks prior to any special election until ten (10) days following the special election.
b. Residential Districts: Each lot located in a residential district may contain one noncommercial opinion sign, subject to the following:
(1) Permission To Place: Such signs are permitted on private property only and may be placed only upon approval of the property owner.
(2) Size And Height: Such signs may not exceed six (6) square feet in area or four feet (4') in height.
(3) Setbacks: Such signs shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from any property line and shall not be located within the twenty five foot (25')
sight triangle of an intersection.
(4) Illumination: Such signs shall not be illuminated.
(5) Conformance With Other Standards: These signs shall conform to all other applicable zoning and building code standards.
c. Nonresidential Districts: The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this sign ordinance in a nonresidential district may substitute
noncommercial copy in lieu of any other commercial or noncommercial copy. This substitution of copy may be made without any additional
approval or permitting.
6. Official Signs: Official signs.
7. For Sale Or Lease Signs: For sale or lease signs, subject to the following:
a. In the agriculture districts each property shall be allowed one sign per frontage on a public street limited to thirty two (32) square feet and six feet
(6') in height.
b. In all residential districts each property shall be allowed one sign per site. Sites with multiple frontages along a public right of way will be allowed
one additional sign per right of way frontage provided that the frontage faces another commercial or industrial use or a collector, minor arterial or
principal arterial road as identified in the comprehensive plan. Each sign is limited to eight (8) square feet and eight feet (8') in height.
c. Institutional uses or residential subdivisions having five (5) or more lots are allowed one sign per frontage on a public street of the subdivision.
Each sign is limited to thirty two (32) square feet and six feet (6') in height. These signs shall be removed once ninety percent (90%) of the lots are
sold. These signs shall be located on private property and shall not be located within any sight triangle. Such signs, if illuminated, shall use only
indirect light with the light source fully diffused and aimed toward the ground.
d. In all other zoning districts each property shall be allowed one sign per frontage on a public street limited to thirty two (32) square feet in area or
six feet (6') in height.
e. Off premises temporary for sale and lease signs, subject to the following:
(1) Permission To Place: Such signs are permitted on private property only and may be placed only upon approval of the property owner.
(2) Duration: These signs are prohibited, except from four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. Thursdays to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Mondays.
(3) Size And Height: These signs are limited to four (4) square feet in size and three feet (3') in height.
(4) Distance: These signs shall not be placed farther than six (6) blocks or a 1.5 mile radius, whichever is greater, from the real estate listing.
(5) Setback: These signs shall be set back at least five feet (5') from the street surface and shall not be located within the twenty five foot (25')
sight triangle of an intersection.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 277/324
(6) Number And Spacing: These signs are limited to two (2) signs per real estate listing per intersection. These signs shall not be located closer
than one block from another sign containing information about the same real estate listing except that these signs may be located on the
opposite corners of the same intersection.
(7) Conformance With Other Standards: These signs shall conform to all other applicable zoning and building code standards.
C. Nonconforming Signs And Uses:
1. Nonconforming Signs: A nonconforming sign lawfully existing upon the effective date of this chapter shall be regulated in accordance with chapter 11
of this title.
2. Nonconforming Uses: When the principal use of land is legally nonconforming under chapter 11 of this title, all existing or proposed signs in
conjunction with that land use shall be considered conforming if they are in compliance with the sign provisions for the most restrictive zoning district
in which the principal use is allowed.
D. Enforcement And Penalties:
1. Administration: This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the community development department designee. The community development
department designee may institute in the name of the city appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator.
2. Inspection: All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the community development department designee.
3. Removal At Owner's Expense: The city reserves the right to require the removal at the owner's expense of any sign when the requirements of this
section are not completely followed and adhered to, or if a sign is not properly maintained or falls into a state of disrepair. The city shall not have any
obligation or liability to replace any sign when removed by the city.
4. Misdemeanor: Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined or penalized not more than the maximum levels established by the state for misdemeanor
offenses.
E. Consent Required: No person may place a sign in any location within the city without the consent of the property owner upon which the sign is to be
located. (Ord. B-200, 6-2-2009)
11-8-4: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
A. Changeable Copy Signs: One changeable copy sign (but not including electronic changeable copy signs) shall be allowed per site provided that the
area of the sign not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the allowable sign area or fifty (50) square feet, whichever is less, for a freestanding or wall sign.
B. Classification: All signs shall be an accessory use or structure.
C. Construction And Placement:
1. Except in the DT downtown district and as otherwise regulated herein, all freestanding signs shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from any
property line. No sign, except official signs, may be located within the public right of way, a corner sight triangle or any easement.
2. No sign shall be erected in or overhang upon a public right of way or otherwise interfere with safe pedestrian or vehicular movement, except official
signs.
3. No sign shall contain colors, shapes, intermittent lighting or words such as "stop", "warning", "caution", etc., which may be confused with traffic
signing or controls unless such signs are intended or approved for such use.
4. Electrical signs shall be installed according to state electrical codes and shall require underground wiring.
5. No sign or sign structure shall be permitted to interfere with the safe access to doors, windows or fire escapes. No sign or sign structure shall be
attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
6. No sign shall contain intermittent, flashing or other type of lighting which changes in intensity or color when artificially illuminated.
7. No exterior sign shall pivot, move, rotate or display any moving parts.
8. No sign shall be painted directly on the exterior surface of any building.
9. Signs which advertise a business, activity, product or service not located exclusively on the premises are prohibited except as regulated herein.
10. No sign may contain more than two (2) sides.
11. No sign shall be attached or be allowed to hang from any building until all necessary wall and roof attachments have been approved by the
Community Development Department designee.
12. No signs, guys, stays or attachments shall be erected, placed or maintained on trees nor interfere with any electric light, power, telephone or
telegraph wires or the supports thereof.
13. Illuminated signs shall be shielded to prevent lights from being directed at oncoming traffic in such brilliance that it impairs the vision of the driver
and may not interfere with or obscure traffic signs or signals. Lighting may not illuminate any adjacent properties, buildings or streets.
14. No permanent freestanding or building mounted sign shall be supported by guywires.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 278/324
15. The Planning Commission and/or City Council may recognize separate sign plans for a project, site, or multi-building PUD which will supersede this
chapter. The sign plans which have been approved by the City will have the effect of a sign ordinance for the specific project, site or multi-building
PUD.
16. Audio speakers or any form of pyrotechnics are prohibited in association with any sign.
17. No sign shall be erected, placed or located upon private property without the permission of the property owner. This includes obtaining permission
of the adjacent property owner for any sign placed in the public right-of-way.
D. Sign Maintenance And Repair: All signs shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good structural condition at all times, including the replacement
of defective parts, cleaning and other items required for maintenance of the sign. Vegetation around, in front of, behind, and underneath the base of
ground signs for a distance of ten feet (10') shall be neatly trimmed and free of weeds, and no rubbish or debris that would constitute a fire or health
hazard shall be permitted under or near the sign. (Ord. B-212, 2-15-2011)
E. Dynamic Signs: Dynamic signs are allowed subject to the following standards:
1. District Limitations: Dynamic signs may be located on properties within the C-3 Highway Commercial, C-4 General Commercial. Dynamic signs are
also permitted in PI Public and Institutional, and DT Downtown Districts, so long as the property has frontage along an arterial road or major collector
as designated in the Comprehensive Plan. Dynamic signs may also be located on public and institutional uses within a residential zone, provided the
site has an approved conditional use permit (CUP) and complies with all other sign standards and is located on a designated arterial or major
collector road.
2. Location: The sign must be located on the site of the use identified or advertised by the sign.
3. Orientation: When located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residential use or zone, dynamic signs must be oriented so that no portion of the
sign face is visible from the residential use or zoning district.
4. Type Of Sign: Dynamic signs are limited to ground signs only.
5. Text Size And Legibility: The following minimum text sizes shall apply to all dynamic signs. If a sign is located on a corner with streets that have
differing speed limits, the minimum text size shall be based on the standard for the higher speed limit to ensure maximum legibility.
MINIMUM TEXT SIZES FOR DYNAMIC SIGNS
Speed Limit Of Adjacent
Road (Miles Per Hour)
Minimum Text
Size (Inches)
25 to 34 7
35 to 44 9
45 to 54 12
55 or more 15
6. Mode: Dynamic signs shall only be allowed to operate in a static mode. Animation, motion or video displays are prohibited. Any change from one (1)
static display to another must be instantaneous and shall not include any distracting effects, such as dissolving, spinning or fading. The images and
messages displayed must be complete in themselves, without continuation in content to the next image or message or to any other sign.
7. Size And Number Of Dynamic Display: The dynamic portion of any sign shall not exceed thirty five percent (35%) of the total allowable area of the
sign, except for the Public and Institutional District and public and institutional uses within residential districts where the maximum percentage shall
be fifty percent (50%). The dynamic portion of signs within the downtown study area as designated in the 2004 Development Framework for
Downtown Rosemount is thirty five percent (35%) or fourteen (14) square feet whichever is less.
The remaining percentage of the allowable sign area cannot have dynamic capabilities even if it is not used. Each site can have only one (1)
dynamic sign and that sign can have only one (1) dynamic display.
8. Minimum Display Time: The minimum display time shall be five (5) minutes. One (1) exception to this standard would be for time, date and
temperature signs which the Federal Court has acknowledged as a justifiable exception to limitations on variable message signs. The time, date and
temperature information may change no faster than once every three (3) seconds, provided that the display of this information remains for at least
five (5) minutes before changing to another display.
9. Brightness: Dynamic signs shall not exceed a maximum illumination of five thousand (5,000) nits during daylight hours and a maximum illumination
of five hundred (500) nits between dusk to dawn as measured from the sign's face at maximum brightness. All dynamic sign applications shall
include certification from the sign's manufacturer that the sign has been preset to conform to the luminance levels noted above and these settings
are protected from end users' manipulation by password protected software.
10. Color: Dynamic signs may be capable of producing multiple colors within the display but no more than two (2) colors shall be displayed at any given
time. The background shall be considered one (1) of the colors. The use of color shall not create distraction or a hazard to the public health, safety or
welfare. No portion of the display may change in color or color intensity in any manner. Each line of text in any direction shall be uniform in color.
11. Operation: All dynamic signs shall be equipped with a means to immediately discontinue the display if it malfunctions. The owner of a dynamic sign
must immediately cease operation of their sign when notified by the City that it fails to comply with the standards of this chapter. The dynamic sign
shall remain inoperable until such time that the owner demonstrates to the City that the device is in satisfactory working condition and conforms to
the standards of this chapter. Appeals of the City's direction regarding the operation of a dynamic sign shall follow the appeals process outlined in
chapter 12, "Board Of Appeals And Adjustments", of this title.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 279/324
12. Application To Existing Signs: The dynamic sign standards shall apply to all existing and future dynamic signs, unless otherwise determined by the
City that an existing sign qualifies as a nonconforming use under State statute or this Code. Any existing dynamic sign that cannot meet the
minimum text size as required by the speed limit must use the largest size possible for one (1) line of copy to fit in the available display space. (Ord.
B-260, 2-9-2017)
F. Flags: Flags displayed in commercial and industrial districts shall not exceed in surface area the maximum permitted for freestanding signs, provided
further that the display of more than three (3) flags shall be debited against the total freestanding signage area permitted.
G. Landscaping: Subject to the standards of the individual zoning district in which the sign is placed, the area around freestanding signs shall be
landscaped with plantings and maintained in such a manner to accent and enhance the sign while remaining sensitive to the natural features of the
site.
H. On Premises Temporary Signs: Applications for on premises temporary sign permits shall follow the administration and enforcement requirements
detailed in subsection 11-8-3A of this chapter, subject to the following:
1. Number And Duration Of Permit: Each property may have only one (1) temporary sign permit at any given time. Permits for temporary signs may be
issued a maximum of six (6) times per year for a maximum of fourteen (14) days per permit. Businesses only open to customers on an intermittent
basis may assign the fourteen (14) day permit to the days they are actually open to customers. Permits for searchlight signs may be issued a
maximum of three (3) times per year for a maximum of three (3) days per permit.
2. Location And Exceptions: Temporary signs are allowed in any Commercial, Business Park, Industrial, or Public and Institutional District except that
portable changeable copy signs are prohibited in the DT Downtown District. Sidewalk signs shall comply with the specific standards detailed in
subsection 11-8-3B4 of this chapter.
3. Size And Placement: Temporary signs shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area or the maximum height of a permanent freestanding
ground sign in the given district. Temporary signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from any property line and shall not encroach upon
any right of way, easement, or sight triangle. No temporary sign may be placed in such a way as to cover any door, window or fire escape and shall
not interfere with circulation in any required parking, loading, maneuvering or pedestrian area.
4. Conformance With Other Standards: Temporary signs shall conform to all other applicable zoning and building code standards.
I. Directional Signs: Directional signs shall be permitted in any commercial, business park, industrial or public and institutional zoning district. Individual on
site directional signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet nor three feet (3') in height. The maximum number of directional signs per site shall not
exceed one per curb cut. Additional directional signs may be allowed internal to the site for the purpose of directing vehicular or pedestrian traffic in a
safe and convenient manner. (Ord. B-212, 2-15-2011)
11-8-5: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs are prohibited:
A. Any sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles any official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or
emergency vehicle signs, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal.
B. All signs over two hundred fifty (250) square feet in area.
C. All off premises signs, except as allowed under subsections 11-8-3B3, "Garage Sale Signs", 11-8-3B7e (for sale and lease - off premises temporary
signs) and 11-8-6C2b(3), "Common Freestanding Sign Bonus", of this chapter.
D. Content classified as "obscene" as defined by Minnesota statutes, section 617.241.
E. Flashing signs.
F. Inflatable signs.
G. Portable signs except as allowed by this chapter.
H. Roof signs.
I. Rotating signs.
J. Shimmering signs.
K. Signs painted, attached or in any other manner affixed to trees or similar natural surfaces, or attached to utility poles, bridges, towers, transit shelters,
benches or similar public structures except official signs. (Ord. B-200, 6-2-2009)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 280/324
11-8-6: DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
The following signs are allowed by specific zoning district subject to the site and building standards of the applicable district:
A. Signs Allowed By Permit In Agricultural Districts:
1. One sign per farm identifying the name of said farm not exceeding twenty four (24) square feet.
2. One sign per farm advertising agricultural products raised in part on the premises not exceeding thirty two (32) square feet. (Ord. B-212, 2-15-2011)
B. Signs Allowed By Permit In Residential Districts:
1. Residential subdivisions having five (5) or more lots are allowed up to two (2) decorative freestanding monument signs per principal entrance to the
subdivision. Each sign is limited to thirty two (32) square feet and six feet (6') in height. These signs shall be located on private property and shall not
be located within any sight triangle. Such signs, if illuminated, shall use only indirect light with the light source fully diffused and aimed toward the
ground.
2. Apartment or condominium buildings are allowed one freestanding monument sign per site. Sites with multiple frontages along a public right of way
will be allowed one additional sign per right of way frontage provided that the frontage faces a nonresidential use or a collector or arterial road as
identified in the comprehensive plan. Each sign is limited to thirty two (32) square feet and six feet (6') in height. These signs shall have a base made
of decorative materials compatible with the exterior materials of the principal structure on site. At a minimum, the base width dimension shall be
larger than fifty percent (50%) of the greatest width of the sign. Such signs, if illuminated, shall use only indirect light with the light source fully
diffused and aimed toward the ground. These signs shall be located on private property and shall not be located within any sight triangle.
3. For sale or lease signs subject to the standards in subsection 11-8-3B7 of this chapter.
4. Public and institutional uses may have signs subject to the standards in subsection F of this section. (Ord. B-221, 4-17-2012)
C. Signs Allowed By Permit In Commercial And BP Districts: Signs should be architecturally compatible with the style, composition, materials, colors and
details of the building which it identifies while differing from signs on surrounding sites and providing a unique identity.
1. C-1 convenience commercial and DT downtown as follows:
a. Wall Signs:
(1) Permanent wall signs shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the total area of the wall on which the signs are affixed. Wall signage may be
affixed to windows but shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the window on which it is placed and is counted toward the overall fifteen percent
(15%) maximum wall signage. Signage placed on a wall facing a parking area and abutting a residential use shall not exceed ten percent (10%)
of the total area of the wall on which it is placed and shall not be illuminated past nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. nor before six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
(2) All permanent wall signs shall be individual channel letters mounted flush with the building or on a raceway. Channel letters shall have a
minimum depth of at least three inches (3"). Box or panel signs are prohibited.
(3) Wall signs may be located on any side of a commercial building that faces another commercial or industrial use, a collector, minor arterial or
principal arterial road as identified in the comprehensive plan or a parking area.
(4) Wall signs constructed on structures with more than one sign shall be designed according to an approved sign concept plan in which all signs
have complementary designs, similar shapes and sign areas. Consideration may be made by PUD to permit variation in size and design of signs
for major tenants or anchor businesses in larger complexes.
(5) In the DT downtown district only, properties may have a sign that projects from the side of the building in addition to the maximum fifteen
percent (15%) wall sign standard. This sign may not exceed twelve (12) square feet in size or three feet (3') in width. The maximum distance
between sign and building face is one foot (1'); however, at no time shall any projecting sign encroach the public right of way. No portion of a
projecting sign may extend beyond the second floor of the building. No less than seven and one-half feet (7.5') of clearance shall be provided
between the sidewalk elevation and the lowest point of the projecting sign. Signs cannot block or diminish design details, windows or cornices of
the building upon which they are placed.
b. Freestanding Signs:
(1) One permanent freestanding sign per site. Sites with multiple frontages along a public right of way will be allowed one additional sign per right
of way frontage provided that the frontage faces another commercial or industrial use or a collector, minor arterial or principal arterial road as
identified in the comprehensive plan. Each sign is limited to forty (40) square feet and ten feet (10') in height. Such signs, if illuminated, shall use
only indirect light with the light source fully diffused and aimed toward the ground.
(2) All permanent freestanding signs shall have a base made of decorative materials compatible with the exterior materials of the principal
structure on site. At a minimum, the base width dimension shall be larger than fifty percent (50%) of the greatest width of the sign.
c. Changeable Copy Signs: Changeable copy signs subject to the standards in subsection 11-8-4A of this chapter.
d. On Premises Temporary Signs: On premises temporary signs subject to the standards in subsection 11-8-4H of this chapter.
e. For Sale Or Lease Signs: For sale or lease signs subject to the standards in subsection 11-8-3B7 of this chapter.
f. Gasoline Signs (DT Downtown District Only): An area not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet within a freestanding sign shall be allowed for
continuous display (no flashing, scrolling or other animation) of electronic or nonelectronic changeable copy identifying current fuel prices in
accordance with Minnesota state statutes section 239.751.
2. C-3 highway commercial and C-4 general commercial as follows:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 281/324
a. Wall Signs:
(1) Permanent wall signs shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total area of the wall on which the signs are affixed. Wall signage may be
affixed to windows but shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the window on which it is placed and is counted toward the overall twenty percent
(20%) maximum wall signage.
(2) All permanent wall signs shall be individual channel letters mounted flush with the building or on a raceway. Channel letters shall have a
minimum depth of at least three inches (3"). Box or panel signs are prohibited.
(3) Wall signs may be located on any side of a commercial building that faces another commercial or industrial use or a collector, minor arterial or
principal arterial road as identified in the comprehensive plan.
(4) Wall signs constructed on structures with more than one sign shall be designed according to an approved sign concept plan in which all signs
have complementary designs, similar shapes and sign areas. Consideration may be made by PUD to permit variation in size and design of signs
for major tenants or anchor businesses in larger complexes.
b. Freestanding Signs:
(1) Sites With Multiple Frontages: One permanent freestanding sign per site. Sites with multiple frontages along a public right of way will be
allowed one additional sign per right of way frontage provided that the frontage faces another commercial or industrial use or a collector, minor
arterial or principal arterial road as identified in the comprehensive plan. Each sign is limited to one hundred (100) square feet and twenty feet
(20') in height. Such signs, if illuminated, shall use only indirect light with the light source fully diffused and aimed toward the ground.
(2) Permanent Freestanding Signs: All permanent freestanding signs shall have a base made of decorative materials compatible with the exterior
materials of the principal structure on site. At a minimum, the base width dimension shall be larger than fifty percent (50%) of the greatest width
of the sign.
(3) Common Freestanding Sign Bonus: The city may approve up to a twenty five percent (25%) size bonus for adjoining properties with a common
lot line that construct a common freestanding ground sign. No property shall be part of more than one common freestanding sign bonus and the
sign bonus is limited to one twenty five percent (25%) increase regardless of the number of participating properties. Properties eligible to
participate in the common freestanding sign bonus must directly adjoin the site on which the common freestanding sign is constructed. The sign
shall conform to all applicable performance standards for the zoning district in which it is located, except that the size of the sign may be up to
one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the maximum permanent freestanding ground sign size standard. The bonus sign area shall not
increase the sign height. Should the sign include a dynamic sign, the dynamic portion of the sign shall not exceed thirty five (35) square feet,
regardless of the total area of the sign. All parties to the common freestanding sign shall enter into an agreement addressing construction,
maintenance and repair responsibilities and trespass rights. This agreement shall be filed with the Dakota County recorder against the title of all
properties involved. Amendment or cancellation of the agreement shall be allowed only upon written approval by the community development
director or their designee.
c. Subdivision Signs: For the purposes of creating identity in planned subdivisions, in addition to other freestanding signs allowed by this chapter, one
freestanding subdivision identification sign shall be allowed limited to one hundred (100) square feet and ten feet (10') in height. Subdivision
identification signs shall only be permitted on property within the subdivision being identified which is situated on a principal or minor arterial road
as identified in the city of Rosemount comprehensive guide plan. Furthermore, subdivision identification signs shall not be situated closer than one
hundred feet (100') to any other permitted freestanding sign.
d. Changeable Copy Signs: Changeable copy signs subject to the standards in subsection 11-8-4A of this chapter.
e. On Premises Temporary Signs: On premises temporary signs subject to the standards in subsection 11-8-4H of this chapter.
f. For Sale Or Lease Signs: For sale or lease signs subject to the standards in subsection 11-8-3B7 of this chapter.
g. Dynamic Signs: Dynamic signs subject to the standards in subsection 11-8-4E of this chapter.
h. Marquee Signs: Movie theaters are allowed chasing and running lights on marquees subject to the requirements for wall signs in commercial
districts and the following standards:
(1) Running and chasing lights are only allowed in the C-4 general commercial and DT downtown districts;
(2) Signs with running and chasing lights are not permitted on walls that are within two hundred fifty feet (250') of residential districts or uses from
which the sign is visible, and the lights shall not exceed an illumination intensity of 0.5 lumens at the property line;
(3) No signs with running and chasing lights are allowed in a front yard setback;
(4) Signs with running and chasing lights shall be a minimum of twelve feet (12') above the adjacent grade elevation and street grade elevation;
(5) The power of illumination of running and chasing lights shall be limited to fifteen (15) watts per bulb;
(6) Running and chasing lights shall not be located near intersections nor within the sight triangle adjacent to an intersection;
(7) Only permanent wall signs shall be allowed running and chasing lights; and
(8) Hours of illumination shall be limited to between the hours of eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) A.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
i. Gasoline Signs (C-3 District Only): An area not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet within a freestanding sign shall be allowed for continuous display
(no flashing, scrolling or other animation) of electronic or nonelectronic changeable copy identifying current fuel prices in accordance with
Minnesota state statutes section 239.751.
3. BP business park as follows:
a. Wall Signs:
(1) Permanent wall signs shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total area of the wall on which the signs are affixed.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 282/324
(2) All permanent wall signs shall be individual channel letters mounted flush with the building or on a raceway. Channel letters shall have a
minimum depth of at least three inches (3"). Box or panel signs are prohibited.
(3) Wall signs may be located on any side of a building that faces another commercial or industrial use or a collector, minor arterial or principal
arterial road as identified in the comprehensive plan.
(4) Wall signs constructed on structures with more than one sign shall be designed according to an approved sign concept plan in which all signs
have complementary designs, similar shapes and sign areas. Consideration may be made by PUD to permit variation in size and design of signs
for major tenants or anchor businesses in larger complexes.
b. Freestanding Signs:
(1) One permanent freestanding sign per site. Sites with multiple frontages along a public right of way will be allowed one additional sign per right
of way frontage provided that the frontage faces another commercial or industrial use or a collector, minor arterial or principal arterial road as
identified in the comprehensive plan. Each sign is limited to one hundred (100) square feet and ten feet (10') in height. Such signs, if illuminated,
shall use only indirect light with the light source fully diffused and aimed toward the ground.
(2) All permanent freestanding signs shall have a base made of decorative materials compatible with the exterior materials of the principal
structure on site. At a minimum, the base width dimension shall be larger than fifty percent (50%) of the greatest width of the sign.
c. Subdivisions Signs: For the purposes of creating identity in planned subdivisions, in addition to other freestanding signs allowed by this chapter,
one freestanding subdivision identification sign shall be allowed limited to one hundred (100) square feet and ten feet (10') in height. Subdivision
identification signs shall only be permitted on property within the subdivision being identified which is situated on a principal or minor arterial as
identified in the city of Rosemount comprehensive guide plan. Furthermore, subdivision identification signs shall not be situated closer than one
hundred feet (100') to any other permitted freestanding sign.
d. Temporary Signs: Temporary signs subject to the standards in subsection 11-8-4H of this chapter.
e. For Sale Or Lease Signs: For sale or lease signs subject to the standards in subsection 11-8-3B7 of this chapter.
D. Signs Allowed By Permit In The Industrial Districts (LI Light Industrial, GI General Industrial, And HI Heavy Industrial):
1. Wall Signs:
a. Permanent wall signs shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total area of the wall on which the signs are affixed.
b. All permanent wall signs shall be individual channel letters mounted flush with the building or on a raceway. Channel letters shall have a minimum
depth of at least three inches (3"). Box or panel signs are prohibited.
c. Wall signs may be located on any side of a commercial building that faces another commercial or industrial use or a collector, minor arterial or
principal arterial road as identified in the comprehensive plan.
d. Wall signs constructed on structures with more than one sign shall be designed according to an approved sign concept plan in which all signs
have complementary designs, similar shapes and sign areas. Consideration may be made by PUD to permit variation in size and design of signs
for major tenants or anchor businesses in larger complexes.
2. Freestanding Signs:
a. One permanent freestanding sign per site. Sites with multiple frontages along a public right of way will be allowed one additional sign per right of
way frontage provided that the frontage faces another commercial or industrial use or a collector, minor arterial or principal arterial road as
identified in the comprehensive plan. Each sign is limited to one hundred (100) square feet and ten feet (10') in height. Such signs, if illuminated,
shall use only indirect light with the light source fully diffused and aimed toward the ground.
b. All permanent freestanding signs shall have a base made of decorative materials compatible with the exterior materials of the principal structure
on site. At a minimum, the base width dimension shall be larger than fifty percent (50%) of the greatest width of the sign.
3. Subdivision Signs: For the purposes of creating identity in planned subdivisions, in addition to other freestanding signs allowed by this chapter, one
freestanding subdivision identification sign shall be allowed limited to one hundred (100) square feet and ten feet (10') in height. Subdivision
identification signs shall only be permitted on property within the subdivision being identified which is situated on a principal or minor arterial as
identified in the city of Rosemount comprehensive guide plan. Furthermore, subdivision identification signs shall not be situated closer than one
hundred feet (100') to any other permitted freestanding sign.
4. Temporary Signs: Temporary signs subject to the standards in subsection 11-8-4H of this chapter.
5. For Sale Or Lease Signs: For sale or lease signs subject to the standards in subsection 11-8-3B7 of this chapter.
E. Signs Allowed By Permit In The FW District:
1. Navigational signs including barge ship identification and directional signs.
2. Park identification and interpretation signs. (Ord. B-212, 2-15-2011)
F. Signs Allowed By Permit In The Public And Institutional District And For Public And Institutional Uses In Residential Districts:
1. Wall Signs:
a. Permanent wall signs shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the total area of the wall on which the signs are affixed. Wall signage may be
affixed to windows but shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the window on which it is placed and is counted toward the overall fifteen percent
(15%) maximum wall signage.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 283/324
b. All permanent wall signs shall be individual channel letters mounted flush with the building or on a raceway. Channel letters shall have a minimum
depth of at least three inches (3"). Box or panel signs are prohibited.
c. Wall signs may be located on any side of a commercial building that faces another commercial or industrial use, a collector, minor arterial or
principal arterial road as identified in the Comprehensive Plan or a parking area.
d. Wall signs constructed on structures with more than one (1) sign shall be designed according to an approved sign concept plan in which all signs
have complementary designs, similar shapes and sign areas. Consideration may be made by PUD to permit variation in size and design of signs
for major tenants or anchor businesses in larger complexes.
2. Freestanding Signs:
a. One (1) freestanding monument sign per site. Sites with multiple frontages along a public right-of-way will be allowed one (1) additional sign per
right-of-way frontage provided that the frontage faces another commercial or industrial use or collector or arterial road as identified in the
Comprehensive Plan. Each sign is limited to fifty (50) square feet and six feet (6') in height. These signs shall be located on private property and
shall not be located within any sight triangle.
b. All permanent freestanding signs shall have a base made of decorative materials compatible with the exterior materials of the principal structure
on site. At a minimum, the base width dimension shall be larger than fifty percent (50%) of the greatest width of the sign.
3. Changeable Copy Signs: Changeable copy signs subject to the standards in subsection 11-8-4A of this chapter.
4. On Premises Temporary Signs: On premises temporary signs subject to the standards in subsection 11-8-4H of this chapter.
5. For Sale Or Lease Signs: For sale or lease signs subject to the standards in subsection 11-8-3B7 of this chapter. (Ord. B-258, 1-17-2017)
Chapter 9
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS; ALL DISTRICTS
11-9-1: RESIDUAL FEATURES:
Uses which because of the nature of their operation are accompanied by excess of noise, vibration, dust, dirt, smoke, odor, noxious gases, glare or wastes
shall not be permitted. These residual features shall be considered "excessive" when they either exceed or deviate from the limitations set forth in the
following performance standards:
A. Noise: Noise shall be muffled so as not to become objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency, shrillness or intensity. Noise levels shall be
regulated by the standards of the Minnesota pollution control agency (MPCA).
B. Vibration: No activity or operation shall at any time cause earth vibrations perceptible beyond the limits of the immediate site in which the operation is
conducted. Temporary vibrations resulting from normal construction or reconstruction projects may be excepted.
C. Dust, Dirt, Smoke, Odor, Gases: The release of solid and liquid particulates, smoke, gases, toxic or noxious materials and other materials or odors shall
be regulated by the standards of the MPCA.
D. Glare: Glare from high intensity lighting or high temperature processes, whether direct or indirect, and as differentiated from street lighting or general
illumination, shall not be visible beyond the limits of the immediate site from which it originates. General lot lighting or security spotlighting shall be
directed away from adjacent properties, eliminating or reducing the illumination generated on the site.
E. Wastes: All solid waste materials, debris, rubbish, junk, refuse or garbage shall be kept within a completely enclosed building or properly contained
within a closed container specifically designed for such purpose. In no case shall noxious or odorous refuse or garbage be kept outside of a completely
enclosed building for a period of time exceeding the average interval of refuse collection by commercial rubbish haulers. Hazardous wastes generated
from any activity or operation shall be properly contained, labeled and stored for transfer to an authorized processing, storage or burial facility,
according to the laws of the state of Minnesota. All waste storage shall comply with sections 5-1-2 and 5-1-3 of this code. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989; amd.
Ord. XIV.21, 3-7-2002)
11-9-2: EXPLOSIVES:
Any activity or operation requiring the use, storage or manufacturing of explosives shall be located no closer than five hundred feet (500') from any
residential district, provided further that the location of said activity or operation is such that damage from explosion, including flying debris, vibration or
smoke, is limited to the site on which the activity or operation is permitted. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
11-9-3: NONHAZARDOUS INDUSTRIAL WASTE CONTAINMENT FACILITY:
A. Permit applicants shall submit the following information together with any other information requested by the city:
1. The proposed project layout including site drawings showing building locations, access roads, buffers and all major facilities.
2. Proposed technology and design.
3. A complete description of the proposed project's operation, including, but not limited to, phasing and anticipated operating lifetime, types of wastes to
be accepted and methods to verify the waste stream, recordkeeping methods, staffing, anticipated waste volumes, containment facilities,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 284/324
contingency and response plans.
4. A description of anticipated traffic generated by the facility, routes to be used, and access to the site.
5. Identification of known and potential environmental risks associated with the construction, operation and closure of the facility.
6. Closure, postclosure and contingency plans, including financing plans.
7. A description of the existing site and surrounding area including current ownership and land uses, current zoning, transportation access to the site,
topography, existing soil and hydrogeologic conditions, vegetation, wildlife, surface waters.
8. Need for city emergency services including fire, police, emergency response, medical.
9. A description of the applicant's experience in operating the technology, proposed training for all operation staff, and the environmental record of the
technology.
B. Permits for nonhazardous industrial waste land disposal facilities shall only be issued if the following standards are met or exceeded:
1. The facility must represent the best available technology for land disposal of nonhazardous industrial waste.
2. The operator and staff must have sufficient experience in the operation of such facilities to ensure competent operation.
3. The design, construction and operation of the facility must minimize negative environmental impacts and must mitigate such impacts to the fullest
extent possible.
4. Public health, safety and welfare must be ensured.
5. Adequate closure, postclosure and contingency plans must be established.
6. An emergency response plan must be established and accepted by the city.
7. An environmental impact statement must be completed and declared adequate by the responsible governmental unit.
8. There must be adequate access to the site.
9. The proposed project must be compatible with surrounding land use.
10. The applicant provides financial security sufficient to guarantee compliance with the terms of the permit.
11. The economic benefits, incentives and other advantages to the city and community must outweigh any known or potential negative aspects of the
facility.
12. The applicant must have a plan for working with industry to develop techniques and markets for recycling industrial waste streams.
13. An interim permit shall not be issued until all required local, state and/or federal permits have been obtained by the applicant. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
The city may allow interim permits that were previously approved and are in the process of being amended or reissued to continue to operate under
the existing permit conditions during the review process by the city or other governmental agencies. (Ord. B-79, 1-21-1997)
14. The applicant must notify each user of the site that free liquids cannot be placed in the containment cell; inspect each container of waste for the
presence of free liquids; and have procedures to prevent any free liquid from being placed in the cell. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
11-9-4: AM RADIO COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS AND SUPPORTING TOWERS:
A. Submittal Of Information: Permit applicants shall submit the following information together with any other information requested by the city:
1. In submitting an application for an interim use permit for the construction and maintenance of radio antennas, and accessory structures, the
applicant shall provide sufficient information to indicate that construction, installation and maintenance of the antenna and tower will not create a
hazard to the health, safety and general welfare of surrounding property owners, animal population or natural environment.
2. This information shall include an outside consultant conducting an independent study at the cost of the applicant, demonstrating that the tower
complies with structural standards for steel antenna towers and antenna supporting structures, engineering department, Electronic Industries
Association (EIA); describing the capacity of the tower, including the number and type of antennas that it can accommodate and the basis for the
calculation of capacity; and demonstrating that the application complies with FAA, FCC and, if applicable, state aeronautics division requirements.
3. A site plan including contents as specified in section 11-10-3 of this title.
4. A written analysis of the impacts of the proposed project shall be required. The applicant must discuss issues related to the aesthetics of the project,
any implications or nuisances in the operations of the project and property tax implications for long term use of the site.
B. Permit Requirements For Construction And Maintenance: Permits for AM radio communications antenna, towers and accessory structures erected,
constructed or located on any property and all supporting devices thereof shall only be issued if the following standards are met or exceeded:
1. The tower shall not exceed four hundred feet (400') above grade or less as authorized by law.
2. Antenna and/or tower setbacks shall be such that the distance from the base to the nearest property line or nonowned structures is not less than the
calculated structural collapse radius.
3. No part of any antenna or tower nor any lines, cable, equipment or wires or braces in connection with either shall at any time extend across or over
any part of the right of way, public street, highway, sidewalk or property line.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 285/324
4. Towers with antennas shall be designed to withstand a uniform wind loading as prescribed by the state building code and the Electronic Industries
Association recognized national standards, whichever is more restrictive.
5. Antenna and metal towers shall be properly protected against direct strike by lightening, either by adequate grounding or suitable circuits designed to
provide such protection. The installation shall comply with all applicable electrical wiring codes, statutes, regulations and standards.
6. The city shall determine whether self-supporting towers or towers supported by cables or guy wires serve to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
7. All signal and remote control conductors of low energy extending horizontally above the ground between the tower or antenna and structure, or
between towers, not buried underground, shall be at least twelve feet (12') above the ground at all points.
8. The base of the tower and all anchors shall be surrounded with a minimum six foot (6') high security fence with the appropriate warning signs posted
on all sides.
9. No accessory structure or appurtenances shall be temporarily or permanently affixed to AM radio antennas or supporting towers except as required
to accomplish the license service for which the antenna or tower is authorized by the FCC, or as may be approved by city council.
10. The economic benefits, incentives and other advantages to the city and community must outweigh any known or potential negative aspects of the
project.
11. The applicant shall furnish the city with copies of all correspondence with the FCC and FAA regarding permit performance of the AM radio
antennas; or any matters affecting public health, safety and welfare.
12. If use of the tower is discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months, or upon expiration of the interim use permit the AM radio communications
antennas, supporting towers and all above and below ground appurtenances shall be removed.
13. The applicant shall be required to adequately maintain the AM radio communications antennas, supporting towers and related accessory structures
and property upon which those facilities do not represent a hazard or nuisance to the public, animal population or natural environment.
C. Broadcast Interference: The applicant shall be responsible to investigate all and remedy legitimate complaints regarding interference to consumer
electronic equipment alleged to be caused by signals from the broadcast facility.
D. Advisory Commission: The city council may establish an advisory commission to hear disputes that cannot be resolved between the broadcast
representatives and affected parties.
E. Tower Use Fee: The city council may require an annual use fee in lieu of taxes. (Ord. B-4, 5-15-1990)
11-9-5: SPENT BAUXITE DISPOSAL FACILITY:
A. Permit applicants shall submit the following information together with any other information requested by the city:
1. The proposed project layout including site drawings showing building locations, access roads, buffers and major facilities.
2. Proposed technology and design.
3. A complete description of the proposed project's operation, including, but not limited to, phasing and anticipated operating lifetime, description of
waste, record keeping methods, staffing, anticipated waste volumes, containment facilities, contingency and response plans.
4. A description of anticipated traffic generated by the facilities, routes to be used and access to the site.
5. Identification of known and potential environmental risks associated with the construction, operation and closure of the facility.
6. Closure, postclosure and contingency plans, including financing plans.
7. A description of the existing site and surrounding area including current ownership and land uses, current zoning, transportation access to the site,
topography, existing soil and hydrogeologic conditions, vegetation, wildlife, surface waters.
8. Need for city emergency services including fire, police, emergency response, medical.
9. A description of the applicant's experience in operating the technology, proposed training for all operation staff and the environmental record of
technology.
B. Permits for spent bauxite disposal facilities shall only be issued if the following standards are met or exceeded:
1. The facility must represent the best available technology for land disposal of spent bauxite.
2. The operator and staff must have sufficient experience in the operation of such facilities to ensure competent operation.
3. The design, construction and operation of the facility must minimize negative environmental impacts and must mitigate such impacts to the fullest
extent possible.
4. Public health, safety and welfare must be ensured.
5. Adequate closure, postclosure and contingency plans must be established.
6. An emergency response plan must be established and accepted by the city.
7. All environmental studies required must be completed and declared adequate by the responsible governmental units.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 286/324
8. There must be adequate access to the site.
9. The proposed project must be compatible with surrounding land uses.
10. The applicant provides financial security sufficient to guarantee compliance with the terms of the permit.
11. The economic benefits, incentives and other advantages to the city and community must outweigh any known or potential negative aspects of the
facility.
12. The applicant must demonstrate that reuse or recycling of spent bauxite is not feasible during the term of the permit and that land disposal is the
only practical alternative.
13. An interim use permit shall not be issued until all required local, state and/or federal permits have been obtained by the applicant. (Ord. B-13, 9-17-
1991)
11-9-6: COMMERCIAL USE ANTENNA TOWERS AND COMMERCIAL ANTENNAS:
A. Permit Required: No commercial use antenna tower may be constructed in the city without first applying for a permit. The permit application must be
accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee. The application fee shall be established by the city council. The permit fee shall be calculated
according to the city's schedule of rates and fees. All technical data and all relevant information shall be submitted to the planning commission for its
review including information specified in subsections 11-9-4A4 and B of this chapter.
1. Upon receiving approval by the planning commission and obtaining the appropriate permits, the following standards for commercial use antenna
towers shall be met:
a. Commercial use antenna towers shall not be multicolored, and shall contain no signage, including logos, except as may be required by any state
and federal regulations.
b. Commercial use antenna towers shall be conditional uses in the general industrial (GI) and the heavy industrial (HI) zones and not within one-half
(1/2) mile of another commercial use antenna tower.
c. No guywires shall be used.
d. The setbacks of commercial use antenna towers shall be no less than the height of the tower. The height of the tower shall not exceed two
hundred fifty feet (250'). A commercial use antenna tower cannot locate any closer than five hundred feet (500') from a residential structure.
e. The structural integrity of a commercial use antenna tower shall be approved by a certified engineer.
f. A commercial use antenna tower shall not be artificially illuminated unless required by the FAA, FCC or other federal or state authority. Any
illumination shall be oriented inward whenever possible while complying with federal or state requirements. If lighting is required, it shall be
oriented inward, if possible, so as not to project onto surrounding residential property.
g. Nonclimbable fencing shall enclose the area on which the commercial use antenna tower is located.
h. Accessory structures in accordance with applicable GI standards shall enclose transmission equipment, power equipment, or any equipment
located on the ground near the tower that is used in conjunction with the commercial use antenna tower.
i. Commercial use antenna towers located within six hundred sixty feet (660') (1/8 mile) of a public right of way (ROW) or a residential (R) or public
(P) district shall be landscaped along the side adjacent to the ROW, R or P district with boulevard trees planted on fifty foot (50') spacing in
accordance with section 11-6-3 of this title.
j. Applicant must provide data indicating location of proposed antenna in relationship with nearest existing or anticipated antenna locations that would
provide optimum service involving the city of Rosemount.
B. Violation Of Standards: Should the commercial use antenna tower owner engage in any activity that violates these standards or endangers the public
health, safety, and welfare, the city may require the abatement of said tower from its current site. The city will provide notice to the commercial use
antenna tower owner of the violations, and provide an opportunity for the owner to address the city council regarding the proposed action. The city may
require immediate abatement in the case that there is an immediate public health threat.
C. Obsolete Or Unused Tower: An obsolete or unused commercial use antenna tower and accompanying accessory facilities shall be removed within six
(6) months of the cessation of operations unless a time extension is approved by the city council. If a time extension is not approved, the commercial
use antenna tower may be deemed a nuisance pursuant to Minnesota statutes, section 429. In the event a tower is determined to be a nuisance, the
city of Rosemount may act to abate such nuisance and require the removal of the commercial use antenna tower at the property owner's expense. The
owner shall provide the city with a copy of the notice of the federal communications commission's (FCC) intent to cease operations and shall be given
six (6) months from the date of ceasing operations to remove the obsolete commercial use antenna tower, and all accessory structures including
anything that may have been placed belowground. In the case of multiple operators sharing the use of a single commercial use antenna tower, this
provision shall not become effective until all users cease operations for a period of six (6) months. The equipment on the ground shall not be removed
until the tower structure has first been dismantled. After the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original, or to an improved state.
D. Collocation Requirements: All commercial use antenna towers erected, constructed, or located within the city shall comply with the following
requirements:
1. A proposal for a commercial use antenna tower shall not be approved unless it can be documented by the applicant that the communications
equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or building within a one-half (1/2) mile radius
of the proposed tower due to one or more of the following reasons:
a. The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced or modified to accommodate planned equipment at a
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 287/324
reasonable cost;
b. The planned equipment would cause interference with other existing or planned equipment at the tower or building as documented by a qualified
and licensed professional engineer, and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost;
c. No existing or approved towers or commercial/industrial buildings within a half mile radius meet the radio frequency (RF) design criteria;
d. Existing or approved towers and commercial/industrial buildings within a one-half (1/2) mile radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at
a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed professional radio frequency (RF) engineer; and/or
e. The applicant must demonstrate that a good faith effort to collocate on existing towers and structures within a one-half (1/2) mile radius was made,
but an agreement could not be reached.
E. Tower Construction Requirements: All towers erected, constructed, or located within the city, and all wiring therefor, shall comply with the following
requirements:
1. Monopoles using stealth technology are the preferred tower design. However, the city will consider alternative tower types in cases where structure
RF design considerations, and/or the number of tenants required by the city preclude the use of a monopole.
2. Towers and their antennas shall comply with all applicable provisions of this code.
3. Any proposed commercial use antenna tower shall be designed, structurally, electrically, and all other respects to accommodate both the applicant's
antennas and comparable antennas for at least one additional user. To allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower, the tower shall be
designed to accept antennas mounted at no less than ten foot (10') intervals.
4. All towers and their antennas shall utilize building materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that effectively blend the tower facilities
within the surrounding natural setting and built environment to the greatest extent possible as determined by the city.
5. In addition to the submittal requirements required elsewhere in this code, applications for building permits for towers and their antennas shall be
accompanied by the following information:
a. Written statements from the federal aviation administration, federal communications commission, and any appropriate state review authority
stating that the proposed tower complies with regulations administered by that agency or that the tower is exempt from those regulations;
b. A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer that does the following: describes the tower height and design including a cross
section and elevation; demonstrates the tower's compliance with the aforementioned structural and electrical standards; documents the height
above grade for all potential mounting positions for collocated antennas and the minimum separation distances between antennas; describes the
tower's capacity, including the number and type of antennas that it can accommodate; and documents what steps the applicant will take to avoid
interference with established public safety communications; and
c. A letter of intent committing the tower owner and his or her successors to allow the shared use of the tower, as long as there is no negative
structural impact upon the tower, and there is no disruption to the service provided.
F. Antennas Mounted On Roofs, Walls And Existing Towers: The placement of wireless communication antennas on roofs, walls, and existing towers may
be permitted on public, institutional, commercial or industrial buildings or facilities, with a building permit approved by the appropriate city staff. In
addition to the submittal requirements required elsewhere in this code, an application for a building permit for antennas to be mounted on an existing
structure shall be accompanied by the following information:
1. A site plan showing the location of the proposed antennas on the structure and documenting that the request meets the requirements of this code.
2. A building plan showing the construction of the antennas, the proposed method of attaching them to the existing structure, and documenting that the
request meets the requirements of this code.
3. A report prepared by a qualified and licensed professional engineer indicating the existing structure or tower's ability to support the antennas.
4. An intermodulation study to ensure there will be no interference with existing tenants or public safety telecommunication providers. (Ord. B-204, 12-
15-2009)
Chapter 10
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
11-10-1: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The council shall designate a zoning administrator, who shall administer and enforce the provisions of this title and for the purpose of this title shall have
the power of a police officer. The zoning administrator shall also maintain current and permanent records of this title, including, but not limited to,
amendments, variances, appeals and conditional uses. (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
11-10-2: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provisions of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished
to the maximum extent authorized in Minnesota statutes section 412.231, as amended from time to time. Each day the violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense. (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 288/324
A. Enforcement: This title shall be enforced by the community development department designee, who is authorized to take any appropriate actions or
proceedings against a violator as provided by statute or ordinance. Such activities may include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Periodically inspect buildings, structures, or uses of land to determine compliance with the terms of this title.
2. Notify, in writing, any person responsible for violating a provision of this title, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary
to correct it.
3. Order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; order removal of illegal buildings, structures, additions or alterations; order
discontinuance of illegal work being done; or take any other action authorized by this title to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its
provisions, including cooperation with the city attorney in the prosecution of complaints.
4. Seek immediate enforcement, without prior written notice, whenever it is determined that an emergency exists in relation to the enforcement of a
provision of this title that requires immediate action to protect the health, safety, or welfare of occupants of any structure, or the public. (Ord. B-148,
1-18-2005)
11-10-3: SITE PLAN AND BUILDING DESIGN REVIEW:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish a formal site plan review procedure for commercial, industrial, institutional, and multiple-family
development projects and provide regulations pertaining to the enforcement of site design standards consistent with the requirements of this title.
B. Exemptions: Unless otherwise specifically required in this title, the following shall be exempt from the requirements for commission review. All
exemptions remain subject to the requirements of this title.
1. The erection or alteration of permitted agricultural structures, when all other provisions of this title are met.
2. Single-family and two-family dwellings, when all other provisions of this title are met.
3. Construction of or addition to an accessory structure not exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the building footprint of the principal structure, when all
other provisions of this title are met.
4. Interior alterations of all structures that do not affect the existing uses or intensity of use, when all other provisions of this title are met.
5. Minor revisions or additions to existing principal structures, provided the proposed modifications do not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the floor area
of said structure or ten thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever is less and all other provisions of this title are met.
6. The erection or alteration of commercial or industrial structures or accessory structures permitted in the BP business park district, when all other
provisions of this title are met.
C. Review Procedures: Applicants shall submit to the city a completed official city application, the associated application fee set by council resolution and
all supportive or supplementary information required by this section prior to any consideration for a site plan review. The city shall process all site plan
applications in conformance with all applicable city, county, and state standards and requirements.
D. Review Process: Prior to filing a formal site plan application, applicants may present a concept plan to the city. The community development department
designee shall have the authority to refer said plan to the planning commission and/or city council for discussion, review, and informal comment. Any
opinions or comments provided to the applicant regarding a concept site plan application are to be considered advisory only and shall not constitute a
binding decision on the request. Subsequent to any concept plan review, an applicant may present a formal site plan application to the city. The
community development department designee shall refer all formal site plan applications to the planning commission. The commission shall hold a
public hearing to review the formal site plan application and act on said application in accordance with subsection C of this section or applicable state
statute.
1. Public Hearing: Unless exempted by this section, no site plan shall be considered until a public hearing has been held by the commission. A notice
of the time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the city's official newspaper, at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Notices
shall be mailed to each property owner within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the affected property, except when located in agriculture, agriculture
preserve and rural residential districts in which case notice shall be mailed to each property owner within one-fourth (1/4) mile of the affected
property. The city shall use its best available records to determine the names and addresses of property owners to receive notice. During the public
hearing city staff shall present their findings with regard to the site plan application.
2. Appeals: The applicant, the administrator, a member of the council, or any person owning property or residing within the prescribed notification area
may appeal the commission decision to the council. An appeal, as provided for within section 11-12-3 of this title, must be filed with the community
development department within ten (10) working days after a final decision is made by the commission.
E. Review Standards: The community development department shall review each application for site plan review for compliance with the performance
standards contained in the comprehensive plan, this title and other applicable city codes and policies. These standards may include, but are not limited
to, the following:
1. Land use and zoning standards.
2. Access, parking and loading.
3. Exterior building materials.
4. Trash enclosure.
5. Landscaping and berming.
6. Signage.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 289/324
7. Lighting.
8. Engineering, grading and drainage.
9. Traffic and pedestrian circulation.
10. Parks and open space.
11. Compliance with other applicable ordinances and approved comprehensive plans. (Ord. B-149, 1-18-2005)
F. Submittal Requirements: The community development director or his/her designee shall determine the number, size, type and scale of the copies
required for submittal with an application. The scale used shall be no smaller than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') unless it is impractical to illustrate
the entire site on a single sheet in which case a smaller scale may be acceptable. The maximum size of plans shall be thirty inches by forty inches
(30" x 40"), and the minimum size shall be eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17"). All site plan applications shall be based on a certificate of
survey prepared by a licensed land surveyor and contain the information listed below, unless specifically waived by the community development
director or his/her designee:
1. Existing conditions plan.
2. Site plan including information specified in subsection G of this section.
3. Architectural elevations, color drawings or renderings, and sample building materials of all principal and accessory buildings, identifying type and
color of materials used on all exterior surfaces.
4. Typical floor plan and room plan drawn to scale with a summary of square footage for each use or activity.
5. Sign plan including, but not limited to, the type, location and size of all proposed signage.
6. Vicinity map showing the property in relation to nearby highways or major street intersections.
7. Any other information deemed necessary by the city to facilitate review. (Ord. B-199, 1-20-2009)
G. Required Information: For the given application, plans shall contain the information listed below, unless specifically waived by the city. The city may also
ask for other information deemed necessary of a particular application.
1. Concept Site Plan: All concept site plans shall be drawn to scale, indicate the location of existing and proposed structures, and may include the
following:
a. Minimum two foot (2') topography and draining conditions on adjacent properties within a minimum of two hundred feet (200').
b. Natural features.
c. Tentative access, circulation and street alignments, both public and private.
d. Amenities to be provided such as recreational areas, open space, walkways, and landscaping.
e. Location and number of parking stalls.
f. Proposed public sanitary sewer, water and storm management.
g. A statement showing the proposed density of the project with the method of calculating said density also shown.
2. Formal Site Plans And Building Permits: Formal site plan and/or building permit applications shall be based on a certificate of survey prepared by a
licensed land surveyor and contain the information listed below, unless specifically waived by the city:
a. General Information:
(1) Name of project/development.
(2) Location of project/development.
(3) Location map, including area within one-half (1/2) mile of site.
(4) Name and mailing address of developer/owner.
(5) Name and mailing address of engineer/architect.
(6) Date of plan preparation and any revisions.
(7) North point indicator.
(8) Scale.
b. Site Information:
(1) Boundary line of property with dimensions.
(2) Location, identification and dimensions of existing and proposed:
(A) Two foot (2') topographic contours.
(B) Adjacent streets and street rights of way.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 290/324
(C) On site streets and street rights of way.
(D) Utilities and utility rights of way and easements, including electric, natural gas, telephone, water (domestic and fire) and sewer (sanitary and
storm).
(E) Existing and proposed buildings and structures.
(F) Parking facilities.
(G) Water bodies, flood fringe, floodplain and floodway, if applicable, and impacts in the floodplain.
(H) Sidewalks, walkways, driveways, loading areas and docks and bikeways.
(I) Fences and retaining walls with elevation information.
(J) Exterior signs.
(K) Exterior refuse collection areas.
(L) Exterior lighting.
(M) Landscaping, including species, sizes and locations.
(N) Traffic flow on site.
(O) Traffic flow off site.
(P) Transit facilities and movements.
(Q) Recreation facilities.
(3) Cross sections of property as required by the director of community development.
(4) Number of employee and nonemployee parking spaces existing and proposed and total square footage of each.
(5) Site statistics, including site square footage, percent of site coverage, dwelling unit density and percent of park or open space.
(6) Grading, drainage and erosion control in accordance with the most recent city of Rosemount engineering guidelines for design.
(7) Wetlands and surface water:
(A) Wetland delineation(s) and classifications per the city of Rosemount comprehensive wetland management plan.
(B) Proposed wetland impacts and replacement areas when applicable.
(C) Proposed wetland buffer and conservation easements.
c. Building Information:
(1) Elevation drawings of all proposed structures and buildings, with dimensions.
(2) Preliminary floor plans for all stories of proposed structures and buildings, with room usage labeled and dimensions.
(3) Elevation and height above mean sea level of all floors and the roof, floodproofing measures, and construction materials.
(4) Gross square footage of existing and proposed structures and buildings.
(5) Exterior finish materials.
(6) Type of construction.
d. Other Items: Other items as may be deemed necessary by the city.
H. Building Permit: No person, firm or corporation shall erect, alter, construct, enlarge, repair, move, improve, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy, or
maintain any building, structure, or portion thereof, within the city of Rosemount until proper permits and/or a certificate of occupancy has been issued
by the protective inspections division of the city. All work for which a permit has been issued must be completed in accordance with title 9 of this code
and applicable federal, state and county laws, codes and regulations.
1. Except as provided for by this section, no building permit shall be issued until a site plan has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of this
title and approved by the commission. Upon approval of the site plan by the commission, the building official will be authorized to process a building
permit for the proposed project pursuant to adopted building and fire codes. The site plan approval process does not imply compliance with the
requirements of said building and fire codes.
I. Plan Conformance: Development of the site shall conform to all site and construction plans officially submitted to and approved by the city. Once
approved, no changes, modifications or alterations shall be made to any plan detail, standard, or specification without prior submission of a plan
modification request.
J. Plan Modifications: Major amendments to an approved site plan may be approved by the planning commission. The notification, public hearing, and
appeal procedure for such amendments shall be the same as those for the original site plan review. Any other amendments may be made
administratively when the director of community development determines that review and approval by the planning commission of a detailed site and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 291/324
building plan is unnecessary to meet the purpose and intent of this section. The director's decision regarding classification of an amendment is final.
When determining if an amendment is major, the director of community development may consider their determination on whether the amendment:
1. Substantially alters the location of buildings, parking areas or vehicle access.
2. Increases the total gross floor area of all buildings by more than five percent (5%) or increases the gross floor area of any individual building by more
than ten percent (10%).
3. Increases the number of stories of any building.
4. Decreases the amount of open space by more than five percent (5%) or alters it in such a way as to change its original design or intended use.
5. Changes the exterior building materials or color of the building.
6. Creates noncompliance with any special condition attached to the approval of the site plan or applicable provision of this title.
K. Term Of Approval: Unless otherwise specified, an approved site plan shall become null and void one year from the date of approval unless the property
owner or applicant has substantially commenced construction of any building, structure, addition or alteration, or use requested as part of the approved
plan or unless a petition for a time extension has been granted by the planning commission. All extension requests shall be submitted in writing to the
community development department at least thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the site plan and shall state facts showing a good faith effort to
complete work permitted under the original approval.
L. Site Improvement Performance Agreement And Financial Guarantee: Following the approval of a site plan required by this title and prior to issuance of
a building permit, the applicant, if deemed necessary by the planning commission, shall guarantee to the city the completion of all improvements as
shown on the approved site plan and as required by the site plan approval. This guarantee shall be made by means of a site performance agreement
and a financial guarantee as provided below.
1. The applicant shall execute the site performance agreement on forms provided by the city. The agreement shall define the required work and reflect
the terms of this section as to the required guarantee of the performance of the work by the applicant.
2. The required work includes, but is not limited to, private exterior amenities such as landscaping, turf establishment, private driveways, parking areas,
curb and gutter, recreational facilities, wetland buffers, erosion control, fences and screening, and other similar facilities. The required work shall also
include all aspects of the tree preservation plan, if applicable.
3. A financial guarantee shall be submitted with the executed site performance agreement as provided herein:
a. Financial guarantees acceptable to the city include cash escrow, an irrevocable letter of credit, or other financial instrument that provides
equivalent assurance to the city and that is approved by the community development director.
b. The term of the financial guarantee shall be for the life of the site improvement performance agreement, and it shall be the applicant's
responsibility to ensure that a submitted financial guarantee shall continue in full force and effect until the community development department
designee shall have approved and accepted all of the work undertaken to be done and shall thereby have released the guarantee or reduced the
amount of the guarantee as provided in this section.
c. When any instrument submitted as a financial guarantee contains provision for an automatic expiration date, after which the instrument may not be
drawn upon, notwithstanding the status of the site performance agreement or of the required work, it shall be the applicant's responsibility to notify
the city in writing, by certified mail, at least sixty (60) days in advance of the expiration date of the intent either to renew or not to renew the
instrument. If the instrument is to be renewed, a written renewal shall be provided at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date. If the
instrument is not to be renewed, and has not been released by the community development department designee, another acceptable financial
guarantee in the appropriate amount shall be submitted at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date. Upon receipt of an acceptable
substitute financial guarantee, the community development department designee may release the original guarantee.
d. The amount of the financial guarantee shall be established by the community development department designee based upon an itemized estimate
of the cost of all required work as provided by the applicant. A cash escrow or irrevocable letter of credit shall be in the amount of one hundred
twenty five percent (125%) of the approved estimated cost. The amount of any other approved financial instrument shall be determined by the
community development department designee.
e. At the option of the city the applicant may submit a separate financial guarantee for that portion of the required work consisting solely of
landscaping improvements with another financial guarantee for all other exterior amenities and improvements that comprise the work. All trees
shall be warrantied to be alive, of good quality, and disease free for twelve (12) months from the time of planting. Any subsequent replacement
shall be warrantied for twelve (12) months from the time of planting.
4. The time allowed for completion of the required improvements shall be set forth in the site performance agreement. This agreement and the financial
guarantee shall guarantee compensation for the required improvements and provide for reimbursement to the city of the cost of enforcement
measures. As the applicant completes various portions of such required work, the community development department designee may release such
portion of the financial guarantee as it is attributable to such completed work. Landscaping improvements shall not be deemed complete until the city
has verified survivability of all required plantings through one winter season, defined for the purposes of this section as the period between October
31 and April 30.
5. The applicant shall notify the community development department in writing when all or part of the required improvements have been completed in
accordance with the approved plan and may be inspected. Upon receipt of such notice, the community development department designee shall be
responsible for the inspection of the improvements to determine that the work performed meets the standards of this title and any conditions imposed
by the planning commission and the standards for the particular industry, profession or material used in the performance of the work. Any required
work failing to meet such standards shall not be deemed complete and the applicant shall be notified in writing as to required corrections. Upon
determination that required work has been completed, including the winter season survivability of landscape plantings, notice shall be given to the
applicant of the date of completion and action taken by the community development department designee to release, or to reduce the amount of, the
financial guarantee. (Ord. B-149, 1-18-2005)
11-10-4: SMALL SCALE MINERAL EXTRACTION:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 292/324
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to remove, store or excavate rock, sand, gravel, clay, silt or other like material in
the city, or to fill or raise the existing surface grades, without receiving a permit for mineral extraction. Permits for small scale mineral extraction under
this section may only be issued in a zoning district where mineral extraction is listed as an interim use. Small scale mineral extraction may be allowed
only within the small scale mineral extraction overlay district. Permits for mineral extraction within the large scale mineral extraction overlay district may
be issued only under section 11-10-4-1 of this chapter.
1. Exceptions: An extraction permit shall not be required for any of the following:
a. Excavation for a foundation, cellar or basement of a building if a building permit has been issued.
b. Excavation by state, county or city authorities in connection with construction or maintenance of roads, highways or utilities.
c. Curb cuts, utility hookups or street openings for which another permit has been issued by the city.
d. Excavation less than one hundred (100) square feet in area or one foot (1') in depth.
e. Excavation or grading for agricultural purposes.
B. Small Scale Mineral Extraction Overlay District: The small scale mineral extraction overlay district is established. The boundary of the district is a line
one-half (1/2) mile north of County State Aid Highway 42, the municipal boundary to the east, a line one-half (1/2) mile south of County State Aid
Highway 42, and US Highway 52 to the west. (Ord. B-223, 5-15-2012)
C. Application, Public Hearing, Notice And Procedure: The application, public hearing, public notice and procedure requirements for mineral extraction
permits shall be the same as those for amendments as provided in section 11-10-11 of this chapter, except that the permit shall be issued on the
affirmative vote of a majority of the entire council. Application for the extraction permit shall be made in writing in the form specified by the city. The
application shall contain the following information:
1. The correct legal description of the land upon which excavation is proposed.
2. The name and address of the applicant, the owner of the land and the person or corporation conducting the actual removal operation.
3. The names and addresses of all adjacent landowners within three hundred fifty feet (350') or, if the subject property is located in agricultural (AG),
agricultural preserve (AG-P) or rural residential (RR) district, within one-fourth (1/4) mile.
4. The purpose of the proposed excavation.
5. The estimated time required to complete the proposed excavation and rehabilitation.
6. The names of the highways, streets or other public roadways within the city upon which the material shall be transported. (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
D. Standards: The following standards shall apply to all extraction operations:
1. Boundary: Extraction operations shall be conducted within the confines of the excavation site described in the application.
2. Access: Extraction operations shall only be allowed on sites which have direct access to either a principal arterial, minor arterial, a collector street, or
to a local street if approved by the public works department, as designated in the city of Rosemount comprehensive guide plan.
3. Prohibited Areas: Extraction operations shall not be conducted within the following:
a. Five feet (5') of the right of way or easement of an existing public utility.
b. Thirty feet (30') of the boundary of an adjoining property which is not being used for extraction operations. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
c. Fifty feet (50') of the right of way of a public street or highway. (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
4. Phasing Of Operations: Extraction operations to be conducted on a site larger than fifteen (15) acres shall be subject to the following requirements:
a. A phasing plan must be prepared which limits operations to a maximum area of fifteen (15) acres per phase of operations.
b. A mineral extraction permit for the first phase of an extraction operation shall be limited to a maximum area of fifteen (15) acres. An extraction
permit for phase two (2) or subsequent phases of a mineral extraction operation shall not be issued until at least seventy percent (70%) of the
previous phase of operations has been rehabilitated according to an approved comprehensive rehabilitation plan.
c. No mineral extraction permit shall authorize extraction operations to be conducted in more than two (2) phases of an extraction operation
concurrently.
d. No mineral extraction permit shall authorize extraction to be conducted on more than nineteen and one-half (191/2) acres at one time.
5. Fencing: During excavation operations, access to any area where collections of water are one and one-half feet (11/2') in depth or more or where
excavation slopes are steeper than one foot (1') vertical to one and one-half feet (11/2') horizontal and any other areas where obvious danger to the
public exists shall be controlled by a fence erected and maintained around the entire site or portions thereof and shall be a type specified by the
council.
6. Appearance And Screening:
a. All machinery shall be kept operational.
b. Abandoned machinery and rubbish shall be promptly removed from the excavation site.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 293/324
c. Within three (3) months after the termination of excavation operations or within three (3) months after the expiration of the extraction permit
provided by this section, the applicant or owner shall dismantle buildings and structures incident to excavation operations and shall grade the
excavation site as well as complete all rehabilitation on the site as provided by the rehabilitation plan.
d. When required, the perimeter of the excavation site shall be planted or otherwise screened.
e. Existing tree and ground cover shall be preserved to the maximum extent feasible, maintained or supplemented by selective cutting, transplanting
and replanting of trees, shrubs and other ground cover along all setback areas.
7. Excavation Operating Standards:
a. Noise: Maximum noise level at the perimeter of the excavation site shall comply with the limits or standards established by the Minnesota pollution
control agency and the United States environmental protection agency.
b. Hours: All excavation operations shall be conducted between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., Monday through Saturday
only. The council may restrict excavation, processing or related operations on legal holidays if such activities cause noise or other disturbances
offensive to adjacent property owners.
c. Explosives: The use and handling of explosives at the excavation site shall be coordinated with the police department. Blasting shall occur only at
hours specified in the extraction permit.
d. Fugitive Dust: Excavation operators shall use all practical means to reduce the amount of fugitive dust generated by excavation operations. In any
event, the amount of dust or other particulate matter generated by the excavation shall not exceed air pollution standards established by the
Minnesota pollution control agency.
e. Water Pollution: Excavation operators shall comply with all applicable Minnesota pollution control agency and department of natural resources
regulations and all applicable United States environmental protection agency regulations for the protection of water quality. No waste products or
processed residue, including untreated wash water, shall be deposited in any public waters of the state of Minnesota.
f. Topsoil Preservation: All topsoil shall be retained at the excavation site until the completion of rehabilitation work in accordance with the
rehabilitation plan.
g. Slopes During Excavation Operations: During the entire period of operations, all excavations other than the working face, shall be sloped on all
sides to a maximum ratio of one foot (1') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical, unless a steeper slope is approved by the city. Where excavations are
adjacent to a public roadway or other right of way, the excavation shall have a maximum slope of four feet (4') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical.
Slopes adjacent to waterways shall not exceed six feet (6') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical.
h. Equipment: All equipment and machinery shall be operated and maintained in such a manner as to minimize dust, noise and vibration. Power
drives or power producing machines shall not be housed or operated less than one thousand feet (1,000') from a residential use. Access roads
shall be maintained in dust free condition by surfacing or other treatment as may be specified by the city engineer.
i. Processing: Crushing, washing and refining, or other similar processing may be authorized by the council as an accessory use, provided, however,
that such accessory processing shall not be in conflict with the use regulations of the district in which the operation is located.
j. Council Waiver: The council, at the time of issuance of the extraction permit, may waive or modify any of the provisions in this section or impose
additional requirements if it finds that the plan of operation or other materials submitted with the application or other factors make appropriate more
suitable measures for standards consistent with the public health, safety and welfare.
E. Special Requirements: The council, as a prerequisite to the issuance of an extraction permit, or after an extraction permit has been granted, may
require the applicant or owner of the premises to:
1. Reimburse the city for the cost of periodic inspections for the purpose of determining that the provisions of the extraction permit and this title are
being followed.
2. Submit to council a detailed map of the streets on which the material removed shall be transported (haul roads). The city shall inspect the haul roads
proposed to be used by the applicant or owner and shall recommend to the council necessary upgrading or repairing of the haul roads prior to their
use by the applicant or owner. The council shall designate the haul roads and shall incorporate the recommendations of the responsible city officials
in the extraction permit issued to the applicant. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant or owner to maintain the haul roads in accordance with
the provisions set forth in the permit. The city shall periodically inspect haul roads to ensure compliance with the permit. During the period of or upon
completion of the excavation operations, the applicant or owner shall make any necessary repairs to the haul roads as recommended by the city. All
costs of inspection provided for in this subsection shall be borne by the applicant or owner. The use of the haul roads shall be further subject to any
road and weight restrictions imposed by the city.
3. Submit annually in writing to the council the estimated quantity of minerals to be excavated. If the quantity of minerals to be excavated is for any
reason likely to exceed the original estimate herein required, the applicant or owner shall notify the council of the change in estimated quantity.
4. Comply with such other requirements as the council shall from time to time deem proper and necessary for the protection of its citizens and the
general welfare.
F. Inspections: The city may inspect all excavation sites where an extraction permit has been issued. The operator or owner of any excavation operation
found in violation of the requirements of this title or its extraction permit shall remedy such violations within the time specified by written notice from the
city.
G. Duration Of Extraction Permit: The excavation license shall run from January 1 through December 31 of the same year or for a lesser period of time as
the council may specify at the time of issuance of the extraction permit. If the extraction permit is to run for less than a full year, the fee shall be
prorated as determined by the council.
H. Extraction Permit Fee: The applicant or owner of the premises on which the excavation operation is located shall annually submit to the council written
estimates of:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 294/324
1. The total area of the mineral extraction operation (expressed in acres) to be actively mined during the forthcoming year; and
2. The total area for which an extraction permit permitting mineral extraction operations has been granted (expressed in acres) which will not be
actively mined in the forthcoming year.
3. The council shall, by resolution, establish an annual per acre permit fee.
I. Surety Bond: The council shall require the applicant or owner of the premises on which the excavation operation is located to post a surety bond with a
surety acceptable to the city, cash escrow or letter of credit ("security") in an amount determined by the council, running to the city, conditioned to pay
the city the extraordinary costs and expense of repairing any streets where such repair work is made necessary by the special burden resulting from
hauling and travel, and removing material from any pit or excavation, and conducting required rehabilitation and conditioned further to comply with all
the requirements of this title and the particular extraction permit, and to pay any expense the city may incur by reason of doing anything required to be
done by any applicant to whom a permit is issued. The security shall remain in full force and effect for a minimum period of one year after expiration of
the extraction permit to guarantee the required rehabilitation as well as the other requirements herein provided. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
J. Cement Or Concrete Production: Cement or concrete production may be allowed in the AG agricultural district as a conditional use provided the site has
an approved mineral extraction permit in compliance with this section and section 11-10-7, "Conditional Use Permits", of this chapter. In addition to
these sections, the following performance standards shall apply:
1. Council Review: The council, at the time of issuance of a CUP for cement or concrete production, may waive or modify any of the provisions of this
section or section 11-10-7 of this chapter or impose additional requirements if it finds that the plans or other factors make appropriate more suitable
measures for standards consistent with the public health, safety, and welfare.
2. Inspection: The city may inspect all sites with or requesting a CUP for cement or concrete production. The operator or owner of any cement or
concrete production site found in violation of the requirements of this section or its CUP shall remedy such violations within the time specified by
written notice from the city. Failure to remedy any violations within the specified time frame may result in revocation of the CUP.
3. Location: The plant shall be located in such a way that it is not visible from an adjacent residential use or a public right of way. This may be
accomplished through topography, berming or setback. The minimum setback from any property line shall be twice the height of the plant or
applicable setback under this code, whichever is greater.
4. Height: The maximum height of any concrete plant shall be seventy five feet (75').
5. Outdoor Storage: There shall be no outdoor storage of vehicles. All equipment and material associated with the cement or concrete plant must be
screened from view from an adjacent residential use or public right of way in conformance with section 11-2-9, "Outdoor Storage", of this title. (Ord.
B-132, 8-7-2003)
11-10-4-1: LARGE SCALE MINERAL EXTRACTION:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to remove, store or excavate rock, sand, gravel, clay, silt or other like material in
the city, or to fill or raise the existing surface grades, in the large scale mineral extraction overlay district established in this section without receiving a
permit for large scale mineral extraction. Such permits may only be issued in a zoning district where large scale mineral extraction is listed as an
interim use and in the large scale mineral extraction overlay district. Permits for mineral extraction within the small scale mineral extraction overlay
district may be issued only under section 11-10-4 of this chapter.
Initial large scale mineral extraction permit applications for a permit under this section shall be submitted with and considered simultaneously with an
application for an interim use permit under section 11-10-8 of this chapter. No permit will be required for any of the following:
1. Excavation for a foundation, cellar or basement of a building if a building permit has been issued.
2. Excavation by state, county or city authorities in connection with construction or maintenance of roads, highways or utilities.
3. Curb cuts, utility hookups or street opening for which another permit has been issued by the city.
4. Excavation less than one hundred (100) square feet in area or one foot (1') in depth.
5. Excavation or grading for agricultural purposes.
B. Large Scale Mineral Extraction Overlay District: The large scale mineral extraction overlay district is established. The boundary of the district is CSAH
42 to the north, Akron Avenue to the east, CSAH 46 to the south and Biscayne Avenue to the west.
C. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
ASPHALT PLANT: A facility used to manufacture asphalt or other forms of coated road stone, sometimes known as blacktop. This facility allows the
combination of a number of aggregates, sand, and filler, in the correct proportions, heated and finally coated with a binder. Increasingly, recycled
asphalt or aggregate products (RAP) are used as part of the mix.
BATHYMETRIC OR HYDROGRAPHIC CHARTS: Charts that show lake bottom relief or terrain as contour lines (called depth contours or isobaths) and
selected depths (soundings).
BERM: A level space, shelf, or raised barrier separating two (2) areas.
CLEAN FILL: As defined in Dakota County ordinance 110.
CONCRETE: A mixture of paste and aggregates (sand and rock). The paste, composed of cement and water, coats the surface of the fine (sand) and
coarse aggregates (rocks) and binds them together into a rocklike mass known as concrete.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 295/324
CONSTRUCTION AGGREGATES OR AGGREGATE: A broad category of coarse particulate material used in construction, including sand, gravel,
crushed stone, slag, and recycled concrete.
CONVEYING (CONVEYOR): A common piece of mechanical handling equipment that moves materials from one location to another.
CRUSHING/CRUSHING PLANT: A machine or plant designed to reduce large rocks into smaller rocks or gravel.
DRY MINING: Mining and excavation that takes place above the ground water table.
EIS: The environmental impact statement as defined by the Minnesota environmental quality board rules.
FLOATING DREDGE (DREDGING): An activity of mining that is carried out underwater with a machine equipped to excavate material from underwater
and bring it to shore where they can be processed into construction grade aggregates.
HAUL ROAD: An internal private road used to transport material.
HAUL ROUTE: An external public road used to transport material.
MINERAL EXTRACTION: Extraction of inorganic materials such as ore, gravel or sand.
MINING BUFFER/SETBACK: The distance a structure or activity must be from the edge of an EIS boundary line.
PORTABLE PROCESSING EQUIPMENT: Equipment designed on a skid or axle assembly that can move from point to point allowing for shorter travel
times and reduced emissions.
PRECAST/CAST CONCRETE PRODUCTS: Products such as bridge beams or plank, concrete pipe or culverts that are cast at a facility and later
transported to a specific construction site after a proper curing time has been achieved.
READY MIXED CONCRETE PLANT: A facility that manufactures specifically designed concrete for delivery to a customer's construction site in a
freshly mixed or plastic unhardened state.
RECLAMATION/END USE: The process of creating useful landscapes that meet a variety of goals. It includes all aspects of this work, including
material placement, stabilizing, capping, regrading, and placing cover soils, revegetation, and maintenance.
RECYCLED ASPHALT AND/OR AGGREGATE PRODUCTS (RAP): Left over or demolished concrete or asphalt products. These products are recycled
(reproduced) and reused in production of new products or road base products used on construction sites.
SCREENING/SCREENING PLANT: A machine that takes granulated material and separates it into multiple grades by particle size.
STAGING: Setting up of equipment or a truck fleet in preparation for a day's activity.
STOCKPILE: A pile or storage location for bulk materials, forming part of the bulk material handling process. Stockpiles are normally created by a
stacking conveyor.
STRIPPING: Removing topsoil (black dirt), clay, timber, brush and waste aggregate products from the top of the mining deposit to expose the quality
sand and gravel needed in the production of high quality construction aggregates.
TON OF MATERIAL: A U.S. short ton (2,000 pounds) of material.
TOPSOIL: The upper outermost layer of soil, usually in the top two (2) to eight inches (8"). It has the highest concentration of organic matter and is
where most of the earth's biological soil activity occurs.
TRUCK SCALE: A platform device that a truck will drive onto for weighing to ensure that the truck is of legal weight and/or dimension.
WASHING/WASH PLANT: A machine into which sand and gravel is conveyed, separated by size, washed, dewatered, and then sent to stockpiles for
load out.
WET MINING: Mining and excavation area that will take place below the ground water table.
D. Review Process:
1. Public Hearing: A public hearing will be conducted for consideration of permit applications. The public hearing, public notice and procedure
requirements for the permits shall be the same as those for amendments as provided in section 11-10-11 of this chapter.
2. Criteria For Permit Approval: The following factors will be evaluated when determining whether to approve a large scale mineral extraction operation.
The approval or denial of a permit shall include, but not be limited to, findings on the following factors:
a. Consistency With City Plans And Policies: The proposed large scale mineral extraction permit is consistent with the comprehensive guide plan and
the location is suitable in that the excavation, mining, processing, stockpiling or hauling of sand and gravel deposits will not tend to create a
nuisance or unreasonably adverse land use impacts or exceed local, state or federal safety and environmental standards on the adjacent
properties. The applicant for a permit, at the applicant's sole cost, shall provide information to help determine the suitability, including, but not
limited to, a completed zoning amendment application; exhibits illustrating adjacent and on site buildings and land uses; existing elevations and
percent of slope within and three hundred feet (300') beyond the perimeter of the EIS boundary; and an environmental impact statement.
b. Environmental Impacts: An environmental impact statement (as defined by Minnesota environmental quality board rules) shall be completed for
each large scale gravel mining project proposed. The proposed project shall be so designed and operated as to minimize adverse impacts
identified in the environmental impact statement. The environmental impact statement shall be considered by the city council prior to any final
action on a large scale mineral extraction permit request. The application for a large scale mineral extraction permit shall not be considered
complete until the time as final comment has been received on the adequacy of the environmental impact statement.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 296/324
c. Large Scale Mineral Extraction Overlay District: The boundaries of the proposed large scale mineral extraction operation shall be completely within
the large scale mineral extraction overlay district.
E. Application Requirements: The application for a large scale mineral extraction permit shall include the following:
1. The correct legal description of the land upon which excavation is proposed.
2. The name and address of the applicant, the owner of the land and the person or corporation conducting the actual removal operation.
3. The names and addresses of all adjacent landowners within one-fourth (1/4) mile.
4. The purpose of the proposed excavation.
5. The estimated time required to complete the proposed excavation and rehabilitation.
6. The names of the highways, streets or other public roadways within the city upon which the material shall be transported.
7. A map of the proposed pit or excavation area to a scale of one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') showing the presently excavated area, the
area proposed to be excavated during the permit period, and the minimum and maximum elevations of the area, and showing a minimum of three
hundred feet (300') of the adjacent land on all sides of the proposed excavation area.
8. A rehabilitation, reclamation, and restoration plan providing for the orderly and continuing rehabilitation of all excavated land. Such plan shall
illustrate, using appropriate photographs, maps, and surveys drawn to a scale of one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') and with a five foot (5')
contour interval satisfactory to the engineer, the following:
a. Removal Of Planned Contours: The removal of planned contours of the land when the mineral removal operations are completed.
b. Timetable: The estimated period of time that the pit will be operated and a schedule setting forth the timetable for excavation and rehabilitation of
land lying within the active, inactive and restoration areas.
c. Storage: Those areas of the site used for storage of topsoil and overburden.
d. Depth; Slope; Revegetation: The depth of all water bodies, the slopes of all slopes after rehabilitation and a description of the type and quantity of
plantings where revegetation is to be established.
e. Contour Extension: The five foot (5') contours shall extend at least two hundred feet (200') beyond the boundary of the operation or beyond the
adjoining right of way, whichever is more inclusive.
f. Ancillary And Accessory Uses: Ancillary and accessory use rehabilitation, reclamation, and restoration plan.
g. Maximum Slope: The maximum slope of the reclamation area that is developable shall be at no steeper than five feet (5') horizontal to one foot (1')
vertical. The maximum slope of the reclamation area that is undevelopable, such as the area between a water body and a right of way line shall be
no steeper than two feet (2') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical. Any slope greater than three feet (3') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical shall be
designed by a licensed engineer and approved by the city engineer.
h. Adjacent To Water Bodies: For manmade groundwater lakes, the bottom contour shall be gradually sloping from the shoreline to the deepest
portion of the water body at a maximum slope of ten feet (10') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical from at least fifty feet (50') upland from the
proposed shoreline to at least ten feet (10') from the proposed shoreline toward the center of the water body. Beyond ten feet (10') in horizontal
distance, the slope of the bottom contours may be no steeper than two to one (2:1).
9. When mining is proposed within the groundwater or within twenty (20) vertical feet of a historic groundwater measurement elevation, then a
hydrogeological study shall be submitted. The study will include tests of soils and groundwater to determine the presence of contaminants on the site
that will, or could be, released to the groundwater or the environment by mining or related activities. All contaminants of concern identified in the EIS
and any other contaminants identified by the city council will be studied unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city council that
such study is not warranted. The hydrogeological study shall include the following:
a. Description of each groundwater excavation (size, shape and location).
b. Description of the location and construction information of all wells within three hundred feet (300') of the EIS boundary.
c. Description of the proposed fill activity (grain size distribution, quantity, and placement procedures).
d. Description of the aquifer characteristics in the area of each groundwater excavation to be affected by proposed fill activity (aquifer thickness and
general geological setting).
e. Description of the impacts of the proposed fill activity on groundwater flow regimes.
f. Description of a groundwater monitoring plan including evidence, to the city council's satisfaction, that the proposed monitoring will provide timely
and effective notice of changes to the hydrology, the presence of contaminants of concern that were not previously identified, or the release,
movement, or the threatened release of contaminants.
g. Identify and describe all measures that will be taken to avoid potential impacts on the groundwater from mining or related activities including, but
not limited to, testing, monitoring, containment, and mitigation.
h. Identify the depth to Prairie Du Chien aquifer and determine the appropriate separation between the mining activity and the aquifer.
i. Such other information as the city may from time to time require.
10. Location of any and all existing wells and the size and depth thereof.
11. Surface water protection plan including a contingency response plan and employee training to facilitate immediate and remedial response should
any accident, release of contaminant, or other spill occur.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 297/324
12. Such other information as the city may from time to time require, including, but not limited to, the location or anticipated location of all stockpiles of
aggregate based construction debris material on the land for which the permit is desired.
F. Accessory Uses: Within a large scale mineral extraction operation, the following uses are customarily incidental to its operation and do not require a
separate permit or approval. These accessory uses must meet the same performance standards as the large scale mineral extraction operation.
Gravel crushing.
Gravel washing.
Minor vehicle and mining equipment maintenance.
Offices associated with the mining operation and ancillary uses.
Stockpiling.
Storage of machinery used daily in the extraction area.
Truck washing.
G. Ancillary Uses: There are a number of uses and production facilities that either use significant quantities of aggregate resources or benefit from close
proximity to large scale mineral extraction operation but also generate issues, nuisances and adverse land use impacts beyond the scope of the
operation itself. The following regulations apply to these ancillary uses to a large scale mineral extraction operation:
1. Separate Interim Use Permit Required: To address the issues, nuisances and adverse land use impacts generated by ancillary uses, a separate
interim use permit as provided in section 11-10-8 of this chapter shall be applied for and approved for each ancillary use. The listing of a use in
subsection G3 of this section does not mean that the use will be approved within the large scale mineral extraction operation or that the use will be
allowed during the entire duration of the operation. The decision whether to grant, grant with conditions, or deny an application for such an ancillary
use is within the discretion of the city council.
2. Association With Mining Activity: An ancillary use may be allowed provided that any of the following conditions are met:
a. On a site that has an approved large scale mineral extraction permit in compliance with this section.
b. In conjunction with large scale mineral extraction occurring within the approved EIS boundary, provided the adjoining municipality has approved
the large scale mineral extraction and provided the ancillary use facility was originally an interim use permit in conjunction with large scale mineral
extraction in the city of Rosemount.
3. Ancillary Uses Considered: The following is a list of ancillary uses that may be considered in association with a large scale mineral extraction
operation and the issues and performance standards that shall be addressed within the interim use permit:
Aggregate processing and recycled aggregate products production. The conveying, crushing, mixing, screening, and washing of aggregate and
recycling concrete and asphalt may be allowed on a site that has an approved large scale mineral extraction permit in compliance with this section.
In addition, the following performance standards shall apply:
a. Location: The plant shall be located in such a way as to minimize its visibility from an adjacent residential use or a public right of way. This may be
accomplished through topography, landscaping, existing vegetation, berming or setback.
b. Material Stockpiles: Stockpiles associated with these uses shall be limited to a height of sixty feet (60').
c. Hours Of Operation: The hours of operation shall be limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday
unless special permission is granted by the city council within the interim use permit. The extra hours of operation may be conditioned on more
restrictive performance standards to address the adverse impacts caused by the extra hours.
d. Ratio Of Aggregate Processing To Recycled Aggregate Products Production: To maximize the use of mined aggregate material and minimize
importing of recycled material transported from outside the associated gravel mine, a ratio of aggregate processing to recycled aggregate product
processing shall be established within the interim use permit. The ratio shall have a minimum of seventy percent (70%) aggregate processing and a
maximum of thirty percent (30%) recycled aggregate product processing. The ratio shall be based on tonnage sales and the actual tonnage sales
shall be reported to the city on an annual basis. The city council may limit the area in the aggregate process facility in which the recycled aggregate
products may be stored.
Asphalt production. A plant for the production of asphalt may be allowed on a site that has an approved large scale mineral extraction permit in
compliance with this section. In addition, the following performance standards shall apply:
a. Location: The asphalt plant and all equipment associated with it shall be located a minimum of six hundred sixty feet (660') from any
nonagricultural zoned land.
b. Setback And Buffering: The plant and all equipment and materials associated with it shall be set back a minimum of seventy five feet (75') from
any EIS boundary line and screened by natural features including berming or vegetation. Year round one hundred percent (100%) opaque screening
with earthen berms and landscaping shall be required from ground level to the first thirty percent (30%) of the overall height and fifty percent (50%)
opaque to fifty percent (50%) of the overall height of the plant as viewed from eye level from surrounding rights of way or roadways.
c. Haul Routes: Traffic generated by this use shall utilize haul routes approved by the city and other agencies as required. The plant owner shall be
responsible for road improvements and easements needed for ingress and egress subject to approval by the city. The haul routes may require
Dakota County highway department or the Minnesota department of transportation approval as well.
d. Access: Traffic generated by this use shall enter onto streets consistent with city access and design standards. The owner of these uses shall be
responsible for all costs associated with road improvements required to serve the use.
e. Material Stockpiles: Stockpiles associated with these uses shall be limited to a height of sixty feet (60').
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 298/324
f. Outdoor Storage: There shall be no outdoor storage of finished material or products. All equipment and raw material associated with the asphalt
plant must be screened from view from an adjacent residential use or public right of way in conformance with section 11-2-9, "Outdoor Storage", of
this title.
g. Air Emissions: Asphalt operations shall comply with Minnesota rules, part 7011 for testing, monitoring and operational requirements.
h. Waste Byproducts: This use shall operate so as not to discharge onto the soils within the EIS boundary, across the boundaries of the EIS
boundary line or through percolation into the subsoil within the EIS boundary or beyond the EIS boundary line where such use is located, toxic or
noxious matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare; or, cause injury or damage to
property or business.
i. Odors: This use shall operate so as to prevent the emission of odorous matter of such quality as to be detectable beyond EIS boundary line.
j. Surety Bond: This use shall comply with the applicable operating, special requirements and bonding for restoration standards for mineral extraction
specified in subsection K7 of this section.
k. Hours Of Operation: The hours of operation shall be limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday
unless special permission is granted by the city council within the interim use permit. The extra hours of operation may be conditioned on more
restrictive performance standards to address the adverse impacts caused by the extra hours.
Casting yard. A facility for the manufacturing of precast concrete products may be allowed on a site that has an approved large scale mineral
extraction permit in compliance with this section. The casting of the concrete products shall occur within a building while the curing of the products
may occur outdoors. The city council may approve the outdoor casting of oversized concrete products provided that the oversized products are to be
used in a construction project that the operator has been awarded and the outdoor oversized product casting ceases when the construction project is
finished. The construction and design of a casting yard that will exist longer than ten (10) years shall comply with site, lot, and building standards
within subsections 11-4-16F and G of this title.
Concrete production. A plant for the production of concrete may be allowed on a site that has an approved large scale mineral extraction permit in
compliance with this section. In addition, the following performance standards shall apply:
a. Location: The plant shall be located in such a way as to minimize its visibility from an adjacent residential use or a public right of way. This may be
accomplished through topography, landscaping, existing vegetation, berming or setback. The minimum setback from any EIS boundary line shall be
twice the height of the plant or applicable setback under this code, whichever is greater.
b. Multiple Ready Mix Concrete Plants: If a facility is to have multiple concrete plants, each concrete plant shall have its own separate interim use
permit. The primary ready mix concrete plant shall have the equipment, except for silos and the conveyors that transport materials into the building,
enclosed within a building. One or more secondary concrete plants may be permitted if an active interim use permit for the primary concrete plant
has been approved that includes a requirement that the primary concrete plant building be completed within eighteen (18) months of approval.
c. Plant Height: The maximum height of any concrete plant shall be one hundred five feet (105').
d. Material Stockpiles: Stockpiles associated with these uses shall be limited to a height of sixty feet (60').
e. Outdoor Storage: There shall be no outdoor storage of finished material or products. All equipment and raw material associated with the cement or
concrete plant must be screened from view from an adjacent residential use or public right of way in conformance with section 11-2-9, "Outdoor
Storage", of this title.
f. Hours Of Operation: The hours of operation shall be limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday
unless special permission is granted by the city council within the interim use permit. The extra hours of operation may be conditioned on more
restrictive performance standards to address the additional adverse impacts resulting from the extra hours.
g. Haul Routes: Traffic generated by this use shall utilize haul routes approved by the city and other agencies as required. The plant owner shall be
responsible for road improvements and easements needed for ingress and egress subject to approval by the city. The haul routes may require
Dakota County highway department or the Minnesota department of transportation approval as well.
Maintenance Facility. A facility for the repair of trucks, other vehicles and equipment used in a mineral extraction operation may be allowed on a site
that has an approved large scale mineral extraction permit in compliance with this section. The construction and design of the maintenance facility
shall comply with site, lot, and building standards within subsections 11-4-16F and G of this title.
H. Performance Standards:
1. Boundary: Extraction operations shall be conducted within the confines of the excavation site described in the permit.
2. Access: Extraction operations shall only be allowed on sites that have direct access to a principal arterial, minor arterial, or collector street as
designated in the city of Rosemount comprehensive guide plan. A local street may be used if approved by the city council.
3. Setbacks: Setback boundaries shall be as follows. Where setbacks are measured from zoning district boundaries that occur along a public street
right of way, the zoning district boundary is assumed to be the centerline of that public right of way.
a. Residential zoning district: Three hundred fifty feet (350').
b. Industrial, commercial or institutional zoning district: One hundred fifty feet (150').
c. Agricultural zoning district: Thirty feet (30').
d. Inhabited residence not in a residential zoning district: Two hundred feet (200').
e. Rights of way or streets: Seventy five feet (75').
f. Preexisting water bodies: One hundred fifty feet (150').
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 299/324
4. Height:
a. The height of all equipment, stockpiles, and all other operations, except those described in subsections H4b and H4c of this section, within the
permitted mineral extraction operation shall not exceed sixty feet (60'). This standard does not apply to the ancillary facilities covered by a
separate interim use permit.
b. The city council may approve a limited number of stationary conveyors to a height no taller than sixty five feet (65') provided that all practical
means of screening and setbacks are employed into the conveyors construction and installation.
c. The floating dredge shall not exceed seventy five feet (75') in height.
5. Appearance, Screening, And Berming: The mining shall be screened from any public right of way or urban development through a combination of
existing stands of trees, berming and installed landscaping.
a. Existing Tree Stands: The preferred method of screening the mining operation is the maintaining existing stands of trees that would provide a level
of at least ninety percent (90%) opacity. If the stand of trees does not provide ninety percent (90%) opacity, then additional landscaping or berming
shall be installed to provide ninety percent (90%) opacity. An annual opacity audit of the tree stands shall be conducted and dead vegetation shall
be removed and additional landscaping or berming shall be installed to maintain ninety percent (90%) opacity. The methodology for the opacity
measure shall be taken during full leaf growth from the shoulder of any public road or neighboring property to determine opacity in a band five feet
(5') to seven feet (7') off the ground.
b. Berms: Berms shall be constructed in areas where the existing tree stands do not exist. The berms shall be at least ten feet (10') in height
measured from the toe of the berm or from the fog line of the existing public road, whichever results in the greatest height of the berm.
6. Hours Of Operations:
a. Mining: The hours of operation shall be limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday. The community
development director may authorize Sunday operation from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on no more than five (5) Sundays
annually provided the operator notifies the community development director no less than seventy two (72) hours before a Sunday operation. The
city council may grant special permission for extra hours of operation within the annual extraction permit. The extra hours of operation may be
conditioned on more restrictive performance standards to address the additional adverse impacts caused by the extra hours of operation.
b. Crushing And Washing: The hours of operation shall be limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday.
The city council may grant special permission for extra hours of operation within the annual extraction permit. The extra hours of operation may be
conditioned on more restrictive performance standards to address the adverse impacts caused by the extra hours of operation.
c. Truck Hauling: The hours of operation shall be limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday. The
community development director may authorize Sunday operation from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on no more than five (5)
Sundays annually provided the operator notifies the community development director no less than seventy two (72) hours before a Sunday
operation. The city council may grant special permission for extra hours of operation within the annual extraction permit. The extra hours of
operation may be conditioned on more restrictive performance standards, including, but not limited to, the truck haul routes, to address the
adverse impacts caused by the extra hours of operation.
d. Staging Activities: Staging activities will be permitted one-half (1/2) hour before normal hours and one-half (1/2) hour after normal hours. Staging
activities include lining up and loading of trucks, equipment inspections, fueling, and other similar related actions. Trucks may enter the site within
one-half (1/2) hour before the normal hours; however, no gravel trucks may leave the site until normal hours of operation. After the P.M. normal
hours of operation and within one-half (1/2) hour past the P.M. normal hours of operation, site cleanup and equipment maintenance is permitted as
well.
7. Slopes:
a. Mining: During the entire period of operations, all excavations other than the working face shall be sloped on all sides no steeper than one foot (1')
horizontal to one foot (1') vertical, unless a steeper slope is approved by the city engineer.
b. Berming: The public view or right of way face of the perimeter berms shall be sloped no steeper than four feet (4') horizontal to one foot (1')
vertical. The extraction side of the perimeter berm shall be sloped no steeper than three feet (3') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical.
8. Noise: Maximum noise level at the perimeter of the EIS boundary shall comply with the limits or standards established by the Minnesota pollution
control agency and the United States environmental protection agency.
9. Paved Access Road: All access roads from a large scale mineral extraction operation to any public roadway shall be paved with asphalt or concrete
for a distance of at least one hundred fifty feet (150'), measured from the mining side of the public right of way, to minimize dust conditions. During
the annual operating permit review, the city council may require additional paving length if dust and mud tracking are identified as a problem by the
city. All unpaved roads within the mining operation shall be treated with a dust retardant on a regular basis as stipulated in the annual operating
permit.
10. Dust Control: Operators shall use all practical means to reduce the amount of fugitive dust generated by excavation operations. In any event, the
amount of dust or other particulate matter generated by the excavation shall not exceed air pollution standards established by the Minnesota
pollution control agency. On days with wind advisory, as defined by the national oceanic and atmospheric administration's national weather service,
the community development director may require during the time of wind advisory that the dry mining operation cease operations to eliminate
additional dust generation.
11. Explosives: The use of explosives in the large scale mineral extraction operation is prohibited.
12. Surface Water Pollution: The permittee shall prepare a surface water protection plan to ensure that surface water quality is not impacted by the
mining operation, accidents or spills within the EIS boundary. The mining plans shall comply with the city's surface water management plan.
Excavation operators shall comply with all applicable Minnesota pollution control agency and department of natural resources regulations and all
applicable United States environmental protection agency regulations for the protection of water quality. No waste products or processed residue,
including untreated wash water, shall be deposited in any public waters of the state of Minnesota.
13. Groundwater: The excavation operators shall prepare a groundwater monitoring plan to ensure that groundwater flow, level, or quality is not
impacted. The groundwater monitoring plan shall comply with city and Minnesota department of health regulations. The groundwater monitoring plan
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 300/324
may include the surface water monitoring of any created water body that is fed by groundwater including the monitoring of any water bodies or
channelized waterways tributary to the created water body.
14. Wastewater: On site sewage treatment systems shall conform with title 9, chapter 6 of this code, Dakota County ordinance 113, and all applicable
state and federal regulations.
15. Topsoil: All topsoil located within the EIS boundary before the mineral extraction operation begins, except the topsoil located over areas that are
planned to be reclaimed as open water, shall remain within boundaries of the operation. Additional topsoil may be retained to ensure that a minimum
of six inches (6") of topsoil is placed on all areas reclaimed and restored as dry ground.
16. Landscaping:
a. Existing tree and ground cover shall be preserved to the maximum extent feasible, maintained or supplemented by selective cutting, transplanting
and replanting of trees, shrubs and other ground cover along all setback areas.
b. The public view and right of way side of berms that are planned to exist longer than fifteen (15) years shall be landscaped with a density of one
tree per six hundred twenty five (625) square feet. A minimum of sixty six percent (66%) of the trees shall be conifers.
c. The city council may consider staggering the timing of the installation of the landscaping if more berming is constructed than is required to screen
the phase of mining permitted with the annual operating permit.
d. Berms that are planned to exist less than fifteen (15) years shall be landscaped with a standard MNDOT ROW mix.
e. All areas reclaimed shall be seeded with a city approved seed mix within fourteen (14) days of final grade being established. Additional seeding
shall be applied as needed until the vegetation has been established.
f. The city may require cover over areas that have remained undisturbed for more than twelve (12) months if it is determined that these areas
generate airborne dust particles.
17. Maintenance Of Mining Vehicles:
a. All machinery shall be kept operational.
b. Abandoned machinery and rubbish shall be promptly removed from the excavation site.
c. All machinery shall be periodically inspected, repaired, and painted as needed to prevent rusting or other deterioration of the machinery.
18. Lighting: Any lighting shall be shielded to prevent lights from being directed at traffic on a public road in such brilliance that it impairs the vision of
the driver and may not interfere with or obscure traffic signs or signals. The level of lighting shall not exceed 1.0 lumen at the EIS boundary line.
19. Compliance With Other Governmental Regulations: The large scale mineral extraction operation shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and
county laws and regulations, including Dakota County ordinances 110 and 111.
20. Compliance With The EIS: The city shall determine permit conditions and requirements that address issues and potential impacts that include, but
are not limited to, those described in the EIS. The city council may require additional studies or information on any issues that the council determines
were not adequately addressed in the EIS because the EIS does not contain sufficient detail for permitting purposes, because the proposed means
of mitigation have changed, because new mitigation techniques are available, because new information has been discovered, or for any other
reason.
21. Council Waiver: The city council, at the time of issuance of the annual extraction permit, may waive or modify any of the provisions in this section or
impose additional requirements if it finds that the plan of operation or other materials submitted with the application or other factors make appropriate
more suitable measures for standards consistent with the public health, safety and welfare.
I. Special Requirements:
1. Reimbursement Of City Costs: The permittee shall reimburse the city for the cost of periodic inspections for the purpose of determining that the
provisions of the extraction permit and this section are being followed. The city may retain consultants at the applicant's expense to evaluate the
application requirements, monitoring and testing results.
2. Haul Routes: The applicant shall submit to the city a detailed map of the streets on which the material removed shall be transported (haul routes).
The city shall inspect the haul routes proposed to be used by the applicant or owner and shall recommend to the city council necessary upgrading or
repairing of the haul routes prior to their use by the applicant or owner. The city council shall designate the haul routes and may consider the
recommendations of the responsible city officials in the extraction permit issued to the applicant. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant or
owner to maintain the haul routes in accordance with the provisions set forth in the permit. The city shall periodically inspect haul routes to ensure
compliance with the permit. During the period of, or upon completion of, the excavation operations, the applicant or owner shall make any necessary
repairs to the haul routes as recommended by the city. All costs of inspection provided for in this subsection shall be borne by the applicant or owner.
The use of the haul routes shall be subject to any road and weight restrictions imposed by the city. The operator shall be responsible for reimbursing
the city for any additional maintenance costs incurred for public roads as a result of the mining operation.
3. Gravel Production And Phasing:
a. A phasing plan shall be prepared.
b. No mineral extraction permit shall authorize extraction operations to be conducted in more than two (2) noncontiguous eighty (80) acre areas of an
extraction operation concurrently.
c. No mineral extraction permit shall authorize extraction to be conducted on more than one hundred sixty (160) acres at one time.
4. Other Requirements As Determined By The Council: The permittee shall comply with such other requirements as the city council shall from time to
time deem proper and necessary for the protection of its citizens and the general welfare.
J. Reclamation, Restoration, And Rehabilitation:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 301/324
1. Phased Operation: To ensure that the mine is reclaimed in a timely and orderly manner, the mining operation shall be divided into phases of no more
than eighty (80) acres per phase.
2. Significant Transportation Corridors: The reclamation plan shall show all future collector and arterial roadways. To provide for the roadway and utility
construction of these future roadways, a reasonable reclamation grade as determined by the city shall be established within the entire designated
right of way width for the appropriate roadway classification. Within twenty four (24) months of receipt of written notice from the city that the collector
or arterial right of way is needed for either roadway and/or utility construction, the permittee will complete mining within that right of way and reclaim
the right of way to the grades approved within the interim reclamation plan.
3. Trunk Utility Services: Within twenty four (24) months of receipt of written notice from the city that public trunk utility services are needed to be
constructed within the mining operation, the permittee shall provide an easement for the utility construction, complete the mining within the
easement, and reclaim the easement to the grades approved within the interim reclamation plan.
4. Water Bodies And Drainage Plan: The city has an adopted surface water management plan which plans for the conveyance of surface water across
the city. The mining operation shall allow for the conveyance of surface water within the approved mining areas as called for within the surface water
management plan.
5. Interim Reclamation Plan: The permittee shall provide an interim reclamation plan which provides reclamation grades for all eighty (80) acre phases
that would allow for agricultural use immediately following reclamation.
6. End Use Grading Plan: The comprehensive plan anticipates that the ultimate use for the entirety of the city is urban development. To accommodate
this ultimate use and allow for orderly development, the permittee shall provide an end use grading plan that can reasonably accommodate urban
development. For mining operations that are expected to require more than twenty (20) years to complete, the city council may approve an end use
grading plan for the area that is expected to be completed within twenty (20) years. The city council shall not approve an annual operating permit for
an area without an approved end use grading plan.
7. Removal Of Buildings, Structures, And Vehicles: Within eighteen (18) months of the reclamation of each phase, all buildings, structures and plants
incidental to that phase of operation shall be dismantled and removed by and at the expense of the sand and gravel producer last operating the
building, structure or plant, or the owner of the property, unless the structure or use is compatible with the anticipated ultimate use of the property. All
buildings, structures or plants not removed as required by this section may be removed by the city with the costs for the removal charged to the
permittee or the owner of the property.
8. Haul Back Materials And Operations: The city council may permit the depositing of clean and compactable inorganic fill that is able to support urban
development to achieve the reclamation grades. The permittee shall submit a haul back management plan that includes the types of fill that shall be
deposited, where the fill comes from, and what testing of the fill shall occur. The testing result for the material proposed to be used as fill shall be
submitted to and approved by city staff before the fill material is transferred within the EIS boundary. All fill deposited within the mining operation
must be able to support urban residential development.
9. Duration Of Mining And/Or Ancillary Uses: To provide for the orderly development of the city, the city council shall determine the duration of the
mining or ancillary use within the interim use permit.
K. Annual Operating Permit:
1. Purpose Of The Annual Operating Permit: A large scale mineral extraction operation may extend for years or decades to complete. The purpose of
the annual operating permit is to provide an opportunity for the city council to review the operation of the mine, gather public comment on the
operation, modify any permit conditions as necessary to address adverse impacts that arise from the operation, and revise the phases and/or
subphases of the mine. The large scale mineral extraction interim use permit provides a zoning basis for the mine provided the city issues an annual
operating permit.
2. Application, Public Hearing, Notice And Procedure: The application, public hearing, public notice and procedure requirements for annual operating
permit shall be the same as those for amendments as provided in section 11-10-11 of this chapter, except that the permit may be issued only on the
affirmative vote of a majority of the entire city council.
3. Area Without An End Use Grading Plan: The city council shall not issue an annual operating permit for an area without an approved end use grading
plan that accommodates urban development.
4. Duration Of Operating Permit: The large scale mineral extraction permit shall run from January 1 through December 31 of the same year or for a
lesser period of time as the city council may specify at the time of issuance of the extraction permit. If the extraction permit is to run for less than a full
year, the fee shall be prorated as determined by the city council.
5. Operating Permit Fee: The fee for large scale mineral extraction permit shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the city council.
6. Inspections: The city may inspect all mineral extraction sites where a large scale mineral extraction permit has been issued. The operator or owner
of any large scale mineral extraction operation found in violation of the requirements of this title or its extraction permit shall remedy such violations
within the time specified by written notice from the city.
7. Financial Surety: The city council shall require the applicant or owner of the premises on which the excavation operation is located to post a surety
with a surety acceptable to the city, cash escrow, performance bond or letter of credit ("security") in an amount and source determined by the city
council, in favor of the city, conditioned to pay the city the costs and expense of repairing any streets where such repair work is made necessary by
the special burden resulting from hauling and travel, and removing material from any pit or excavation, and conducting required rehabilitation and
conditioned further to comply with all the requirements of this section and the particular extraction permit, and to pay any expense the city may incur
by reason of doing anything required to be done by any applicant to whom a permit is issued. The security shall remain in full force and effect for a
minimum period of one year after expiration of the extraction permit to guarantee the required rehabilitation as well as the other requirements herein
provided. The surety bond will be based on the number of acres requested within the annual renewal extraction permit, the amount of acres that
have not been reclaimed to the end use grading plan elevations, and an amount that can be immediately withdrawn for the special burden of street
repair or to replace insufficient landscaping. Surety for unfulfilled rehabilitation measures will be determined and a security will be required as long as
the rehabilitation measures are not completed.
8. Insurance: The permittee shall maintain general liability insurance and provide the city annually a certificate of general liability insurance issued by
insurers duly licensed within the state of Minnesota. The city council shall determine the appropriate amount of liability insurance during the annual
permit renewal.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 302/324
L. Enforcement:
1. Notice Of Violation: Whenever the city finds that the permittee has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this section, the
authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the permittee. Such notice may require, without limitation:
a. The performance of monitoring, analysis, and reporting;
b. That violating practices or operations shall cease and desist;
c. The abatement or remediation of contamination or hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
d. The notice shall state that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city administrator by filing with the city clerk a written notice of
appeal within seven (7) calendar days of service of the notice of violation.
2. Appeal Of Notice Of Violation: Upon receiving a notice of violation, the permittee may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement
agency. The notice of appeal must be received by the city clerk within seven (7) calendar days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the
appeal before the city administrator or the city administrator's designee shall take place within seven (7) calendar days from the date of receipt of the
notice of appeal. The decision of the city administrator or city administrator's designee shall be final.
3. Enforcement Measures After Appeal: If the violation had not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the
event of an appeal, within fifteen (15) days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency,
then representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all
measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of
any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
4. Cost Of Abatement Of The Violation: Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of
abatement, including administrative costs. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal
authority, the enforcement agency may levy the charges as a special assessment against the property, which assessments shall constitute a lien on
the property for the amount of the assessment. The permittee violating any of the provisions of this section shall become liable to the city by reason
of such violation.
5. Legal Action: It shall be unlawful for the permittee to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section. If the
permittee has violated and continues to violate the provisions of this section, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or
permanent injunction restraining the permittee from activities which would create further violations or compelling the permittee to perform abatement
or remediation of the violation, or seek any other available remedy in law or equity.
6. Compensatory Action: In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this section, the authorized enforcement agency
and violator may agree on alternative compensatory actions.
7. Nuisance: In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the
provisions of this section is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or
restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
8. Criminal Prosecution: The permittee that has violated or continues to violate this section shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of
the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty in accordance with section 1-4-1 of this code. The authorized enforcement agency may recover all
attorney fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this section, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
9. Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit:
a. The city council may suspend or revoke a permit issued under this section upon a finding of a violation of any of the provisions of this section or
violation of any condition of the annual operating permit.
b. A revocation or suspension by the city council shall be preceded by written notice to the permittee and a public hearing. The written notice shall
give at least eight (8) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state the nature of the charges against the permittee. The notice
may be served upon the permittee personally or by United States mail addressed to the most recent address in license application. (Ord. B-223, 5-
15-2012)
11-10-5: RECYCLING OPERATIONS:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to establish or expand, in any way, a recycling operation without first receiving a
permit from the city. Such permit may only be issued in a zoning district where such use is listed as a permitted use.
B. Permit Application Requirements: Application for a permit shall be made in writing in the form specified by the city and shall contain the following
information:
1. The correct legal description of the land.
2. The name and address of the applicant and the owner of the land if different from the applicant.
3. Maps, photographs and surveys illustrating the relationship of the site to the community and surrounding properties and existing site conditions
including vegetation, surface waters and topography.
4. A description of the operation as regards the sales of parts and the use of cutting, compressing and packaging equipment.
5. A site plan, to scale, showing the location and intended use of all structures, storage areas, driveways, parking and equipment.
C. Development And Operating Standards:
1. The site shall be a minimum of five (5) acres in size.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 303/324
2. A solid wall or opaque fence at least eight feet (8') in height shall be provided around the entire perimeter of the site to screen said site from public
streets and surrounding property. Such fence shall be of sound construction and shall be properly maintained.
3. All activities shall be confined within the fenced in area. There shall be no stacking of material above the height of the fence or wall except that
equipment used on the site may exceed the wall or fence height. No equipment, material, signs or lighting shall be used or stored outside the fenced
area. There shall be no storage of materials within semitrailer units or other vehicles which would extend above the height of the fence.
4. All equipment used in industrial processes, including that used for cutting, compressing or packaging, shall be within a completely enclosed building.
5. The fenced area shall be set back at least two hundred feet (200') from any street and the area within front or street side yards shall be planted with
trees, grass and shrubs in accordance with section 11-6-3 of this title.
6. Whenever the operation abuts an R district, a transition strip of at least two hundred feet (200') in width shall be provided between the fenced area
and the R district boundary. Said transition strip shall be landscaped as prescribed in subsection C5 of this section.
7. The fenced area shall be set back at least thirty feet (30') from any nonresidential district.
D. Additional Requirements: The city may attach such additional conditions as may be required to ensure compliance with this title. (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
11-10-6: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUD):
A. Purpose: The purpose of the planned unit development (PUD) district is to provide a district that will encourage the following:
1. Flexibility in land development and redevelopment in order to utilize new techniques of building design, construction and land development.
2. Provision of life cycle housing to all income and age groups.
3. Energy conservation through the use of more efficient building designs and sitings and the clustering of buildings and land uses.
4. Preservation of desirable site characteristics and open space and protection of sensitive environmental features, including, but not limited to, steep
slopes, trees and poor soils.
5. More efficient and effective use of land, open space and public facilities through mixing of land uses and assembly and development of land into
larger parcels.
6. High quality of design and design compatible with surrounding land uses, including both existing and planned.
7. Sensitive development in transitional areas located between different land uses and along significant transportation or scenic corridors within the city.
8. Development that is consistent with the comprehensive plan.
B. Development Standards: Within the PUD district, all development shall be in compliance with the following:
1. Uses: For a given PUD, all uses shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan and the master development plan as approved.
a. Area Used For Land Uses: The city may permit up to ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of all buildings in a PUD to be used for land uses
for which the site is not designated in the comprehensive plan if the city council finds that such use is in the best interests of the city and is
consistent with the requirements of this chapter. If nondesignated uses are to be incorporated into a PUD, the city may forward a copy of the
request to the metropolitan council for review.
b. Designated For More Than One Use: Where the site of a proposed PUD is designated for more than one land use in the comprehensive plan, the
city may require that the PUD include all the proposed land uses.
c. Single Land Use Or Housing Type: Any PUD which involves a single land use type or housing type may be permitted; provided, that it is otherwise
consistent with the objectives of this title and the comprehensive plan.
2. Area: Each PUD shall have a minimum area of ten (10) acres, excluding areas within a designated wetlands, floodplain or shoreland district or right
of way, unless the applicant can demonstrate the existence of one of the following:
a. Unusual physical features of the property itself or of the surrounding neighborhood such that development as a PUD will conserve a physical or
topographic feature of importance to the neighborhood or community.
b. The property is directly adjacent to or across the right of way from property which has been developed previously as a PUD and will appear as and
will function as an extension of that previously approved development.
c. The property is located in a transitional area between different land use categories or on a collector or arterial (minor or principal) street, as defined
in the comprehensive plan.
3. Density: Each residential PUD or the residential portion of each mixed use PUD shall have a density within the range specified in the comprehensive
plan for the PUD site. The density of individual buildings or lots within a PUD may exceed these standards, provided the density for the entire PUD
does not exceed the permitted standards.
If the site is not designated in the comprehensive plan for residential use, the appropriate density shall be determined by the city based upon the city
council's finding that such density is consistent with the intent of the PUD and of the comprehensive plan.
4. Streets, Utilities, Public Facilities And Subdivisions: The city ordinances governing the specifications and standards for streets, utilities, public
facilities and subdivisions may be modified based upon the unique characteristics of the PUD. The city council may therefore approve streets,
utilities, public facilities and land subdivisions that are not in compliance with usual specifications or ordinance requirements if it finds that strict
adherence to such standards or requirements is not required to meet the intent of this chapter or to protect the health, safety or welfare of the
residents of the PUD, the surrounding area or the city as a whole.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 304/324
5. Parking: Parking provided for uses within a PUD shall be consistent with the parking requirements contained in chapter 6 of this title, unless the
developer can demonstrate to the city's satisfaction that a lesser standard should be permitted on the grounds of complementary peak parking
demands by the uses within the PUD. The city may require execution of a restrictive covenant limiting future use of the property to those uses that
will continue the complementary peak parking demands or a proof of parking agreement.
6. Setbacks, Buffers And Greenspace: Setback, buffers and greenspace within a PUD shall be consistent with applicable sections of this title and title
12 of this code unless the developer can demonstrate to the city's satisfaction that a lesser standard should be permitted with the addition of a
screening treatment or other mitigative measures.
7. Covenants: All applicants for a PUD shall establish an association to oversee the maintenance of commonly held properties and review of
architectural modifications to the approved plans.
8. Architectural And Landscape Design: The applicant shall demonstrate that the architectural and landscape design proposed for all residential PUD
or the residential portion of a mixed use PUD will provide privacy for both internal and exterior living areas. This provision shall include, but not be
limited to, landscape and fence screens, location of HVAC equipment, and location of structures relative to adjacent homes. Deviations from
approved plans must be approved by both the city council and by the established homeowners' association.
9. Buildings Per Lot: The city may permit more than one building to be placed on one platted or recorded lot in a PUD.
10. Private Recreational Uses: Each residential PUD comprised of units other than single-family detached housing or within a mixed use PUD shall
provide an area dedicated for private recreational uses for project residents. Such areas will be for active or passive recreational uses suited for the
needs of the residents of the project, including, but not limited to, swimming pools, trails, nature areas, picnic areas, tot lots and saunas.
11. Unified Ownership Or Control: All property to be included within a PUD shall be under unified ownership or control or subject to such legal
restrictions or covenants as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the approved master development plan and final site and building plan.
12. Signs: Signs shall be restricted to those permitted under chapter 8, "Signs", of this title or in a sign plan approved by the city regulated by
permanent covenants.
13. Application Of Other Provisions: The requirements contained in this title shall apply to a PUD as deemed appropriate by the city.
C. Application And Review Process: All applications for a planned unit development (PUD) shall include both a master development plan and final site and
building plan. Prior to submission of these formal applications, an applicant may submit a concept plan for review and comment by the planning
commission and city council.
Upon receipt of a complete application for concept plan, master development plan, or final site and building plan, the community development
department designee shall set a date for a public hearing as outlined in section 11-10-3 of this chapter for formal review of the PUD application. The
applicant shall make a presentation of the applicable PUD application at a public hearing before the commission. The commission shall recommend
approval, revision, reapplication or denial of the applicable plan to the council.
1. Basis For Action: The planning commission and city council shall base their recommendations and actions regarding the applicable PUD application
on consideration of the items listed below. The planning commission and city council may attach such conditions to their actions as they shall
determine necessary or convenient to better accomplish the purposes of this chapter.
a. Compatibility of the proposed plan with this chapter and the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan.
b. Effect of the proposed plan on the neighborhood in which it is to be located.
c. Internal organization and adequacy of various uses or densities, circulation and parking facilities, public facilities, recreation areas, open spaces,
screening and landscaping.
d. Consistency with the standards of section 11-10-3 of this chapter pertaining to site and building plan review.
e. Such other factors as the planning commission or city council deems relevant.
2. Classification Of PUD District: All PUD master development plan applications shall include a proposed rezoning to a specific PUD district. The
district shall be designated by the letters "PUD" followed by the alphanumeric designation of the underlying zoning district, which may be either the
prior zoning classification or a new classification. For mixed use PUDs, the city council shall, whenever reasonably practical, specify underlying
zoning classifications for the various parts of the PUD. When it is not reasonably practical to specify the underlying zoning classification, the city
council may rezone the district, or any part thereof, to "PUD-mixed".
No building or other permits shall be issued for any work on property included within a proposed or approved PUD nor shall any work occur unless
such work is in compliance with an approved PUD.
Regulations governing uses and structures in the PUD shall be the same as those governing the underlying zoning district subject to the following:
a. Regulations may be modified expressly by conditions imposed by the council at the time of rezoning to PUD.
b. In the case of districts rezoned to PUD-mixed, the council shall specify regulations applicable to uses and structures in various parts of the district.
3. PUD Concept Plan: In order to receive guidance in the design of a PUD prior to submission of a formal application, an applicant may submit a
concept plan for review and comment by the planning commission and city council. The comments of the planning commission and city council shall
address the consistency of the concept plan with this chapter. The comments of the planning commission and city council shall be for guidance only
and shall not be considered binding upon the city regarding approval of the formal PUD application when submitted. Submission of a concept plan is
optional but is highly recommended for large PUDs. In order for the review to be of most help to the applicant, the concept plan should contain such
specific information as is suggested by the city including, but not limited to, the following:
a. Approximate building and road locations.
b. Height, bulk and square footage of buildings.
c. Type and square footage of specific land uses.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 305/324
d. Number of dwelling units.
e. Generalized grading plan showing, method of storm water management and areas to be cut, filled, and preserved.
f. Staging and timing of the development.
4. PUD Master Development Plan And Rezoning: Approval of a rezoning to PUD and master development plan shall occur simultaneously and be
subject to the procedures outlined in sections 11-10-3 and 11-10-11 of this chapter. After rezoning of the property to PUD, nothing shall be
constructed on the PUD site except in conformance with the approved plans and this chapter. The master development plan shall contain the
following:
a. Building location, height, bulk and square footage.
b. Type and square footage of specific land uses.
c. Number of dwelling units.
d. Detailed parking, street and utility locations and sizes.
e. Storm water management plan and computations, including location and size of pipes and storm water ponds. Specific requirements are on file
with the engineering department.
f. Grading plan.
g. Generalized landscape plan.
h. Generalized plan for uniform signs and lighting.
i. Plan for timing and phasing of the development.
j. Covenants or other restrictions proposed for the regulation of the development.
k. Renderings or elevations of the entrance side of buildings to be constructed in the development.
5. PUD Final Site And Building Plan: Approval of a final site and building plan for the entire PUD or for specific parts of the PUD shall be subject to the
procedures outlined in section 11-10-3 of this title. Applicants may combine the final site and building plan review with the master development plan
review by submitting all information required for both stages simultaneously. Approval of a final site and building plan shall signify approval of all
plans necessary prior to application for a building permit subject to other necessary approvals by the city including, but not limited to, platting. The
final site and building plan shall contain information as required by the city, including, but not limited to, the following:
a. Detailed parking, utility, street, grading and drainage plans in accordance with city of Rosemount guidelines on file with the engineering
department.
b. Detailed building elevations and floor plans.
c. Detailed landscaping, sign and lighting plans.
6. Substantial Compliance: The final site and building plan shall be in substantial compliance with the approved master development plan. Substantial
compliance shall be determined by the director of community development based on the following standards:
a. Buildings, parking areas and roads are in substantially the same location as previously approved.
b. The number of residential living units has not increased or decreased by more than five percent (5%) from that approved in the master
development plan.
c. The floor area of nonresidential uses has not been increased by more than five percent (5%) nor has the gross floor area of any individual building
been increased by more than ten percent (10%) from that approved in the master development plan.
d. There has been no increase in the number of stories in any building.
e. Open space has not been decreased or altered to change its original design or intended use.
f. All special conditions required on the master development plan by the city have been incorporated into the final site and building plan.
7. Conditions Of Approval: The city may impose such conditions on approval of a master development plan and rezoning or PUD final site and building
plan as the council deems necessary to assure compliance with the purposes of this section, including the requirement that the developer execute
and record such covenants and restrictions on the PUD property as the city deems necessary to assure that the property is developed and used in
accordance with the approved plans.
D. Term Of Approval: If an application has not been made for a final site and building plan pursuant to the approved master development plan for all or a
part of the property within a PUD or construction on the property has not been initiated in conformance with the approved site and building plan within
one calendar year of the date on which the PUD rezoning became effective or if within that period no extension of time has been granted, the city
council may rezone the property to the zoning classification at the time of the PUD application or to a zoning classification consistent with the
comprehensive plan designation for the property. In the absence of a rezoning, the approved master development plan and approved site and building
plan, if applicable, shall remain the legal control governing development of the property included within the PUD.
E. Amendments: Major amendments to an approved master development plan may be approved by the city council after review by the planning
commission. The notification and public hearing procedure for such amendment shall be the same as for approval of the original PUD. Any other
amendment may be made administratively where the director of community development determines that review and approval by the planning
commission and city council of a detailed site and building plan is unnecessary to meet the objectives of this chapter.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 306/324
1. Amendment Classification: When determining if an amendment is major, the director of community development shall base their determination on
whether the amendment:
a. Substantially alters the location of buildings, parking areas or roads.
b. Increases or decreases the number of residential dwelling units by more than five percent (5%).
c. Increases the gross floor area of nonresidential buildings by more than five percent (5%) or increases the gross floor area of any individual building
by more than ten percent (10%).
d. Increases the number of stories of any building.
e. Decreases the amount of open space by more than five percent (5%) or alters it in such a way as to change its original design or intended use.
f. Creates noncompliance with any special condition attached to the approval of the master development plan.
F. Exemptions: This chapter shall not apply to any PUD that has received final approval by the city council prior to the effective date hereof unless such is
requested by the property owner and approved by the city council. (Ord. B-143, 10-19-2004)
11-10-7: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS (CUP):
A. Purpose: The purpose of conditional use permits is to allow for those uses which are not generally suitable within the zoning district, but which under
some circumstances may be suitable. The applicant for a CUP shall have the burden of proof that the use is suitable and that the standards set forth in
this chapter have been met.
B. Application, Public Hearing, Notice And Procedure: The application, public hearing, notice and procedure requirements for CUPs shall be the same as
those for amendments to this title, as identified in section 11-10-11 of this chapter. CUPs may be granted only by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the entire
council. Specific submissions required to complete an application for a CUP shall address all standards applicable to the proposed use. The applicant
shall provide information as required in the site plan review.
C. Standards: The commission shall recommend a CUP and the council may issue such CUP if it finds that such use at the proposed location:
1. Will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, or general welfare of the neighborhood or the city.
2. Will be harmonious with the objectives of the comprehensive plan and city code provisions.
3. Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be compatible or similar in an architectural and landscape appearance with the
existing or intended character of the general vicinity and will not change the essential character of that area, nor substantially diminish or impair
property values within the neighborhood.
4. Will be served adequately by existing (or those proposed in the project) essential public facilities and services, including streets, police and fire
protection, drainage, structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer systems and schools.
5. Will not involve uses, activities, processes, material equipment and conditions of operation that will be hazardous or detrimental to any persons,
property, or the general welfare because of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors.
6. Will have vehicular ingress and egress to the property which does not create traffic congestion or interfere with traffic on surrounding public streets.
7. Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural, scenic, or historic feature of major importance and will comply with all local, state, and
federal environmental quality standards.
8. These standards apply in addition to specific conditions as may be applied throughout this code.
D. Conditions: In reviewing applications for CUPs, the commission and the council may attach whatever reasonable conditions they deem necessary to
mitigate anticipated adverse impacts associated with these uses, to protect the value of other property within the district, and to achieve the goals and
objectives of the comprehensive plan and city code provisions. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Controlling the number, area, bulk, height, density, intensity, and location of such uses.
2. Regulating ingress and egress to the property and the proposed structures thereon with particular reference to vehicle and pedestrian safety and
convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or other catastrophe.
3. Regulating off street parking and loading areas where required.
4. Specifying utilities with reference to location availability and compatibility.
5. Requiring berming, fencing, screening, landscaping or other facilities to protect nearby property.
6. Ensuring compatibility of appearance.
In determining such conditions, special consideration shall be given to protecting immediately adjacent properties from objectionable views, noise,
traffic and other negative characteristics associated with such uses.
E. Revocation: Failure to comply with any condition set forth in a CUP, or any other violation of city code provisions, shall also constitute sufficient cause
for the termination of the CUP by the council following a public hearing.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 307/324
F. Expiration: In any case where a conditional use has not been established within one year of the date on which the CUP was granted, the permit shall be
null and void. If the conditional use is discontinued for six (6) months, the CUP shall be null and void.
G. Permittee: A CUP shall be issued for a particular use and not for a particular person. (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
11-10-8: INTERIM USE PERMITS (IUP):
A. Application, Public Hearing, Notice And Procedure: The application, public hearing, public notice and procedure requirements for interim use permits
shall be the same as those for amendments as provided in section 11-10-11 of this chapter, except that the permit shall be issued on the affirmative
vote of a majority of the entire council. Specific submissions required to complete an application for an interim use permit shall be specified for each
type of interim use allowed.
B. Termination: An IUP shall terminate on the happening of any of the following events, whichever first occurs:
1. The date stated in the permit.
2. Upon violation of the condition under which the permit was issued.
3. Upon change in the city's zoning regulation which renders the use nonconforming.
C. Standards:
1. The interim use must be allowed in the zoning district where the property is located.
2. The interim use must meet or exceed the performance standards set forth in this title and other applicable city ordinances.
3. The interim use must comply with the specific standards for the use identified in this title, and must comply with all conditions of approval which shall
be included in an IUP agreement.
D. Conditions: The city may attach conditions to approval of a permit to mitigate anticipated adverse impacts associated with the use, to ensure
compliance with the standards of approval, to protect the value of other property, and to achieve the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan.
(Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
E. Findings For Interim Use Permits:
1. The extent, location, and intensity of the use will be in substantial compliance with the comprehensive plan.
2. The use will provide adequate ingress and egress to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
3. The use will not be detrimental to the existing character of the development in the immediate neighborhood or endanger the public health, safety,
and general welfare.
4. The use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district.
5. The use shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located.
F. Modification Of Standards Or Conditions: The council, after public hearing, may modify standards or conditions required for the IUP, when strict
application of such standards or conditions would unreasonably limit or prevent otherwise lawful use of a property or an existing structure and would
result in exceptional undue hardship to the owner of such property or structure; provided, that such modification will not impair the intent and purpose of
such standards or conditions and is consistent with reasonable enjoyment of adjacent property. (Ord. B-32, 9-21-1993)
11-10-9: FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT CONDITIONAL USES:
A. Application: The commission shall hear and decide applications for conditional uses permissible under section 11-4-19, "FP Floodplain District", of this
title. Applications shall be submitted to the planning department and forwarded to the commission for consideration. The applicant shall furnish the
following information as deemed necessary by the community development department for determining the suitability of the particular site for the
proposed use:
1. Plans in triplicate drawn to scale prepared by a registered engineer showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the lot, existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, floodproofing measures, and the relationship of the above to the location of the stream channel and
meeting all other requirements of section 11-10-3, site plan contents, of this chapter.
2. Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of materials, water
supply, and sanitary facilities.
The city engineer or designee shall evaluate the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood damage to the
use, the adequacy of the plans for protection, and other technical matters. Based upon the technical evaluation, the commission shall determine the
specified flood hazard at the site and evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in relation to the flood hazard.
B. Factors And Conditions: In reviewing conditional use applications, the commission shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this
title and:
1. The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 308/324
2. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges, culverts, or other hydraulic
structures.
3. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
4. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
5. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.
6. The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
7. The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use.
8. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
9. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area.
10. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
11. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site.
12. Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this section.
C. Public Hearings: Within sixty (60) days from the date of application for conditional use permit, the community development department shall submit the
application to the commission. The commission shall set a time for public hearing and give the applicant at least ten (10) days' written notice thereof.
Notice of the hearing shall be published at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing and notice shall be mailed to each property owner within one-fourth
(1/4) mile of the affected property.
D. Decisions: The commission shall render its written decision on a conditional use permit within thirty (30) days following the public hearing. In granting a
conditional use permit the commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards which are in conformity with the purposes of this section.
The conditional use permit must be title registered with the property in the office of the county recorder.
E. Subject To Appeal: All decisions by the commission granting or denying a conditional use permit shall be final subject to appeal to the council as
outlined in section 11-10-3 of this chapter.
F. Notify Commissioner Of Natural Resources: A copy of the application for the proposed conditional uses shall be submitted to the commissioner of
natural resources sufficiently in advance so that the commissioner will receive at least ten (10) days' notice of the hearing. A copy of all decisions
granting conditional use permits shall be forwarded to the commissioner of natural resources within ten (10) days of such action.
G. Conditions Imposed: The commission may attach such conditions to the granting of conditional use permits deemed necessary to fulfill the purposes of
this section. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities.
2. Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation.
3. Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
4. Requirements for construction of channel modifications, compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures.
5. Floodproofing measures, in accordance with the state building code and this title. The applicant shall submit a plan or document certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and
associated flood factors for the particular area.
H. Violation Of Conditional Use Permit: Violations of conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the conditional use permit is
granted, shall be deemed a violation of this section punishable under section 11-10-2 of this chapter. (Ord. B-25, 2-2-1993)
11-10-10: CEMETERIES:
A. Application, Public Hearing, Notice, And Procedure: The application, public hearing, public notice, and procedure requirements for cemeteries shall be
the same as for planned unit development (PUD) as provided in section 11-10-6 of this chapter. At the time of plat approval, a security in the form of a
performance bond, letter of credit or other such form as deemed necessary to secure the landscape improvements and perpetual maintenance for the
platted portion of the cemetery will be required.
1. All cemeteries must be platted so that each gravesite will have a lot and block number.
2. Cemeteries must have a minimum acreage size of five (5) acres.
3. All gravesites must be set back a minimum of fifty feet (50') from any cemetery property boundary.
4. All gravesites must be set back a minimum of one hundred fifty feet (150') from any potable water well.
5. No gravesite shall be located in a flood hazard area within a 500-year flood event boundary.
6. Any cemetery not completely enclosed by a secured fence after closing, nor staffed by on site personnel during daylight hours shall be developed as
a memorial park with no aboveground gravesite markers.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 309/324
7. All cemeteries must have planting strips or buffer yards adjacent to residential districts or uses, public uses and public rights of way. In the absence
of a planting strip along a property line, boulevard trees are required to be planted at fifty foot (50') intervals. The interior of the cemetery must have a
minimum of one tree per five thousand (5,000) square feet to break up the large expanse of turf area. (Ord. B-43, 7-29-1994)
8. All gravesites must be within two hundred feet (200') of interior access drives, if the cemetery is to be open to public access. All interior driveways
must be paved in accordance with standards specified in chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
9. All gravesites must have minimum direct frontage to a six foot (6') wide land containing no gravesites to provide access to gravesites for equipment.
10. All burials must utilize a concrete vault to avoid risk of cave ins, buried to a minimum depth of six feet (6') so that no portion of the grave is above
the frost line during winter months.
11. Cemeteries must have direct access to a collector or arterial street. (Ord. B-43, 7-29-1994)
12. All cemetery development will require site plan review approval and will be subject to the conditions for grading permits as specified in section 11-
10-3 of this chapter. In addition, soil borings will be required to determine the depth of the water table and the soil structure appropriateness for
burials. (Ord. B-96, 12-2-1997)
13. All gravesites shall be set back a minimum of one hundred feet (100') from any wetland. (Ord. B-43, 7-29-1994)
11-10-11: AMENDMENTS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to allow for additions or revisions to the provisions of this title and changes in zoning district boundaries.
B. Procedures:
1. Initiation: An amendment to this title may be initiated by the council, commission or by petition of an affected landowner.
2. Application: Applications provided by the city shall be completed in writing prior to any consideration of an amendment of this title. Zoning
amendment fees are established by resolution of the council. Applications shall not be formally accepted until all supportive or supplementary
information has been furnished by the applicant. Applications for an amendment to the text of this title shall be submitted by an affected property
owner on forms provided by the city and shall include the proposed text for the ordinance amendment in proper ordinance form. Applications to
amend the text of this title must be received by the council, which will then forward the petition to the commission for public hearing and
recommendation.
3. Commission Recommendation: An amendment not initiated by the commission shall be referred to the commission for study and report and may not
be acted upon by the council until it has received the recommendation of the commission on the proposed amendment or until sixty (60) days have
elapsed from the date of reference of the amendment without a report by the commission.
4. Public Hearing: No amendment to this title shall be considered until a public hearing has been held by the commission. A notice of the time, place
and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the city's official newspaper, at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Amendments affecting
changes in zoning districts shall require mailed notice to each property owner within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the affected property owner.
However, zoning changes in the agriculture, agriculture preserves and rural residential districts shall require mailed notice to each property owner
within one-fourth (1/4) mile of the affected property. The city shall use its available records to determine the names and addresses of property
owners. Failure to give notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt
was made to comply with these provisions. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
5. Council Action: Amendments to this title require a majority vote of all its members. The adoption or amendment of any portion of a zoning ordinance
which changes all or part of the existing classification of a zoning district from residential to either commercial or industrial requires a two-thirds (2/3)
majority vote of all members of the council. (Ord. B-206, 6-15-2010)
6. Reapplication: No application for the same or substantially the same amendment shall be made within six (6) months of the date of denial.
7. Generally: Notice requirement and procedures set forth in this section in excess of those required by state law are directory. Failure to comply with
such procedures will not invalidate the proceedings. (Ord. B, 9-19-1989)
Chapter 11
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND USES
11-11-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is established in recognition of the existence of uses, structures, site improvements, and lots which were lawfully established but which do not
currently comply with the provisions of this title or subsequent amendment. It is further established to specify the requirements, circumstances and
conditions under which nonconforming buildings, structures, site improvements, and uses will be operated and maintained and to encourage actions that
bring nonconforming uses into conformity with this title. (Ord. B-151, 2-15-2005)
11-11-2: CONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES:
Any nonconformity, including the lawful use or occupation of land or premises existing at the time of the adoption hereof, may be continued through repair,
replacement, restoration, maintenance or improvement but not through expansion, unless:
A. The nonconformity or occupancy is discontinued for a period of more than one year; or
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 310/324
B. Any nonconforming use is destroyed by fire or other peril to the extent of greater than fifty percent (50%) of its market value and no building permit has
been applied for within one hundred eighty (180) days of when the property is damaged. In this case, the city may impose reasonable conditions upon
a building permit to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent property.
Any subsequent use or occupancy of the land or premises shall be a conforming use or occupancy. (Ord. B-151, 2-15-2005)
11-11-3: EXPANSION OF NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES:
No nonconformity may be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such additions or enlargements are made so as to bring said building or structure
into conformity with the regulations of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. B-151, 2-15-2005)
11-11-4: CONDITIONS:
The city may, by ordinance, impose upon nonconformities reasonable regulations to prevent and abate nuisances and to protect the public health, welfare,
or safety. (Ord. B-151, 2-15-2005)
11-11-5: RELATIONSHIP TO ADULT USES:
This chapter does not prohibit the city from enforcing an ordinance that applies to adults only bookstores, adults only theaters, or similar adults only
businesses, as defined by this code. (Ord. B-151, 2-15-2005)
11-11-6: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
Multiple lots or parcels of record shall be considered a single undivided parcel if such lots or parcels:
A. Are under common ownership;
B. Are contiguous; and
C. Do not meet the area or dimensional standards for the applicable zoning district.
No portion of such single parcels may be used, sold, or subdivided in a manner that lessens compliance with applicable area or dimensional standards.
(Ord. B-151, 2-25-2005)
Chapter 12
BOARD OF APPEALS AND ADJUSTMENTS
11-12-1: AUTHORIZATION, POWERS AND DUTIES:
The planning commission shall act as the board of appeals and adjustments and shall have the power to hear and decide, subject to appeal to the city
council, requests in the following cases:
A. Interpretation: Hearing appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in a decision or judgment made by an administrative officer in the interpretation
or enforcement of this title or in the interpretation of zoning district boundaries.
B. Variances: Grant variances from literal ordinance requirements in instances where strict enforcement would cause undue hardship because of
circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration. (Ord. B-216, 8-16-2011)
11-12-2: PROCEDURES:
Interpretations may be requested to be heard by the board of appeals and adjustments at any regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission.
Requests for variances are subject to the following:
A. Applications: Applications provided by the city must be completed in writing prior to any consideration of variance petitions. Fees for variances are
established by resolution of the city council.
B. Applicant To Provide Plans, Maps, Surveys, Etc.: The board of appeals and adjustments shall require the applicant to provide plans, maps, surveys,
etc., as deemed necessary, to ensure proper review and consideration of variance petitions.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 311/324
C. Public Hearing: Notice of the hearing shall be published at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing, and notice shall be mailed to each
property owner within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the property to which the variance relates. However, zoning changes in the agriculture district,
agriculture preserve and rural residential districts shall require mailed notice to each property owner within one-fourth (1/4) mile of the affected property.
The city shall use its available records to determine the names and addresses of property owners. Failure to give notice to individual property owners
or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt was made to comply with these provisions.
D. Approval Or Denial: The board of appeals and adjustments, or the city council upon appeal, shall either approve or deny variances based on Minnesota
statute 462.357, subdivision 6, as it may be amended from time to time. Conditions of approval that are directly related to and bear a rough
proportionality to the impact created by the variance may be attached to any variance granted.
E. Generally: Notice of requirement and procedures that are set forth in this section in excess of those required by state law are directory. Failure to
comply with such procedures will not invalidate the proceedings.
F. Appeal: Within ten (10) working days of the action of the board of appeals and adjustments, the applicant, the zoning administrator, a member of the city
council or any person owning property or residing within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the property affected by the decision may appeal the decision
to the city council. The appeal must be filed with the planning department.
G. Findings: The board of appeals and adjustments and the city council, upon appeal, must find as follows in the granting of a variance from this title.
Variances may be granted when the applicant for the variance establishes that there are practical difficulties in complying with the zoning ordinance.
Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical difficulties.
1. The variance request is in harmony with the purposes and intent of the ordinance.
2. The variance is consistent with the comprehensive plan.
3. Granting of the variance allows reasonable use of the property.
4. There are unique circumstances to the property which are not created by the landowner.
5. Granting of the variance does not alter the essential character of the locality.
H. Lapse And Reapplication:
1. A variance granted but not used shall become void one year after its effective date.
2. No application for the same or substantially the same variance shall be made within six (6) months of the date of denial. (Ord. B-216, 8-16-2011)
11-12-3: APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL:
A. The city council shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any fact, procedure, or
finding made by the board of appeals and adjustments or the planning commission.
B. Building permits shall not be issued after an appeal has been filed with the planning department. If permits have been issued before an appeal has
been filed, then the permits are suspended and construction shall cease until the city council has made a final determination of the appeal.
C. The city council shall conduct a hearing within thirty (30) days after the receipt by the city council of the appeal from the action of the planning
commission. As provided in section 11-12-2 of this chapter, the city council shall give due notice of the hearing. The city council shall render a decision
on the appeal without unreasonable delay.
Any person may appear and testify at the hearing either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney.
D. A fee to be established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the planning department by the appellant at the time the notice of appeal is filed.
Such resolution may provide for waiver or refund of such fee under specific circumstances. (Ord. B-216, 8-16-2011)
Chapter 13
OFFICIAL MAPS
11-13-1: PURPOSE:
Land that is needed for future street purposes and as sites for other necessary public facilities and services is frequently diverted to nonpublic uses which
could have been located on other lands without hardship or inconvenience to the owners. When this happens, public uses of land may be denied or may
be obtained only at prohibitive cost or at the expense of dislocating the owners and occupants of the land. Identification of an official map of land needed
for future public uses permits both the public and private property owners to adjust their building plans equitably and conveniently before investments are
made which will make such adjustments difficult to accomplish. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a uniform procedure for the proper use of official
maps as authorized by the Minnesota municipal planning act, Minnesota statutes chapter 462. (Ord. B-187, 3-20-2007)
11-13-2: OFFICIAL MAP DEFINED:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 312/324
"Official map" as used in this chapter means a map adopted in accordance with this chapter showing existing streets, proposed future streets, and the
area needed for widening of existing streets of the city. An official map may also show the location of existing and future land and facilities within the city.
An official map may cover the entire city or any portion of the city. (Ord. B-187, 3-20-2007)
11-13-3: INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS:
Proceedings for adoption, amendment, or repeal of an official map or any part thereof may be initiated by: a) the city's planning department; b) a
recommendation of the planning commission; or c) action by the city council. (Ord. B-187, 3-20-2007)
11-13-4: SKETCH MAPS AND REPORTS:
Every proposal or request for an official map or its amendment or repeal, however initiated, shall be accompanied by a sketch map or plat showing the
lands proposed to be included and the public purpose to be served. (Ord. B-187, 3-20-2007)
11-13-5: REFERENCE TO PLANNING COMMISSION:
Except when proceedings have been initiated by recommendation of the planning commission, every proposed official map or change in a map shall be
referred to the planning commission for advice and recommendation thereon, and such recommendation shall be submitted to the city council within forty
five (45) days after reference to the planning commission along with the report of the commission on the effect of the proposal on the comprehensive plan
of the city. If no recommendation is received by the council from the planning commission within forty five (45) days after reference of the proposal to the
commission by the council, the council may take such action as it may deem proper upon the proposal without further action by the planning commission.
(Ord. B-187, 3-20-2007)
11-13-6: NOTICE AND HEARING:
A. Notice: Upon receiving the recommendation of the planning commission or after forty five (45) days from the submission of the proposal to the planning
commission without a recommendation from the commission, the council may call a public hearing on the proposal. A notice of the time, place, and
purpose of the hearing and a description of property to be included in the mapped streets and public grounds shall be published in the official
newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, the clerk shall also mail a copy of the notice
to each owner of land situated within or abutting any street or other public ground shown on the official map. For purposes of this notice, the owners
shall be determined by the records of the county auditor and the notice shall be addressed to the last known address as shown by the auditor's
records. Failure to serve any such notice shall not invalidate the proceedings.
B. Hearing: At the time and place specified in the notice, the council shall hear evidence and arguments concerning the proposal. The hearing may be
continued from time to time without further notice. The council may direct the planning commission to conduct a hearing and following the hearing to
report its recommendation to the council. (Ord. B-187, 3-20-2007)
11-13-7: PREPARATION AND FILING OF MAPS:
The official map or maps shall be prepared in sufficient detail to permit the establishment of future acquisition lines on theground. In unplatted areas, a
minimum of a centerline survey shall be made prior to the preparation of the final draft of the official map. The accuracy of the future acquisition lines
shown on the official map shall be attested to by a licensed land surveyor. After enactment of any ordinance adopting an official map or amending or
repealing a previous official map ordinance, a certified copy of the official map or section to which the ordinance relates, together with an attached copy of
the ordinance, shall be filed with the county recorder. (Ord. B-187, 3-20-2007)
11-13-8: EFFECT:
After an official map has been adopted and filed, the issuance of building permits by the city shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. The city shall
deny every application for a permit to construct a new building or structure or expand an existing building or structure within any area designated on the
official map for street or public purposes, or outside of any building line that may have been established upon the existing street. Whenever any street or
highway is widened or improved or any new street is opened, or any interest in lands for other public purposes is acquired by the city, the city is not
required in such proceedings to pay for any building or structure placed without a permit or in violation of conditions of a permit within the limits of the
mapped street or outside of any building line that may have been established upon the existing street or within any area thus identified for public purposes.
The adoption of an official map does not give the city any right, title, or interest in areas identified for public purposes thereon, but the adoption of the map
does authorize the city to acquire such interest without paying compensation for buildings or structures erected in such areas without a permit or in
violation of the conditions of a permit. (Ord. B-187, 3-20-2007)
11-13-9: APPEALS:
Whenever a building permit is denied pursuant to this chapter, the board of appeals and adjustments shall, upon appeal filed with it by the owner of the
land, grant a permit for building in an area designated on the official map for a street or other public purpose in any case in which the board finds, upon the
evidence and the arguments presented to it: a) that the entire property of the appellant of which the area designated for public purposes forms a part
cannot yield a reasonable return to the owner unless such a permit is granted, or b) that balancing the interest of the city in preserving the integrity of the
official map and of the comprehensive city plan and the interest of the property owner in the use of his property and in the benefits of ownership, the grant
of such permit is required by considerations of justice and equity. The board of appeals and adjustments shall hold a public hearing upon the appeal after
notice of the hearing has been published in the official newspaper once at least ten (10) days before the hearing. If the board authorizes theissuance of a
permit, it shall specify the exact location, ground area, height, and other details as to the extent and character of the building for which the permit is
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 313/324
granted. If the board authorizes issuance of a permit, the council or other authority, board or commission having jurisdiction shall have six (6) months from
the date of the decision of the board to institute proceedings to acquire such land or interest therein, and if no such proceedings are started within that
time, the city shall issue the permit if the application otherwise conforms to local ordinances. (Ord. B-187, 3-20-2007)
11-13-10: ADOPTION OF MAPS:
Language for adoption of official maps shall be as follows:
ADOPTION OF MAP [fill in description]: The map entitled "Official Map of ", a copy of which is attached to Ordinance No. and incorporated herein by
reference, is hereby adopted and designated as the Official Map of .
(Ord. B-187, 3-20-2007)
Title 12
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
12-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE of the city of Rosemount. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
12-1-2: AUTHORITY:
The council shall be the platting authority. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
12-1-3: PURPOSE:
All subdivisions of land hereafter submitted for approval shall comply in all respects with the regulations set forth herein. It is the purpose of these
regulations to:
A. Encourage well planned, efficient, and attractive developments by establishing adequate standards for design and construction.
B. Provide for the health, safety, and welfare of people by requiring properly designed and coordinated streets and adequate sewage, water, and drainage
facilities.
C. Secure the rights of the public with respect to public land and waters.
D. Serve as a tool to carry out the objectives and policies of the comprehensive guide plan.
E. Provide for a means to provide adequate recreational areas, school sites, and other public facilities. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
12-1-4: SCOPE:
This title shall apply to the subdivision of land in the city. All subdivisions in which any of the resulting parcels is lessthan five (5) acres in area or three
hundred feet (300') in width shall be platted. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
12-1-5: LOTS OF RECORD, RECORDING AND CONVEYING OF LAND:
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any binding contract is made for the sale of any part thereof, before the subdivision is recorded with
the county and before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the subdividing owner, or its authorized
agent, shall apply for and secure approval of such subdivision in accordance with the procedures herein.
No conveyance involving the division of land to which these regulations are applicable shall be filed or recorded with the Dakota County recorder's office if
the land is described in the conveyance by reference to an unapproved registered land survey made after or to an unapproved plat made after such
regulations became effective. No building permit shall be issued and no public utilities provided to a lot, piece or parcel of land created by a division of land
made in violation of the subdivision regulations of the city. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
12-1-6: CONFLICT WITH PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROVISIONS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 314/324
A. Private Provisions: These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that
where the provision of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant or other private
agreement or restriction, the requirement of these regulations shall govern.
B. Public Provisions: These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, or other
provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of these regulations
or any other ordinance, rule, or regulation, or other provision of the law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall
control. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
12-1-7: DEFINITIONS:
ADMINISTRATOR: The Rosemount city administrator or the administrator's designee.
ALLEY: A right of way that provides a secondary means of vehicular access to the side or rear of two (2) or more properties abutting on a street.
APPLICANT: The person or persons requesting approval of a subdivision by the council. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the property
proposed for subdivision in the event that the applicant does not own the affected property.
ATTORNEY: The Rosemount city attorney.
BLOCK: An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, or by streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision,
or a combination of the above with a river, lake, wetland or railroad right of way.
BOARD: The Rosemount board of appeals and adjustments.
BOULEVARD: That portion of a street right of way between the curb or curb line and the property line.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel, and when said structure is divided by party
walls without openings, each portion of such building so separated shall be deemed a separate building.
BUILDING SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance from a lot boundary to the nearest part of the foundation wall of a building as defined in title 11 of
this code.
CITY: The city of Rosemount, Dakota County, state of Minnesota.
CLERK: The Rosemount city clerk.
COMMISSION: The planning commission of the city.
COMPREHENSIVE GUIDE PLAN OR COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: As defined in the city's zoning ordinance.
COUNCIL: The Rosemount city council.
COUNTY RECORDER: The county recorder of Dakota County, Minnesota.
DEVELOPER: The applicant or owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his/her representative who has petitioned the city for the installation of public
improvements including streets and/or utilities. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the proposed subdivision if the developer does not own
the affected property.
EASEMENT: Authorization by a property owner for another to use the owner's property for a specified use.
ENGINEER: The Rosemount city engineer.
ESCROW: A deposit of funds held by the city for the purpose of securing public infrastructure or subdivision improvements or other costs or obligations of
the developer as required or specified by resolution by the city council, ordinance,subdivision agreement or agreed to by the developer.
FINAL PLAT: A drawing, in final form, showing a proposed subdivision containing all information and detail required by state statutes and by this title to be
presented to the city council for approval, and which, if approved, may be duly filed with the county recorder.
FINANCE DIRECTOR: The Rosemount finance director or treasurer.
FRONTAGE: That side of a lot abutting on a public street right of way.
GRADE: The ratio of horizontal or vertical dimensions of slope of the road, street, or other public way specified as a percentage of slope.
HIGHWAY, LIMITED ACCESS: A freeway or expressway, providing a trafficway for through traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting
property of lands and other persons have no legal right to accesses to or from the same, except at such points and in such manner as may be determined
by the public authority having jurisdiction over such trafficway.
IMPROVEMENTS: See definition of Public Improvement.
LETTER OF CREDIT: A letter provided to the city authorizing person(s) to pay money or extend credit to another on the credit of the writer to secure the
promise to perform some act.
LOT: As defined in the city's zoning ordinance.
METES AND BOUNDS: A method of property description whereby properties are described by means of their direction and distance from an easily
identified location.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 315/324
MONUMENT: An iron stake or pin placed in the ground indicating the location of intersecting property boundary lines.
NONACCESS EASEMENT: An easement restricting vehicular access from a public or private property.
OUTLOT: A parcel of land designated on a plat intended for future development purposes that is restricted from private development or use, and will be
replatted in accordance with an adopted preliminary plat, or a platted parcel intended for public or quasi-public use including parks or ponding.
OWNER: Any individual, firm, corporation, association, syndicate, partnership, or trust with an interest in the land sought to be subdivided under these
regulations.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A public pedestrian walkway provided between lots where required by the city to allow for pedestrian accessibility to streets or public
areas. This may also be referred to as a "trailway".
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: As defined in the city of Rosemount's zoning ordinance.
PLAT: The drawing or map of a subdivision prepared for filing or recording pursuant to Minnesota statutes, chapter 505 and containing all elements and
requirements set forth in applicable local regulations adopted pursuant to Minnesota statutes, section 462.358 and chapter 505.
PROTECTIVE COVENANT: A contract between parties which constitutes a restriction on the use of the property. Such restrictions are not enforced by the
city.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: An infrastructure facility such as sanitary sewer, water main, storm sewer, street, or other facilities intended for the public
welfare for which the city may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation.
PUBLIC LAND: Land owned and/or operated by a governmental unit dedicated for public use.
PUBLICATION: As defined in the city's zoning ordinance.
REPLATTING: The platting of an area that was previously final platted and recorded with Dakota County.
RIGHT OF WAY: As defined in the city's zoning ordinance.
RURAL SUBDIVISION: A low density subdivision in the agriculture or rural area beyond the metropolitan urban service area (MUSA) with on site individual
sewage treatment facilities.
SHALL: Mandatory.
SIDEWALK: A paved pedestrian walkway separate from the street surface.
STREET: As defined in the city's zoning ordinance.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street intended to move traffic from local streets to arterial streets across the city.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC: A street with only one vehicular outlet.
STREET FRONTAGE: That part of a lot which abuts a public right of way.
STREET, LOCAL: A street to serve primarily as an access to abutting properties.
STREET, MINOR ARTERIAL: A street intended to collect and distribute traffic from minor traffic generating areas such as community commercial areas,
primary and secondary educational facilities, hospitals, major recreational areas, churches, and offices. They are designed to carry traffic from collector
streets across the county to regional system of principalarterial highways.
STREET, PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL: A road intended to move through traffic to and from major traffic generators such as central business districts, regional
shopping centers, colleges, and/or universities, military installations, major industrial areas, and similar traffic generators within the governmental unit;
and/or as a route for traffic between communities or large areas and/or which carries interstate and/or high volumes of traffic.
STREET, PRIVATE: A street which is not dedicated to the city for public use.
STREET WIDTH: On a street with curbs, a measurement from the face of curb, or the measurement of the paved or improved surface of a street
perpendicular to the centerline.
STRUCTURE: As defined in the city's zoning ordinance.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association, who shall lay out any subdivision or part thereof as defined therein, either by
themselves or with others.
SUBDIVISION: The separation of an area, parcel or tract of land under single ownership into two (2) or more parcels, tracts, lots or long term leasehold
interests where the creation of the leasehold necessitates the creation of streets, roads, or alleys for residential, commercial industrial, or any other use, or
any combination thereof, except those separations:
A. Where all the resulting parcels, tracts, lots, or interests will be twenty (20) acres or larger in size and five hundred feet (500') in width for residential
uses and five (5) acres or larger in size for commercial and industrial uses;
B. Creating cemetery lots;
C. Resulting from court orders or the adjustment of a lot line by the relocation of a common boundary.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 316/324
SUBDIVISION AGREEMENT: A contractual agreement providing for public infrastructure improvements and land development entered into between the
city and subdivider to be completed prior to final plat approval.
SURVEY MONUMENT: See definition of Monument.
SURVEYOR: A person duly registered as a land surveyor by the state of Minnesota.
URBAN RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION: A subdivision serviced or to be serviced with municipal sanitary sewer, storm sewer and municipal water
developed within the metropolitan urban service area (MUSA).
VARIANCE: As defined in the city's zoning ordinance, title 11, chapter 12 of this code.
ZONING DISTRICT: As defined in the city's zoning ordinance.
ZONING ORDINANCE: Title 11 of this code. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
Chapter 2
PLAT PROCEDURES
12-2-1: PREAPPLICATION:
The subdividers or owners should meet with city officials (engineer and planner) in order to be made fully aware of all applicable ordinances, policies,
regulations, and plans pertinent to the proposed subdivision. Staff will then inform the subdividers of the specific requirements for subdivision approval.
(Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
12-2-2: SUBDIVISION PLATTING REQUIREMENTS:
All subdivisions are subject to platting requirements unless otherwise provided for herein. Platting requires two (2) sequential review and approvals by
council. A preliminary plat is required for overall public infrastructure phasing and capital improvement planning, and a final plat is required for recording
each phase or addition. Prior to granting final plat approval, the council may permit or require the plat to be divided into two (2) or more additions or may
impose such conditions upon filing of the additions as it may deem necessary to ensure the orderly development of the plat.
Preliminary and final plats may be combined as a simple plat under circumstances elsewhere described herein.
A. Application And Fees: All applications for subdivisions shall be filed with the city and shall include all of the information required on the application form
provided by the city and all of the information required by this title. Failure by the applicant to provide all of the required information may result in
immediate rejection of the application by staff. Application and processing fees shall be established by fee resolution adopted from time to time by the
council.
B. Staff Review Of Application: Within ten (10) days of the receipt of the application, staff shall complete the initial review to determine if all required
information has been filed. The applicant will be notified of incomplete or unacceptable application upon completion of initial review. Failure by the city
to inform the applicant does not obligate the city in anymanner.
C. Public Hearing: When the application is complete, the city shall conduct a public hearing before the commission according to the procedures specified
in section 11-12-2 of this code.
D. Council Approval: The council shall act following the receipt of a complete application as required accompanied by recommendations forwarded by the
parks and recreation committee, planning, and utilities commissions regarding the subdivision in accordance with Minnesota statutes 462.358. (Ord. B-
91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
12-2-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
A. Application Information: The preliminary plat, at a minimum, shall include the following information:
1. Twenty (20) copies of the preliminary plat including all information required in this title or as established by city policy;
2. Completed and signed application with corresponding fee(s) as established by resolution of the council;
3. Exact legal description of the property; and
4. Abstractor's certificate of property owners within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the preliminary plat boundaries.
B. Staff Review, Public Hearing, And Approval: The city shall complete the review, public hearing and approval process according to the requirements of
section 12-2-2 of this chapter.
C. Final Requirements: Prior to a final plat submission, the following information shall have been reviewed and approved by the council:
1. A preliminary plat in accordance with the provisions of this title;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 317/324
2. An environmental assessment worksheet (EAW) when required and subject to the provisions of Minnesota state statutes;
3. Approval of other governmental jurisdictions that have approval authority of preliminary plats;
4. An engineering feasibility report unless this requirement has been waived by the council; and
5. A tree preservation plan in accordance with subsection 11-6-3E of this code. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
D. Lapse And Extension Provision: Approval shall be effective for a period of five (5) years after action by the council unless otherwise specified by the
council. Upon expiration of the time limit, all approvals for preliminary plat or portions thereof for which a final plat has not been recorded with the
county, shall be null and void and a new petition and processing shall be necessary to revalidate the preliminary plat unless the council shall grant an
extension of time prior to the expiration date. This subsection will pertain to all preliminary plats approved after January 1, 2015. (Ord. B-253, 8-16-
2016)
12-2-4: FINAL PLAT:
A. Application Information: The final plat, at a minimum, shall include the following information:
1. Twenty (20) copies of the final plat including all plat information required in this title or as established by city policy;
2. Completed and signed application with corresponding fee(s) as established by resolution of the council;
3. Easements or deeds as may be required by the city for trailways, ponding, parks, utilities or similar public purposes in a form prescribed by the
attorney; and
4. Bond, escrow, letter of credit or similar guarantees to the city related to performance and/or for installation of public improvements and/or developer
to install improvements.
B. Staff Review And Approval: The staff shall review the final plat and forward a recommendation to the commission. The commission shall review the final
plat and forward a recommendation to the council.
C. Final Requirements: Prior to the city executing the final plat, the following information shall have been received and approved by the council:
1. A subdivision agreement, drafted by the city that identifies all requirements of the developer and the city;
2. The approved phasing of the subdivision, which may include the use of additions and/or outlots with dedication of public rights of way and/or public
easements;
3. Approval of other governmental jurisdictions that have approval authority of preliminary plats;
4. An engineering feasibility report;
5. Review and approval by the city's public utilities commission and park and recreation committee; and
6. A copy of the abstract when required by the city for a title search. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
12-2-5: PLATTING ALTERNATIVES:
Alternatives to the standard preliminary and final plat procedures and requirements may be permitted under certain conditions as defined below in
administrative plats and simple plats.
A. Administrative Plat Procedures: Administrative plats shall conform to all requirements of standard subdivision except that some of the information
requirements such as the engineering feasibility report may be waived by the city staff. Property may be subdivided through an administrative platting
procedure which combines the preliminary and final plat procedures in conformance with the following conditions:
1. The resulting subdivision shall contain no more than three (3) parcels.
2. The proposed subdivision shall be in areas where municipal streets and utilities are already in place and capable of serving the plat.
3. Future streets shall not be constructed and the proposed subdivision shall not interfere with proper development of neighboring adjacent properties.
4. Resulting parcels shall conform with all zoning ordinance requirements.
B. Simple Plat Procedures: A simple plat shall combine the procedures required for preliminary and final plats to include one review and approval
sequence before the commission and council. Property may be subdivided through a simple platting procedure in conformance with the following
conditions:
1. The resulting subdivision shall contain no more than five (5) acres or three (3) lots for commercial plats, and no more than ten (10) acres or twenty
(20) lots for residential plats.
2. Resulting parcels shall conform with all zoning ordinance requirements.
3. The proposed subdivision shall contain no more than one phase for final platting. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
12-2-6: RECORDING REQUIREMENTS FOR FINAL PLATS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 318/324
A. Vested Rights: No vested rights, in terms of conveying lots, shall accrue to any plat by reason of preliminary or final approval until the actual signing of
the plat by the city after all requirements are met and recorded with the county. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
B. Signing Of Plat: Signatures shall be recorded upon the final plat as required by the county.
1. The signature of the commission chair or their designee, attesting to the date upon which the commission made a recommendation on the
preliminary plat after a public hearing.
2. The signature of the mayor or vice mayor attesting to the date upon which the council approved the final plat.
3. The signature from the clerk's office and seal of the city attesting to the above referenced actions by the city and valid signatures. (Ord. B-237, 7-15-
2014)
C. Release Of Plat: The final plat shall not be released by the clerk for recording with the county until the following have been completed:
1. The recording of signatures upon the final plat as listed in subsections A and B of this section.
2. The recording of signatures upon the appropriate subdivision agreement(s).
3. The submittal of all required fees and appropriate financial guarantees to the city, if any, ensuring the applicant's performance of the terms of these
regulations.
D. Recording Of Plat:
1. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to file with the county recorder within two (2) years after the plat has been released for recording by the
city unless a time extension has been granted by the council.
2. Failure to record the plat within two (2) years of council approval shall render all approvals by the city null and void until a new application has been
processed and approved by the city or until the city has granted an extension in time in which the final plat shall be recorded.
E. Proof Of Recording: The city shall not take any action related to the plat such as issuing building permits or awarding public utility or street contracts on
the platted property until such time as the clerk has been satisfied that the plat has been recorded with the county recorder. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff.
8-11-1997)
12-2-7: QUALIFICATIONS GOVERNING APPROVAL OF PLATS:
All subdivisions shall conform to the following criteria:
A. That the proposed subdivision complies with applicable ordinances and the comprehensive guide plan.
B. That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision complies with applicable plans of Dakota County, state of Minnesota or the metropolitan
council.
C. That the physical characteristics of the site, including, but not limited to, topography, vegetation, susceptibility to erosion, and filtration, susceptibility to
flooding, water storage and retention, are such that the site is suitable for the type of development or use contemplated.
D. That the site physically is suitable for the proposed density of development.
E. That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are not likely to cause environmental damage.
F. That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements are not likely to cause health problems.
G. That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not conflict with the easements of record or with easements established by judgment
of court.
H. That completion of the proposed development of the subdivision can be completed in a timely manner so as not to cause an economic burden upon the
city for maintenance, repayment of bonds, or similar burden.
I. That the design of the subdivision is compatible and consistent with the platting or approved preliminary plat on adjacent lands.
J. That all proposed urban residential subdivisions are in the metropolitan urban service area (MUSA). (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
Chapter 3
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS AND IMPROVEMENTS
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 319/324
12-3-1: STREET DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. A subdivision shall provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets in surrounding areas; or a subdivision shall conform to a plan
for the neighborhood approved, or adopted by the council to meet a particular situation where topography or other conditions make continuance or
conformance to existing streets impractical.
B. Local streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged and so that they will not function as collector streets.
C. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed collector or arterial street, the city may require such treatment as may be necessary for
adequate protection of residential property and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
D. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right of way, or limited access highway right of way, the city may require a frontage street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such right of way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land. Such distances
shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
E. Street intersections with centerline offsets of less than two hundred fifty feet (250') for local street to local street and six hundred sixty feet (660') for
local to collector intersections shall not be allowed.
F. When connecting street lines of the same street from each other at any point by more than ten degrees (10), they shall be connected by a curve with a
radius adequate to meet Minnesota department of transportation (Mn-DOT) adopted sight distance guidelines, and of such greater radii as the engineer
shall determine for special cases.
G. Streets shall be laid out as so to intersect, as nearly as possible, at right angles and no street shall intersect any other street at less than seventy five
degrees (75).
H. Sight easements with tangent distances of twenty five feet (25') shall be provided at street intersections or the city may permit property lines at street
intersections to be rounded with a radius deemed necessary.
I. Street right of way and widths shall meet the following minimum criteria:
STREET DESIGN
Classifications Right Of Way (ROW) (Feet) Street Widths1 (Feet)
Principal or minor arterial As required by state or county As required by state or county
Collector 80_100 36_52
Local 60 32
Note:
1.Measured face of curb to face of curb.
ROW dedications, excluding turnaround area may be reduced from sixty (60) to fifty feet (50'), and pavement widths reduced from thirty two (32) to no less
than twenty eight feet (28') in areas as determined by the city to be environmentally sensitive due to topography, forestation and/or wetlands.
J. The construction of half streets shall be prohibited, but half of the required right of way shall be platted within such tract where streets are appropriate as
determined by the city.
K. Cul-de-sac dead end streets, designated to be so permanently, shall not serve more than fifteen (15) single-family dwelling units or twenty five (25)
multiple dwelling units and shall not be longer than seven hundred feet (700') and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having
roadway diameter of at least ninety feet (90') (measured face of curb to face of curb) and street property line diameter of at least one hundred twenty
feet (120').
L. Cul-de-sacs shall only be developed where justified by irregular topography or where adjacent to limited access streets.
M. Street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed the following, with vertical curves design each meeting Mn-DOT approved standards:
Street Type Percent Grade
Arterial 5
Collector 7
Local 8
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 320/324
N. No street grade in new subdivisions shall be less than one percent (1.0%). At intersections, the street grade shall not exceed two and zero-tenths
percent (2.0%) for the first one hundred feet (100') approaching said intersection. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
12-3-2: STREET SECTIONS:
The street section shall comply with design standards as set forth in the city standard specification. All street designs are subject to review and approval of
the engineer. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
12-3-3: SIDEWALKS, TRAILS, OR PATHWAYS:
Sidewalks, trails or pathways shall be provided in each plat in accordance with provisions of the city policy. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
12-3-4: EASEMENT DETAILS:
A. Utility and drainage easements abutting public street right of way and centered on rear or side lot lines shall be at least ten feet (10') wide or wider as
may be required by the city.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed by a ponding area, watercourse, ponding or utility easements, drainage, channel, or stream there shall be provided a
drainage conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the
purpose as determined by the city. Said drainage or ponding easements shall be laid out and located in such a manner as to provide reasonable
access for maintenance and dredging purposes without undue infringement upon the property over which access is taken.
C. Trails or pedestrianways shall be shown as trailways on the plat as separate easements or recorded at the county as the city may direct.
D. When double frontage or reverse frontage lots are incorporated in a plat, a planting screen easement of at least ten feet (10') in width may be required
along the line of lots abutting a collector street, minor or principal arterial highways. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
12-3-5: LANDLOCKED PARCELS:
As a general rule, the city shall not permit landlocked parcels or parcels that are only served by private easements. However, the city may permit the
following:
A. Landlocked parcels in multiple dwelling or commercial complex provided said parcel(s) have access to public street by an easement over another parcel
within the same multiple dwelling or commercial complex.
B. Landlocked parcels which are reserved for public use or platted as an outlot for such use as ponding areas may be permitted. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff.
8-11-1997)
12-3-6: PARK DEDICATION:
A. Comprehensive Plans: Where a proposed park, trailway, ponding, or open space area, shown on the city's comprehensive guide plan, park
development guide, comprehensive storm sewer plan or official map, is located in the whole or in part in a subdivision, such area or areas shall be
shown on the preliminary plat. Such area or areas shall also be dedicated to the City by the subdivider if the Council requests such dedication under
the provisions of the subsections below. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
B. Dedication: In all subdivisions, the City shall require that a reasonable portion of such land be set aside and dedicated to the public for parks,
playgrounds or other public use exclusive of property dedicated for streets and other public ways.
1. In all residential subdivisions it shall be presumed that a reasonable amount of land has been dedicated for parks and playgrounds if the subdivider
dedicates at least one twenty-fifth (1/25) of an acre for each Low Density Residential dwelling unit of the proposed subdivision (acres to be dedicated
= 0.04 x number of dwelling units), 0.03 of an acre for Medium Density Residential (acres to be dedicated = 0.03 x number of dwelling units) or 0.02
of an acre for High Density Residential (acres to be dedicated = 0.02 x number of dwelling units). The land use density determination will be based
upon the approved Comprehensive Land Use Plan. The City shall determine whether a cash payment in lieu of land dedication is appropriate. The
amount of cash dedication shall be determined by multiplying the number of dwelling units of the proposed subdivision times the designed fee per
dwelling which may be set from time to time by resolution of the Council. (Ord. B-263, 6-20-2017)
2. In all commercial, industrial and other subdivisions, it shall be presumed that a reasonable amount of land has been dedicated to serve the needs of
the resident and working population for parks and playgrounds if the subdivider dedicates at least ten percent (10%) of the land in the subdivision for
parks, recreation and usable open space. The City shall determine whether a cash payment in lieu of land dedication is appropriate. The amount of
the cash dedication shall be determined by multiplying the number of acres (determined by application of the formula stated above) times the
designated fee per acre which may be set from time to time by resolution of the Council.
3. The dedication of a portion of land for parks or playgrounds, or the payment of cash in lieu thereof, provided for above shall be presumed to be
reasonable. However, upon the request of the applicant, the recommendation of the Park and Recreation Commission, or at the discretion of the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 321/324
Council, the City may either increase or decrease such dedication or payment upon a determination by the Council that such dedication or payment
is unreasonable or insufficient given the specific characteristics of the proposed subdivision and its intended use. (Ord. XVII.107, 7-1-2003)
4. Ponding areas, needed as part of the overall City storm drainage plan, shall be dedicated as land or easement at the option of the City and as
accepted by the City. However, no credit shall be given for park dedication unless said area meets the criteria for public parks as stated in the City's
park dedication resolution and is approved by the Council. Said dedication of land or easement shall be in a form approved by the Council.
5. In the case of subdivisions of land which have previously been subdivided and for which land has been dedicated for parks or playgrounds, or cash
payments in lieu of such dedication have been made, the Council shall make reasonable adjustments to recognize such previous dedication or
payment.
C. Timing Of Park Dedication: If a new subdivision is designed to be platted into more than one (1) addition, all park and other public use lands
contemplated under this section in the total subdivision area, shall be dedicated with the final plat of the first phase or addition of the subdivision unless
otherwise approved by the Council.
D. Condition Of Land To Be Dedicated: Land to be dedicated for public park, trail, or ponding shall be brought to a suitable condition by the subdivider in
accordance with City policy. All disturbed areas shall have topsoil restored, be regraded with turf established according to specifications provided by
the City.
E. Abstract: Such lands shall be free and clear of all liens and encumbrances including special assessments as evidenced by a recent abstract of title or
registered property abstract to be submitted at developer's cost to the City for its examination.
F. Dedicated Property: City must have received warranty deed or equivalent for dedicated park property by the City before final plat is approved. (Ord. B-
91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
12-3-7: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
The following required improvements shall be installed in accordance with the engineering policy, standards, and specifications which have been or may in
the future be adopted by the Council. Where standards and specifications have not been adopted, the improvements shall be made in accordance with
good engineering practices.
A. Survey Monuments: Shall be placed at all block and lot corners, angle points, points of curves in streets and at intermediate points as shall be required
by the City. The monuments shall be of such material, size, and length as may be approved by the City. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to see
that the survey monuments are maintained in good order during construction and development.
B. Sanitary Sewer Systems:
1. Where available, Municipal sewer facilities shall be provided in the development of the subdivision.
2. Prior to providing plans for utilities, analysis of the soil to the depth of the utility proposed should be made and provided with the utility report when
required by the City.
3. Where Municipal sewer facilities are not available, individual sewage systems shall be provided in accordance with this Code.
C. Water Systems:
1. Where available, Municipal water facilities shall be provided in the development of the subdivision.
2. Where Municipal water facilities are not available, individual water systems shall be provided in accordance with the Minnesota Department of Health
and Dakota County adopted standards.
D. Drainage Facilities: Storm sewer, open drainage, or other facilities and easements shall be installed and provided, which will adequately provide for the
drainage of surface waters.
1. Said drainage facilities shall be provided as approved by the City Engineer.
2. Storm sewer and/or other drainage facilities shall be installed as determined to be necessary by the City Engineer for proper drainage of the surface
waters.
E. Streetlights: Streetlights shall be installed as provided by the City's adopted policy.
F. Driveway Approaches: Concrete or bituminous driveway surfaces over boulevard for lots adjacent to streets improved to City standards shall be
provided for the development.
G. Turf: Topsoil shall be spread to a minimum depth of four (4) to six inches (6"), and lawn grass shall be established on each lot upon the completion of
the paving of adjacent street(s). In addition, prior to the issuance of occupancy permits for a dwelling so provided, seeding shall be established and
maintainable as a lawn, sod shall be installed upon the unpaved street right-of-way fronting the lot and in any drainage swales adjacent to the lot. (Ord.
B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
12-3-8: GRADING OF SITE PRIOR TO FINAL PLAT:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 322/324
Approval of a subdivision grading permit does not obligate the City in any manner to approve a final plat. For further example, please refer to title 9 of this
Code. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
Chapter 4
VARIANCES, EXCEPTIONS, AND PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
12-4-1: VARIANCES:
The board of appeals and adjustments shall have the authority to grant variances from the requirements of this title subject to the same procedures,
conditions, and findings required by the city's zoning ordinance. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
12-4-2: EXCEPTIONS:
The following subdivisions may be exempted from normal platting requirements:
A. Simple Lot Division: A simple, easily described division of a platted lot of record (for example, east 1/2 of lot 31, north 150 feet of lot 31) may be
exempted from the platting requirements of this title provided the resultant parcels meet all zoning requirements. Such division requires the approval of
the council.
B. Agricultural Lot Divisions: Lot divisions for single-family dwellings in the agricultural district may be exempted from platting requirements in accordance
with the requirements of section 11-4-1 of this code.
C. Lot Recombination: To divide on recorded lot or parcel in order to permit the adding of a parcel of land to an abutting lot and create two (2) buildable
lots. The proposed lots shall not cause the remaining portion of the existing lots or parcels to be in violation of this regulation or the zoning ordinance.
D. Consolidation: The owner of two (2) or more contiguous parcels or lots of record may, subject to council approval, consolidate said parcels or lots into
one lot of record by recording the consolidation with the county and filing a copy of a certificate of survey showing same, with the clerk within thirty (30)
days of recording. No hearing or commission review is necessary unless the proposal is referred to the commission by the planner for clarification. The
proposed lots shall not cause any portion of the existing lots, parcels, or existing buildings to be in violation of this regulation or the zoning ordinance.
E. Corrections: When a survey or description of a parcel or lot has been found to be inadequate to describe the actual boundaries, approval of a corrective
plat may be requested. This type of subdivision creates no new lots or streets. The proposedcorrective subdivision, in sketch plan form, along with a
letter signed by both property owners agreeing to the new subdivision, shall be submitted to the council for approval. No hearing or commission review
is necessary unless the proposal is referred to the commission by the planner for clarification. The proposed lots shall not cause any portion of the
existing lots, parcel, or existing buildings to be in violation of this regulation or the zoning code. A certificate of survey may be required on any proposed
lot with existing buildings in order to determine the placement of the building on the proposed lot.
F. Registered Land Survey (RLS): Registered land surveys shall not be used to avoid the requirements of this title. A registered land survey for parcels of
less than five (5) acres in size or three hundred feet (300') in width shall be reviewed by the commission and approved by the council in the same
manner as a subdivision plat. Such approval shall be attached to the survey. All registered land surveys shall be prepared in conformance with
Minnesota statutes, section 508.47, subdivision 4. Prior to approval of a registered land survey, the council may require the dedication of street or utility
easements or public park land to the city. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
12-4-3: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
The city may combine public hearing requirements for subdivisions with those required of the planned unit developments. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-
1997)
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
12-5-1: AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE THIS TITLE:
The administrator, or the administrator's designee, shall administer and enforce the provisions of this title and shall have said authority to:
A. Enter upon the land or within a building during reasonable working hours as found necessary to fulfill his/her duties as administrator of this title.
B. Conduct inspections of buildings and use of land to determine compliance with the terms of this title.
C. Maintain permanent and current records of this title, including, but not limited to, maps, amendments, bonds, variances, waivers, plats, development
agreements, and applications thereto.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 323/324
D. Institute in the name of Rosemount appropriate citations or proceedings against a violator as provided by law. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
12-5-2: PREMATURE SUBDIVISIONS:
Any preliminary plat/final plat and/or development deemed premature pursuant to the criteria listed below shall be denied by the council.
A. Lack Of Adequate Drainage: A condition of inadequate drainage shall be deemed to exist if:
1. Surface or subsurface water retention and runoff is such that it constitutes a danger to the structural security of the proposed structures.
2. The proposed subdivision will cause pollution of water sources or damage from erosion and situation on downhill or downstream land.
3. The proposed site grading and development will cause harmful and irreparable damage from erosion and situation on downhill or downstream land.
4. Factors to be considered in making these determinations may include: average rainfall for the area; the relation of the land to floodplains; the nature
of soils and subsoils and their ability to adequately support surface water runoff and waste disposal systems; the slope of the land and its effect on
effluents; and the presence of streams as related to effluent disposal.
B. Lack Of Adequate Water Supply: A proposed subdivision shall be deemed to lack an adequate water supply if the proposed subdivision does not have
adequate sources of water to serve the proposed subdivision if developed to its maximum permissible density without causing an unreasonable
depreciation of existing water supplies for surrounding areas.
C. Lack Of Adequate Roads Or Highways To Serve The Subdivision: A proposed subdivision shall be deemed to lack adequate roads or highways to
serve the subdivision when:
1. Roads which serve the proposed subdivision are of such a width, grade, stability, vertical and horizontal alignment, site distance and surface
condition that an increase in traffic volume generated by the proposed subdivision would create a hazard to public safety and general welfare, or
seriously aggravate an already hazardous condition, and when, with due regard to the advice of the county and/or the Mn-DOT, said roads are
inadequate for the intended use.
2. The traffic volume generated by the proposed subdivision would create unreasonable highway congestion or unsafe conditions on highways existing
at the time of the application or proposed for completion within the next two (2) years.
D. Lack Of Adequate Waste Disposal Systems: A proposed subdivision shall be deemed to lack adequate waste disposal systems if in subdivisions for
which sewer lines are proposed, there is inadequate sewer capacity in the present system to support the subdivision if developed to its maximum
permissible density after reasonable sewer capacity is reserved for schools, planned public facilities, and commercial and industrial development
projected for the next five (5) years; or if in subdivisions where sewer lines are neither available nor proposed, there is inadequate on site sewer
capacity potential to support the subdivision if developed to the maximum permissible density indicated in the Rosemount comprehensive plan, as may
be amended.
E. Inconsistency With Comprehensive Plan: A proposed subdivision shall be deemed inconsistent with the city's comprehensive plan when the subdivision
is inconsistent with the purposes, objectives and recommendations of the adopted comprehensive plan of Rosemount, as may be amended.
Subdivisions which do not follow planned public improvements shall be deemed inconsistent with the city's growth strategies as outlined in the
comprehensive plan.
F. Public Service Capacity: A proposed subdivision shall bedetermined to lack necessary public service capacity when services such as recreational
facilities, schools, police and fire protection and other public facilities, which must be provided at public expense, cannot reasonably be provided for
within the next two (2) years.
G. Minnesota Environmental Quality Commission (EQB) Policies: The proposed subdivision is inconsistent with the policies of the environmental quality
board, as may be amended, and could adversely impact critical environmental areas or potentially disrupt or destroy historic areas, which are
designated or officially recognized by the council, in violation of federal and state historical preservation laws.
H. Inconsistency With Capital Improvement Plan: A proposed subdivision shall be deemed inconsistent with capital improvement plans when
improvements and/or services necessary to accommodate the proposed subdivision have not been programmed in the Rosemount, county or other
regional capital improvement plans. The council may waive this criteria when it can be demonstrated that a revision to capital improvement programs
can be accommodated. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
12-5-3: BUILDING PERMITS:
No building permit shall be issued until public improvements have been accepted by the city. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
12-5-4: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provisions of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished
according to Minnesota statutes, section 609.02, subdivision 3. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)
12-5-5: REPEALS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=452 324/324
The board of appeals and adjustments and its functions are provided by title 11, chapter 12 of this code. (Ord. B-91, 8-5-1997, eff. 8-11-1997)