CITY OF SAVAGE, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE L• GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 10. ........................... General Provisions
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 30. ........................... Mayor and City Council
Chapter 31. ........................... City Department and Offices
Chapter 32. ........................... Municipal Elections
Chapter 33. ........................... Municipal Employees
Chapter 34. ........................... Boards and Commissions
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter 50. ........................... Garbage and Refuse
Chapter 51. ........................... Municipal Water and Sewer; General Provisions
Chapter 52. ........................... Water Use and Service
Chapter 53. ........................... Sewer Use and Service
Chapter 54. ........................... Stormwater Drainage Utility
Chapter 55. ........................... Street Lighting Utility
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter 70. ........................... Traffic Code
Chapter 71. ........................... Stopping, Standing or Parking
Chapter 72. ........................... Recreational Vehicles
Chapter 73. ........................... Snowmobiles
Chapter 74. ........................... Traffic Schedules
Chapter 75. ........................... Parking Schedules
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter 90. ........................... Air Pollution
Chapter 91. ........................... Animal Control
Chapter 92. ........................... Parade, Race & Public Assembly
Chapter 93. ........................... Disposal of Unclaimed Property
Chapter 94. ........................... Local Improvement Policy
Chapter 95. ........................... Public Nuisances
Chapter 96. ........................... Parks
Chapter 97. ........................... Public Health and Safety
Chapter 98. ........................... Pyrotechnics
Chapter 99. ........................... Regulation of Alarm Systems
Chapter 100........................... Right- of-way Management
Chapter 101........................... Streets and Public Ways
Chapter 102........................... Urban Forest and Shade Tree Management
Chapter 103. ......................... Short Term Rentals
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter 110........................... General License and Permit Provisions
Chapter 111........................... Liquor Control
Chapter 112........................... Solicitation
Chapter 113........................... Taxicabs
Chapter 114........................... Therapeutic Massage Enterprises and Therapists
Chapter 115........................... Body Art
Chapter 116........................... Pawnshops
Chapter 117........................... Precious Metals and Secondhand Dealers
Chapter 118........................... Licensing of Sexually- Oriented Businesses
Chapter 119 .......................... Tobacco
Chapter 120........................... Sidewalk Cafes
Chapter 121........................... Residential Rental Property
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter 130........................... Minors
Chapter 131........................... Display of Sexually- Oriented Materials
Chapter 132........................... Firearms
Chapter 133. ......................... Social Host
Chapter 134. ......................... Smoking Prohibited
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter 150........................... Building Codes
Chapter 151........................... Subdivisions
Chapter 152........................... Zoning Code
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
I. ........................................F..r.anchises
IL..........................................Street Name Changes
III...................................Z..o..n.i.n.g Map Amendments
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to Minnesota Rules
References to Minnesota Regulations
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
INDEX
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
10. 01 Title of code
10. 02 Rules of interpretation
10. 03 Application to future ordinances
10. 04 Captions
10. 05 Definitions
10. 06 Severability
10. 07 Reference to other sections
10. 08 Reference to offices
10. 09 Errors and omissions
10. 10 Official time
10. 11 Reasonable time
10. 12 Ordinances repealed
10. 13 Ordinances unaffected
10. 14 Effective date of ordinances
10. 15 Repeal or modification of ordinance
10. 16 Ordinances which amend or supplement code
10. 17 Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
10. 18 Copies of code
10. 19 Adoption of statutes and rules by reference
10. 20 Enforcement
10. 21 Acceptance
10. 22 Code alterations
10. 23 Public utility ordinances
10. 24 Court proceedings
10. 25 Liability of officers
10. 26 Issuance of citations
10. 98 Supplemental administrative penalties
10. 99 General penalty
10. 01 TITLE OF CODE.
A) All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as revised, codified, rearranged,
renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and
designated as the " city code," for which designation " code of ordinances," " codified ordinances" or
code" may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of the law
as contained in the code.
B) All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to the components of the code unless
otherwise specified. Any component code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the " Traffic
Code." Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation "§" followed by the number, such as
10. 01." Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and section numbers are
employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
10. 02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
A) Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules
of construction, definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing
the interpretation of state law.
B) Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the
following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the
context of the same ordinance:
1) AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written " and/ or," whenever
the context requires.
2) Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance requires an act to be done
which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the
performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.
3) Gender; singular andplural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be
deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural and
words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the
future, if applicable.
4) General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited
to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
10. 03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to ordinances hereafter
adopted which amend or supplement this code unless otherwise specifically provided.
10. 04 CAPTIONS.
Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and section numbers are
employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
10. 05 DEFINITIONS.
A) General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or ordinary and usual sense.
However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be
understood according to their technical import.
B) Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
AGENT. A person acting on behalf of another.
Page 2of12
CITY. The City of Savage, County of Scott, State of Minnesota.
CLERK. The City Clerk.
CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as modified by
amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
COUNCIL. The City Council.
COUNTY. The County of Scott.
EMPLOYEES. Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title only, this
shall be constructed as though followed by the words " of the City of Savage."
FEE. A sum of money charged by the city for services or activities regulated by the city.
LICENSE. The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession, occupation or
service.
MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
MISDEMEANOR. A crime for which a sentence of not more than 90 days or a fine of not
more than $ 1, 000, or both, may be imposed.
MONTH. A calendar month.
NUISANCE. Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of
the city; or any act or thing repugnant to or creating a hazard to or having a detrimental effect on the
property of another person or to the community.
OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an
oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and
AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge taken by the person and administered by an individual
authorized by state law.
OCCUPANT. As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the
whole or any part of the building or land, whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE. Any act forbidden by a provision of this code or the omission of any act required
by the provisions of this code
OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
OWNER. As applied to a building, land or vehicle, shall include any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of the building, land or vehicle.
Page 3 of 12
PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof
PERSONAL PROPERTY. Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects,
evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to
property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or demised and every
right or interest therein.
PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
RETAILER. Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of
goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities direct to the consumer.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.
SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
STATE. The State of Minnesota.
STREET. Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public
places and sidewalks.
SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in the chapter
analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by
the subject matter of the heading. Not all chapters have subchapters.
TENANT. As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or
any part of the buildings or land, whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER. The terms " wholesaler" and " wholesale dealer" as used in this code, unless
otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or
things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING. May include printing and any other mode of representing words
and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public
writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of the person, or in case the person
is unable to write, by the person' s proper mark.
YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
Prior Code, § 1- 3- 3)
10. 06 SEVERABILITY.
Page 4of12
If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect
without the invalid provision or application.
10. 07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that reference shall extend and
apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the
subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
10. 08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
Reference to a public officer shall refer to the officer or his/ her designee. Reference to a public
office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the
powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or
change in the official title of the functionary.
Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015)
10. 09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any
word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words
to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied,
omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the
same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.
10. 10 OFFICIAL TIME.
The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws, shall be the official time within
this city for the transaction of all city business.
10. 11 REASONABLE TIME.
A) In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires
reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is
necessary for a prompt performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
B) The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding
the first day and including the last. If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
Page 5of12
10. 12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature
pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the
subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
10. 13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not
embraced in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication.
10. 14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall take effect from and after
the due publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided.
10. 15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
A) Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent
ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until
the publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect to it,
unless otherwise expressly provided.
B) No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted, created, given, secured, or
accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged,
but may be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless it
is otherwise expressly provided.
C) When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision shall be itself repealed,
the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is
expressly provided.
10. 16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
A) If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or section of this code, the chapter
or section shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.
B) Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new chapter or section shall
indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In
addition to this indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be
Page 6of12
shown in concise form above the ordinance.
10. 17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of this code shall be
prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws. This code does not affect any rights or
liabilities accrued, penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or forfeitures shall be enforced
and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In particular, any agreement granting permission to
utilize highway right- of-ways, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment
or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if
this code had not been enacted.
10. 18 COPIES OF CODE.
A) The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection.
B) The City Clerk shall provide a copy for sale for a reasonable charge.
10. 19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES BY REFERENCE.
It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code, all future amendments to any
state or federal rules and statutes adopted by reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby
adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this code was adopted,
unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the contrary.
10. 20 ENFORCEMENT.
A) Any licensed peace officer of the city' s Police Department, or the County Sheriff, or any
Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to enforce any provision of this code.
B) As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from time to time, the City Clerk shall
have the authority to administer and enforce this code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain
individuals designated within the code or by the City Clerk or City Council shall have the authority to
administer and enforce the provisions specified. All and any person or persons designated may issue a
citation in lieu of arrest or continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.
C) The City Clerk and any city official or employee designated by this code who has the
responsibility to perform a duty under this code may with the permission of a licensee of a business or
owner of any property or resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect or
otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.
D) Except as otherwise provided in Chapters 111 and 115, if the licensee, owner, resident, or other
Page 7of12
person in control of a premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the City Clerk,
peace officer, or any employee or official charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this code
may, upon a showing that probable cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of
competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before conducting the inspection or
otherwise entering the property. This warrant shall be only to determine whether the provisions of this
code enacted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to
enforce these provisions. No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable cause to issue the warrant.
Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable cause does not depend on specific knowledge
of the condition of a particular property.
E) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the city to enter private
property in urgent emergency situations where there is an imminent danger in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.
10. 21 ACCEPTANCE.
The city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof
in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this state as the ordinances of the city of general and
permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in § 10. 12 of this code.
Prior Code, § 1- 1- 2)
10. 22 CODE ALTERATIONS.
Any ordinance amending the city code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the
section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory
requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this city code. All the
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately prepared for insertion in its proper place in
each copy of this city code. Each replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in
each individual copy of the city code.
Prior Code, § 1- 1- 3)
10. 23 PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES.
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the
conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this city
code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as the city code may contain provisions for matters,
in which case, this city code shall be considered as amending the ordinance or ordinances in respect to
the provisions only.
Prior Code, § 1- 2- 2)
10. 24 COURT PROCEEDINGS.
A) No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance whether the former
ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against the former ordinance or as to
Page 8of12
any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any offense or act so committed or so
done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before
the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance
in force at the time of the proceeding so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be
mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, the provision may, by consent of the party affected, be
applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
B) This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the
repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
C) Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or
by virtue of any general ordinance of the city herein repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances
contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty
accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any
right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this city
code.
Prior Code, § 1- 2- 3)
10. 25 LIABILITY OF OFFICERS.
No provisions of this city code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so
construed as to make the officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to
perform the duty, unless the intention of the City Council to impose the fine or penalty on the officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty.
Prior Code, § 1- 4- 3)
10. 26 ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS.
A) Except as otherwise provided by statute, only a peace officer may:
1) Ask a person receiving a citation to give written promise to appear in court; or
2) Take a person into custody as permitted by M.S. § 629.34, as it may be amended from time
to time.
B) The following city individuals may issue citations in lieu of arrest or continued detention for
violation of the Savage City Code, the Savage Zoning Code and/or the Savage subdivision regulations.
Areas ofjurisdiction will be contained in city policy as set forth in resolution of the City Council.
1) Peace officers;
2) City Administrator;
Page 9of12
3) Assistant City Administrator;
4) Planning Manager;
5) Senior planner;
6) Building Official;
7) Utility Services Superintendent;
8) Public Works Superintendents;
9) City Engineer;
10) Fire Chief or Fire Marshal;
11) Code Enforcement Officer;
12) Parks and Natural Resources Superintendent; and
13) Community service officer.
Prior Code, § 1- 4- 4) ( Ord. 263, passed 2- 11- 1988; Ord. 425, passed 3- 18- 1996; Ord. 534, passed
8- 21- 2001; Ord. 552, passed 12- 2-2002; Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015)
10. 98 SUPPLEMENTAL ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
A) In addition to those administrative penalties established in this code and the enforcement
powers granted in § 10. 20, the City Council is authorized to create by resolution, adopted by a majority
of the members of the Council, supplemental administrative penalties.
B) These administrative penalty procedures in this section are intended to provide the public and
the city with an informal, cost effective and expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for
violations of certain provisions of this code. The procedures are intended to be voluntary on the part of
those who have been charged with those offenses.
C) Administrative penalties for violations of various provisions of the code, other than those
penalties established in the code or in statutes that are adopted by reference, may be established from
time to time by resolution of a majority of the members of the City Council. In order to be effective, an
administrative penalty for a particular violation must be established before the violation occurred.
Page 10 of 12
D) In the discretion of the peace officer, City Clerk, or other person giving notice of an alleged
violation of a provision of this code, in a written notice of an alleged violation, sent by first class mail to
the person who is alleged to have violated the code, the person giving notice may request the payment of
a voluntary administrative penalty for the violation directly to the City Finance Director within 14 days of
the notice of the violation. In the sole discretion of the person giving the notice of the alleged violation,
the time for payment may be extended an additional 14 days, whether or not requested by the person to
whom the notice has been given. In addition to the administrative penalty, the person giving notice may
request in the notice to the alleged violator to adopt a compliance plan to correct the situation resulting
in the alleged violation and may provide that if the alleged violator corrects the situation resulting in the
alleged violation within the time specified in the notice, that the payment of the administrative penalty
will be waived.
E) At any time before the payment of the administrative penalty is due, the person who has been
given notice of an alleged violation may request to appear before the City Council to contest the request
for payment of the penalty. After a hearing before the Council, the Council may determine to withdraw
the request for payment or to renew the request for payment. Because the payment of the administrative
penalty is voluntary, there shall be no appeal from the decision of the Council.
F) At any time after the date the payment of the administrative penalty is due, if the administrative
penalty remains unpaid or the situation creating the alleged violation remains uncorrected, the city,
through its Attorney, may bring criminal charges in accordance with state law and this code. Likewise,
the city, in its discretion, may bring criminal charges in the first instance, rather than requesting the
payment of an administrative penalty, even if a penalty for the particular violation has been established by
Council resolution. If the administrative penalty is paid, or if any requested correction of the situation
resulting in the violation is completed, no criminal charges shall be initiated by the city for the alleged
violation.
10. 99 GENERAL PENALTY.
A) Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this code for which another
penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty
which may be imposed for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days or a fine of not
more than $ 1, 000, or both.
B) Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon
conviction be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense
which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $ 300.
C) In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of prosecution may be
added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or
continues.
D) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any official duty imposed by this
code shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.
Page 11 of 12
E) In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or in § 10. 98, if any person, firm or
corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code, the Council or any city official designated by
it, may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the violation.
Page 12 of 12
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
Section
30. 01 Salaries
30. 02 Meetings of the Council
30. 03 Presiding officer
30. 04 Quorum and voting
30. 05 Minutes
30. 06 Ordinances, resolutions and communications
30. 07 Hearings
30. 08 Agenda and order of business
30. 09 Suspension of rules
30. 10 Term of Mayor
30.01 SALARIES.
A) Monthly compensation. The salary of the Mayor shall be $ 10, 000 annually, payable
monthly, and the salary for each Councilmember shall be $7, 500 annually, payable monthly.
The salaries shall become effective on January 1, 2016.
B) Compensation for unusual circumstance. When the Mayor or member( s) of the City
Council is required to represent the city for a purpose not typical of normal duties,
reimbursement may be requested in an amount not to exceed $ 100 per day or $300 per calendar
year. The payment shall be made only when time spent is mandatory, such as to testify in court
or to otherwise represent the city in a legal matter.
Prior Code, § 1- 5- 1) ( Ord. 334, passed 10- 10- 1991; Ord. 462, passed 10- 20- 1997; Ord. 539,
passed 12- 17- 2001; Ord. 748, passed 05- 04- 2015)
30. 02 MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL.
A) Initial meeting. At the first regular meeting of the Council in January of each year, the
Council shall:
1) Designate the depositories of city funds;
2) Choose one of the Council members as Acting Mayor who shall perform the duties
of the Mayor during the disability or absence of the Mayor from the city or, in case of a vacancy
in the office of Mayor, until a successor has been appointed and qualifies;
3) Designate the official newspaper; and
4) Appoint officers and make Council committee appointments as may be necessary;
and
Page 1 of 6
5) Choose one employee as Acting City Administrator who shall perform the duties of
the City Administrator during the disability or absence of the City Administrator from the city or,
in case of a vacancy in the position, until a successor has been appointed and qualifies.
B) Regular meetings.
1) Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the first and third Monday of each
calendar month, and a worksession of the Council shall be held on the second Monday of each
calendar month. Starting time shall be at 7: 00 p.m. The ending time shall not be later than 11: 00
p. m., unless extended by two-thirds vote of the Council.
2) The schedule for the coming calendar year shall be set by the Council during the
month of January; the meeting dates may be revised in order to eliminate holiday conflicts. The
schedule shall be published in the city' s legal newspaper and shall be posted on the principal
bulletin board at City Hall.
C) Special meetings. The Mayor or any two members of the Council may call a special
meeting of the Council by filing a written statement with the City Administrator. A special
meeting shall be preceded by three- day posted notice ( or, as an alternate, three- day published
notice) as well as three-day mailed notice to any person requesting particular notice of special
meetings. At least one day before the meeting, notice shall be mailed or delivered personally to
each member of the Council, or shall be left at the Council member' s usual place of residence
with some responsible person.
D) Emergency meetings. An emergency meeting may be called on less than three days
notice for any matter, which, in the judgment of the Council, requires immediate consideration.
Notice shall be made by telephone or by any other method used to notify Council members. A
good faith effort shall be made to provide notice to any news medium that has requested
notification. No posting or publication is necessary.
E) Location ofmeetings. All meetings, including special and adjourned meetings, shall be
held in the City Hall unless otherwise set by motion duly made and passed at a Council meeting.
F) Open to the public. All Council meetings, including special and adjourned meetings and
meetings of Council committees, shall be open to the public, unless the meeting is allowable by
state law to be closed due to the nature of the subject to be discussed. At least one copy of any
printed materials relating to agenda items must be available for public inspection while the
governing body considers the subject matter.
Prior Code, § 1- 5- 2) ( Ord. 207, passed 4- 11- 1985; Ord. 383, passed 12- 8- 1994)
Page 2 of 6
30.03 PRESIDING OFFICER.
A) Who presides. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council. In the absence
of the Mayor, the Acting Mayor shall preside. In the absence of both, the City Administrator
shall call the meeting to order and shall preside until the Council members present at the meeting
choose one of their numbers to act temporarily as presiding officer.
B) Powers and duties.
1) The presiding officer shall preserve order, enforce the rules of procedure herein
prescribed, and determine without debate subject to the final decision of the Council on appeal,
all questions of procedure and order. Except as otherwise provided by statute or by these rules,
the proceedings of the Council shall be conducted in accordance with Robert' s Rules of Order,
Revised.
2) The presiding officer may make motions, second motions or speak on any question;
except that, on demand of any Council member, the presiding officer shall vacate the Chair and
designate a Council member to preside temporarily.
C) Appealfrom ruling. Any member may appeal to the Council from a ruling of the
presiding officer. If the appeal is seconded, the member may speak once solely on the question
involved and the presiding officer may speak once solely on the question involved and the
presiding officer may explain the ruling, but no other Council member shall participate in the
discussion. The appeal shall be sustained if it is approved by a majority of the members present
exclusive of the presiding officer.
Prior Code, § 1- 5- 3)
30.04 QUORUM AND VOTING.
A) Quorum and voting. At all Council meetings, a majority of all the Council members
elected shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a smaller number may
adjourn from time to time.
B) Voting.
1) The votes of the members on any question may be taken in any manner, which
signifies the intention of the individual members; and the votes of the members on any action
taken shall be recorded in the minutes. The vote of each member shall be recorded on each
appropriation of money, except for payments ofjudgments, claims and amounts fixed by statute.
If any member is present but does not vote, the minutes, as to the member' s name, shall be
marked abstain.
Page 3 of 6
2) A majority vote of all members of the Council shall be necessary for approval of
any ordinance unless a larger number is required by statute. Except as otherwise provided by
statute, a majority vote of a quorum shall prevail in all other cases.
Prior Code, § 1- 5- 4)
30.05 MINUTES.
A) Minutes kept. Minutes of each Council meeting shall be kept by the City Clerk, Deputy
Clerk or other person as designated by the Council. Ordinances, resolutions and claims need not
be recorded in full in the minutes if they appear in other permanent records of the City Clerk and
can be accurately identified from the description given in the minutes.
B) Approval. The minutes of each meeting shall be reduced to typewritten form, shall be
signed by the City Clerk and copies thereof shall be delivered to each Council member as soon
as practical. At the next regular Council meeting following the delivery, approval of the minutes
shall be considered by the Council. The minutes need not be read aloud, but the presiding officer
shall call for any additions or corrections. If there is no objection to a proposed addition or
correction, it may be made without a vote of the Council. If there is an objection, the Council
shall vote upon the addition or correction. If there are no additions or corrections, the minutes
shall stand approved.
Prior Code, § 1- 5- 5)
30.06 ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND COMMUNICATIONS.
A) Ordinances and resolutions.
1) Readings. Every ordinance shall receive at least one reading before the Council
prior to final adoption. An ordinance or resolution need not be read in full unless a member of
the Council requests a reading.
2) Signatures required,publication. Every ordinance and resolution passed by the
Council shall be signed by the Mayor, attested by the City Administrator and filed by the City
Administrator in the ordinance or resolution book. Proof of publication of every ordinance shall
be kept in a permanent file in the office of the City Administrator.
3) Repeals and amendments. Every ordinance or a resolution repealing a previous
ordinance or resolution or a section of subdivision thereof shall give the number, if any, and the
title of the ordinance or code number of the ordinance or resolution to be repealed in whole or
part. Each ordinance or resolution amending an existing ordinance or resolution or part thereof,
shall set forth in full each amended section or division as it will read with the amendment.
B) Motions, petitions and communications. Every motion shall be stated in full before it is
submitted to a vote by the presiding officer and shall be recorded in the minutes. Every petition
or other communication addressed to the Council shall be in writing and shall be read in full
Page 4 of 6
upon presentation to the Council unless the Council dispenses with the reading. Each petition or
other communication shall be recorded in the minutes by title and filed with the minutes in the
office of the City Administrator.
Prior Code, § 1- 5- 6)
30.07 HEARINGS.
Unless otherwise provided in this code or by law, every public hearing required by law,
ordinance or resolution to be held on any legislative or administrative matter shall be conducted
in accordance with this section.
A) Notice. Every hearing shall be preceded by ten days' published notice and ten days'
mailed notice to all persons entitled thereto by law, ordinance or regulation unless only published
notice is required. The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. Failure to
give the notice or defects in it shall not invalidate the proceedings if a good faith effort has been
made to comply with this division.
B) Conduct ofhearing. At the hearing, each party in interest shall have an opportunity to
be heard and to present the evidence as is relevant to the proceeding. The Council may adopt
rules governing the conduct of hearings, records to be made and any other matters as it deems
necessary.
C) Record. Upon the disposition of any matter after hearing, findings and decisions shall
be entered into the summary in the official Council minutes.
Prior Code, § 1- 5- 7)
30.08 AGENDA AND ORDER OF BUSINESS.
A) Agenda. An agenda of business for each regular Council meeting shall be prepared and
filed in the office of the City Clerk not later than one day before the meeting. The agenda shall
be prepared in accordance with the order of business and copies thereof shall be available to each
Council member and to the City Administrator as far in advance of the meeting as time for
preparation will permit.
B) Order of business.
1) Each meeting of the Council shall convene at the time and place appointed
therefore. Council business shall be conducted in the order established by the Council from time
to time by resolution.
2) The order of business may be varied by the presiding officer, but all public hearings
shall be held at the time specified in the notice of hearing.
Prior Code, § 1- 5- 8) ( Ord. 142, passed 10- 22- 1981)
Page 5 of 6
30.09 SUSPENSION OF RULES.
These rules contained in this chapter may be suspended only by a two-thirds vote of the
members present and voting.
Prior Code, § 1- 5- 9)
30. 10 TERM OF MAYOR.
The Mayor shall be elected for a four-year term commencing with the city election in 2007,
for the term beginning in January 2008.
Prior Code, § 1- 5- 11) ( Ord. 628, passed 7- 2- 2007)
Page 6 of 6
CHAPTER 31: CITY DEPARTMENT AND OFFICES
Section
31. 01 City Administrator
31. 02 City Attorney
31. 03 Finance Department
31. 04 Public Works Department
31. 05 Department of Building Inspections
31. 06 Police Department
31. 07 Fire Department
31. 01 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
A) Position created. The position of City Administrator is hereby created for the city and it
shall include the statutory position of City Clerk, who shall be known as the City Administrator
and shall be vested with all the authority and responsibility prescribed by state law and city
ordinances for city clerks and in addition shall have the duties prescribed hereinafter.
B) Appointment and removal. The City Administrator shall be appointed by the City
Council for an indefinite term. If at any time after the City Administrator has completed one year
of continuous service, the Council wishes to remove the City Administrator, the City
Administrator may, within 30 days after written notice of removal, request a public hearing which
the Council must grant and which must be started within 30 days after the request.
C) Qualifications. The City Administrator shall be selected solely on the basis of executive
and administrative qualifications with special reference to experience and formal education as
well as knowledge of accepted practices pertaining to the duties of the office.
D) Powers and duties. The City Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of
the city and shall be responsible directly to the City Council for the proper administration of all
affairs of the city and to that end shall be empowered and required to:
1) Perform all the duties of a clerk of a statutory city as provided by state law and may
delegate such duties to an employee of the city;
2) Supervise the administration of all departments, all offices and divisions of the city
except as otherwise provided by law, and carry out any other responsibilities placed under the
jurisdiction by this code or by subsequent Council action or directions;
3) Interview and screen all prospective city employees as permitted by law and make
recommendations to the Council before the Council makes any appointment. The City
Administrator shall make recommendations for terminating and suspending employees and may
suspend any employee until the next Council meeting when the Council shall affirm, modify or
rescind the suspension. The City Administrator shall also interview and screen all consulting
Pagel of 8
firms, who may be required to conduct work for the city, and shall also review the performance of
the consulting firms and recommend any changes in their services that the City Administrator
feels are of benefit to the city;
4) Develop and issue all administrative rules, regulations and procedures necessary to
insure the proper functioning of all departments and offices under the City Administrator' s
jurisdiction as permitted by law and Council approval and subject to the ordinances and
resolutions of the city;
5) Prepare and submit an annual budget to the City Council and keep the City Council
advised of the financial condition of the city and make recommendations from time to time as
may be determined necessary and desirable;
6) Attend and participate in discussions at all meetings and other official bodies as
directed by the Council. The City Administrator shall also represent the city at all official or
semi- official functions as may be directed by the Council and not in conflict with the prerogatives
of the Mayor. The City Administrator shall be entitled to notice of all regular and special
meetings of the Council;
7) See that all laws and ordinances are duly and reasonably enforced and promptly
refer any violations thereof to the Chief of Police;
8) Have the authority to purchase or enter into contracts when the amount thereof does
not exceed the statutory limit for purchasing without competitive bidding; and the City
Administrator shall receive estimates, quotations and sealed bids for purchases and contracts
wherein competitive bidding is required by statute and present them to the City Council for
official action;
9) Recommend from time to time, the adoption of any measures as the City
Administrator may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety and welfare of the
community, or for the improvement of the administration; and
10) Perform other duties as may be required by the Mayor or City Council and
consistent with state statutes and city ordinances or resolutions.
E) Bonds and compensation.
1) Bond required. The City Administrator shall furnish a surety bond to be approved
by the Council; the bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance of the City
Administrator' s duties in an amount set by the Council. The premium for the bond shall be paid
by the city.
2) Compensation. The City Administrator shall receive compensation as the Council
shall fix from time to time by ordinance or resolution.
Prior Code, § 1- 6- 1)
Page 2 of 8
31. 02 CITY ATTORNEY.
A) Position established, appointment, compensation. The position of City Attorney is
hereby established. At the first regular Council meeting in January each year, in accordance with
30. 02(A)(4), the Council shall appoint an attorney or firm of attorneys to the position of City
Attorney.
B) Duties. The City Attorney shall represent the city with respect to any legal matters or
litigation including prosecution of ordinance violations, petty misdemeanors, misdemeanors and
gross misdemeanors committed within the city.
Prior Code, § 1- 6- 2)
31. 03 FINANCE DEPARTMENT.
A) Department established. There is hereby established for the city, a Finance
Department.
B) Finance Director. The Finance Department shall have within it the office of Finance
Director and shall contain other employees as are determined to be necessary by the City
Council.
C) Duties. The Finance Department shall be responsible:
1) For keeping the financial books and records of the city and for all accounts and
funds of the city;
2) For investing the funds of the city and for making certain that cash is available for
the month to month financial requirements of the city; and
3) For making monthly reports to the City Administrator showing the state of finances
of the city and the amounts received and spent during the month, which reports shall be filed;
and the Department shall make an annual report at the close of the fiscal year with the total
amount of all receipts and expenditures of the city and the transactions during the preceding year.
Prior Code, § 1- 6- 3)
31. 04 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
A) Department created. There is created a department of the city, which shall be known as
the Department of Public Works. This Department shall consist of such employees as may from
time to time be assigned thereto by the City Administrator.
Page 3 of 8
B) Assignment. The City Administrator shall assign a City Engineer and superintendents
who shall supervise specific divisions within the Public Works Department.
C) Powers and duties. The Public Works Department, under the direction of the City
Engineer and Superintendents, shall have the following duties and powers: have the following
duties and powers:
1) To have general charge and supervision of the construction and care of all public
streets, alleys and sidewalks in the city and to keep the same clean and in good
repair;
2) To have general charge and supervision of the construction and care of all gutters,
storm sewers and drains in the city and to keep them functioning properly and free
from debris and in good repair;
3) To receive applications and issue permits for the construction or repair of any part
of the street, sewer, lighting, water, or sanitary sewer system of the city as approved
by the City Council and to supervise the construction and repair whether being
constructed by private contractors or by city employees;
4) To issue all necessary notices to remove illegal or unsafe conditions relating to the
public streets, sewers or sewer system; to require necessary safeguards during
construction or repair; and to insure compliance with all provisions of the
ordinances of the city regarding the construction, repair, maintenance and use of the
street, sewer, storm sewer, lighting and water systems;
5) To have charge of the care, functioning and maintenance of the city waterworks and
water distribution system and the sewer system;
6) To be the custodian of all property of the city which is not assigned to the care or
custody of any other officer; and
7) To perform any other and further duties as might be assigned by the City
Administrator.
D) Supervision of employees. All officers and employees assigned to the Department of
Public Works shall perform their duties subject to the orders and under the supervision of the
City Engineer and the superintendents.
Prior Code, § 1- 6- 4) ( Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015)
Page 4 of 8
31. 05 DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING INSPECTIONS.
A) Department established; appointments and removals. There is created and established a
department of the municipal government of the city which shall be known as the Department of
Building Inspections and which shall consist of a Building Official and the subordinates and
assistants as may be
from time to time assigned thereto. The Building Official and subordinates shall be appointed or
removed by the City Council after interviews, screening and recommendations of the City
Administrator.
B) Powers and duties ofBuilding Official.
1) Building construction, repair and the like. The Building Official shall have general
charge and supervision of the erection, construction, alteration, repair, removal and inspection of
all buildings, structures or portions thereof within the city and shall enforce all ordinances
relating thereto.
2) Plumbing. The Building Official shall have general charge and supervision of all
plumbing and plumbing inspection and elevator inspection and shall enforce all ordinances
relating thereto.
3) Permits. The Building Official shall receive applications and issue permits for the
erection, construction, alteration, repair and removal of buildings and structures.
4) Records. The Building Official shall keep comprehensive records of applications
received, of permits issued, of certificates issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered and of
notices or orders issued. The Building Official shall retain on file essential portions of required
plans and essential documents relating to building work so long as any part of the building or
structure to which they relate may be in existence. All records shall be open to public inspection
for good and sufficient reasons at the stated office hours, but shall not be removed from the
office of the Building Official without the Building Official' s written consent.
5) Reports. The Building Official shall make written reports to the City Administrator
once each month, or more often if requested, including statements of permits and certificates
issued and orders promulgated.
6) Right ofentry. The Building Official shall have the power to make or cause to be
made an entry into any building or premises where construction is going on for the purpose of
making inspections at any reasonable hour.
C) Stop work order.
1) The Building Official shall have the power to order all work stopped on
construction or alteration or repair of buildings in the city when the work is being done in
Page 5 of 8
violation of any provisions of any ordinance relating thereto, or in violation of the Zoning Code.
Work shall not be resumed after the issuance of an order except on the written permission of the
inspector; provided, that if the stop order is an oral one, it shall be followed by a written stop
order within one hour. The written stop order may be served by the Building Official or any
police officer. Immediately following the issuance of a stop work order, the Building Official
shall notify the City Administrator.
2) Any person who continues doing work in violation of a stop order shall be fined
subject to the terms of§ 10. 99 of this code.
Prior Code, § 1- 6- 5) Penalty, see § 10. 99
31. 06 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
A) Department composition, appointment, compensation. The head of the Department shall
be known as the Chief of Police and the number of additional members of the Department,
together with their ranks and titles shall be determined by the Chief of Police.
B) Chief ofPolice.
1) The Chief of Police shall have supervision and control of the Police Department
and its members. The Chief of Police shall be responsible to the City Administrator for law
enforcement and property of the city used by the Department and shall be responsible for the
proper training and discipline of the members of the Department. The Chief of Police shall be
responsible for the keeping of adequate records and shall report to the City Administrator on the
needs of the Department and its work. Every member of the Department subordinate to the
Chief shall obey the instructions of the Chief and any superior officer.
2) In the absence of the Chief, the Chief shall designate through the chain of
command a replacement for a temporary absence. In the event of a permanent vacancy, the
Council shall appoint an interim Chief to serve until a replacement is found.
C) Duties ofpolice officers. Members of the Police Department shall:
1) Enforce the ordinances and laws applicable to the city;
2) Bring violators before the County Court;
3) Make complaints for offenses coming to their knowledge; and
4) Serve the notices as may be required by the Council or other authority. When the
city is not a party to the proceedings involved in the process or notice, the officer shall collect the
same fees as provided by law. All fees shall be paid into the city treasury.
D) Uniform and badge. Each member of the Department shall, while on duty, wear a
suitable badge furnished by the city, except that the Chief may authorize the performance of
Page 6 of 8
specific duties while not in uniform. The officer shall also wear a uniform accepted and
determined by the city. When a member terminates employment in the Department, the member
shall immediately deliver to the city the member' s badge and all other property of the city in the
member' s possession.
Prior Code, § 1- 6- 6)
31. 07 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
A) Department Composition; Appointments and Removals. There is hereby in this city a
Fire Department. The head of the Fire Department shall be known as the Fire Chief. The Fire
Chief shall be appointed by and is subject to removal by the City Council. All firefighters and
probationary firefighters shall be appointed by the City Council. Firefighters shall continue as
members of the Fire Department during good behavior and may be removed by the City Council.
B) Fire Chief.
1) Report to City Administrator. The Fire Chief shall report directly to the City
Administrator.
2) Fire Code Official. The Fire Chief shall be the fire code official. The fire code
official may appoint deputies who shall serve at the fire code official' s discretion. The fire code
official shall determine the number and duties of any deputies.
3) Fire Department Officers. The Fire Chief shall appoint all officers in the Fire
Department and may establish procedures for the appointment of such officers. All officers
appointed by the Fire Chief shall serve at the Fire Chief s discretion. The Fire Chief shall
determine the number of officers and duties of each officer within the Fire Department.
4) Duties ofFire Chief.
a) Supervision and Control. Fire Chief shall have supervision and control of the
Fire Department and its members. The Fire Chief shall be responsible for fire suppression and
property of the City used by the Fire Department and shall be responsible for the proper training
and discipline of the members of the Fire Department. The Fire Chief shall be responsible for
keeping of adequate records and shall report to the City Administrator on the needs of the Fire
Department and its work. Every member of the Fire Department subordinate to the Fire Chief
shall obey the instructions of the Fire Chief and any superior officer.
b) Policies and Procedures. The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the
development and enforcement of a policies and procedures manual relating to the safe and
prudent operation of the Fire Department.
c) Fire Department Operations. The Fire Chief shall oversee all Fire
Department operations including but not limited to: fire code enforcement, staffing, training,
reports and record keeping, public informational programming and budgeting. When necessary
and appropriate, the Fire Chief shall oversee firefighters at the scene of fires and other
Page 7 of 8
emergencies. The Fire Chief shall establish and maintain mutual aid agreements with
neighboring fire departments and shall keep abreast of grant programs that may be of benefit to
the City.
d) Code Enforcement. The Fire Chief shall oversee the enforcement of all
ordinances aimed at fire prevention and shall have full authority to inspect all premises pursuant
to § 10. 20 and to cause the removal or abatement of all fire hazards.
e) Equipment. The Fire Chief shall be responsible for maintenance and security
of Fire Department facilities, vehicles and equipment consistent with OSHA and NFPA
requirements and as otherwise dictated by the City Council.
5) Absence ofthe Fire Chief. In a temporary absence of the Fire Chief, the Fire
Chief shall designate a replacement to serve during the absence. If the Fire Chief is not available
to designate a replacement the City Administrator shall designate a replacement to serve in the
Fire Chief s temporary absence. In the event of a permanent vacancy, the City Council shall
appoint an interim Fire Chief to serve until a replacement is appointed.
Prior Code, § 1- 6- 7) ( Ord. 305, passed 5- 24- 1990; Ord. 369, passed 2- 10- 1994; Ord. 525,
passed 2- 5- 2001; Ord. 708, passed 9- 4- 2012)
Page 8 of 8
CHAPTER32: MUNICIPALELECTIONS
Section
32.01 Municipalelections
32.01 MUNICIPALELECTIONS
A) Timeofelections. PursuanttotheM.S. §2 05.07,a sitmaybeamendedfromtimeto
time, itisherebyprovidedthatthecityshallholdbiennialelectionsthefirstTuesdayafterthe
firstMondayinthemonthofNovemberineacheven-numberedyear.
B) Voterregistration, statutoryrulesadopted. Asystemofpermanentregistrationofvoters
providedforbyM.S. Chapter201, asitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime, isherebyadoptedfor
thecity. Nopersonshallbepermittedtovoteinanelectioninthecityunlessregisteredas
providedbystatelaw.
C) Electedofficials, termsextended. Wheneverthischaptershallresultintheexpirationof
acurrenttermofofficeatatimewheninthosemonthsprecedingtheendofthetermthereisno
election, thenthetermofofficetherebyaffectedisextendedtothedateofthenextelection.
PriorCode, § 1-7-1) ( Ord. 36, passed3-26-1970; Ord. 45, passed8-1-1971; Ord. 60, passed
8-22-1974; Ord.800, passed9-4-2018)
Page1of1
CHAPTER 33: MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES
Entire Chapter was repealed by Ordinance No. 723 on September 3, 2013.
Prior Code, § 1- 8- 1) ( Ord. 530, passed 4- 16- 2001; Ord. 695, passed 2- 21- 2012; Ord. 700,
passed 8- 6- 2012; Ord. 723, passed 9- 3- 2013)
Page 1 of 1
CHAPTER 34: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Planning Commission
34. 001 Commission authorized and continued
34.002 Composition
34.003 Term; vacancies; oath
34.004 Organization
34.005 Powers and duties
34.006 Expenditures
Parks, Recreation and Natural Resources Commission
34.020 Commission authorized and continued
34. 021 Membership
34.022 Organization
34.023 Powers and duties
34.024 Expenditures
Economic Development Commission
34.035 Commission established; purpose
34.036 Membership, appointment and compensation
34.037 Terms of office, vacancies, oath and removals
34.038 Organization
34.039 Powers and duties
Economic Development Authority
34.050 Authority created
34. 051 Membership; appointment; office term; compensation
34.052 Officers
34.053 Quorum
34.054 Powers
Advisory Communications Commission
34.065 Commission established, purpose
34.066 Membership, appointment and compensation
34.067 Term of office, vacancies and removal
34.068 Organization
34.069 Powers and duties
Page 1 of 27
Emergency Management
34.080 Scott County Emergency Management Common Organization
34. 081 Conformity and cooperation with federal and state authorities
34.082 City Emergency Management Director
34.083 Policy and purpose
34.084 Definitions
34.085 Establishment of emergency management organization
34.086 Powers and duties of Director
34.087 Local emergencies
34.088 Emergency regulations
34.089 Emergency management a government function
34.090 Participation in labor disputes or politics
Zoning Board ofAppeals and Adjustments
34. 100 Board required
34. 101 Establishment of Board
34. 102 Organization
34. 103 Duties
Building Code Board ofAppeals
34. 115 Creation
34. 116 Membership
34. 117 Officers
34. 118 Place of meeting
34. 119 Rules of procedure
34. 120 Meetings
34. 121 Quorum and manner of voting
34. 122 Appeal procedure
34. 123 Criteria
34. 124 Cost responsibility
PLANNING COMMISSION
34.001 COMMISSION AUTHORIZED AND CONTINUED.
The Planning Commission for the city is hereby continued. The Commission shall be the
City Planning Agency authorized by M.S. § 462.354, Subd. 1, as it may be amended from time
to time.
Prior Code, § 2- 1- 1) ( Ord. 211, passed 8- 8- 1985)
Page 2 of 27
34.002 COMPOSITION.
The City Planning Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the City
Council. The seven members shall be appointed and may be removed by the Council. In
addition to the membership enumerated herein, the City Council may also appoint up to two
alternate members of the Planning Commission, who may attend all meetings and participate in
all discussions, but who will vote only if a regular member of the Planning Commission is
absent. If two alternates have been appointed, the alternates shall take the place of absent
Planning Commission members on the basis of seniority.
Prior Code, § 2- 1- 2) ( Ord. 362, passed 11- 22- 1993)
34.003 TERMS; VACANCIES; OATH.
A) Regular members and alternate members of the Commission shall be appointed for a
term of three years. Term of office shall begin on February 1 and shall expire on January 31. All
members shall be appointed and may be removed by the City Council. Vacancies during the
term shall be filled by the Council for the unexpired portion of the term. Every appointed
member, before beginning the duties described herein, shall take an oath relating to the faithful
discharge of those duties. All persons shall serve without compensation.
B) Length of service for a Commissioner shall be limited to nine years or three terms,
whichever is less, except that the City Council shall be authorized to grant a temporary term of
one year to an incumbent candidate who has no opposition.
Prior Code, § 2- 1- 3) ( Ord. 362, passed 11- 22- 1993; Ord. 582, passed 9- 27- 2004)
34.004 ORGANIZATION.
A) Officers.
1) Election. The Commission shall elect, from among its appointed regular members,
a Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson and the other officers as it may determine. At the first regular
meeting in February, the Chair shall call for nominations and the officers shall be elected by
voice or written ballot from among those nominated. They shall serve for one year and their
term shall begin immediately upon election. No member shall hold more than one office at a
time.
2) Duties of the Chairperson.
a) To open the meeting at the appointed time and having ascertained that a
quorum is present, call the meeting to order;
b) To announce, in proper sequence, the business that comes before the
Commission;
Page 3 of 27
c) To recognize members who are entitled to the floor;
d) To state and put to vote all questions that come before the Commission as
motions or that otherwise arise in the course of the proceedings;
e) To protect the Commission from frivolous or dilatory motions by refusing to
recognize them;
f) To expedite business in every way compatible with the rights of members and
citizens;
g) To decide all questions of order; and
h) To authenticate by signature, when necessary, all acts, orders and proceedings
of the Commission.
3) Duties of the Vice- Chairperson. In the absence of the Chairperson, to serve and
perform all duties of the Chairperson.
B) Meetings, records. Regular meeting shall be scheduled to be held on the first and third
Thursday of each month, unless there are no business items requiring Commission consideration,
or as set by the City Council. All meetings shall operate under parliamentary rules as defined by
Robert' s Rules of Order.
C) Quorum. Four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum. No action may
be taken without a quorum, but a lesser number may adjourn a meeting until a quorum is present
and a final vote shall be taken at an adjourned meeting).
D) Voting. All action taken by the Commission shall be by a majority vote of members
who are present.
Prior Code, § 2- 1- 4) ( Ord. 311, passed 8- 23- 1990; Ord. 362, passed 11- 22- 1993; Ord. 370,
passed 2- 10- 1994)
34.005 POWERS AND DUTIES.
A) Generally.
1) The Planning Commission shall have the powers and duties given planning
agencies generally as provided in M S. §§ 462.351 et seq., as they may be amended from time to
time.
2) The Commission shall also exercise the duties conferred upon it by this code,
including the Zoning Code and by the Council.
B) Comprehensive plan. After the Council has prepared and adopted a comprehensive
Page 4 of 27
plan, the Commission shall periodically, but at least once every two years, review the
comprehensive plan, any ordinances and any capital improvement program the Council has
adopted to implement the plan. After the review, it shall, to the extent it deems necessary, revise
the comprehensive plan, adopt the amendments or the new comprehensive plan and recommend
it to the Council in accordance with law. Similarly, after the review, it shall recommend to the
Council any amendments it deems desirable to the capital improvement program and any
ordinance implementing the plan.
C) Zoning ordinances, public hearing. No zoning ordinance or amendment shall be
adopted by the Council until a public hearing has been held thereon by the Planning Commission
upon notice as provided in M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.
D) Subdivision plat approval.
1) Any subdivision plat submitted to the Council for approval shall, prior to final
approval, be referred to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation.
2) Any plat so referred shall be returned to the Council within 60 days of filing, and
failure of the Commission to report is deemed to have satisfied the requirements of this division.
Prior Code, § 2- 1- 5)
34.006 EXPENDITURES.
Expenditures of the Commission shall be within amounts appropriated for the purpose by
the City Council.
Prior Code, § 2- 1- 6)
PARKS, RECREATIONAND NATURAL RESOURCES COMMISSION
34.020 COMMISSION AUTHORIZED AND CONTINUED.
There is hereby created a Parks, Recreation and Natural Resources Commission for the city
pursuant to the authority given by M.S. §§ 471. 15 to 471. 19, as they may be amended from time
to time.
Prior Code, § 2- 2- 1) ( Ord. 354, passed 2- 11- 1993; Ord. 444, passed 2- 3- 1997)
34.021 MEMBERSHIP.
The Parks, Recreation and Natural Resources Commission shall consist of not less than
three nor more than seven voting members and, if desired, one or two Council persons acting ex
officio. In addition to the membership enumerated herein, the City Council may appoint a first
and, if desired, a second alternate. Alternates may attend all meetings and participate in all
Page 5 of 27
discussions, but may participate in the voting process ( to include the making and seconding of
motions) only if a regular member of the Commission is absent.
A) Terms.
1) Generally.
a) Regular members and alternate members shall be appointed for a term of three
years. Terms of office shall begin on February 1 and shall expire on January 31.
b) Ex- officio Council persons may be appointed annually.
c) All members shall be appointed and may be removed by the Council.
2) Term limit. Length of service for a Commissioner shall be limited to nine years or
three terms, whichever is less, except that the City Council shall be authorized to grant a
temporary term of one year to an incumbent candidate who has no opposition.
B) Vacancies. If a mid-year vacancy occurs, the unexpired portion of the appointed term
shall be filled by the City Council.
C) Oath. Every appointed member, before beginning duties, shall take an oath relating to
the faithful discharge of those duties.
D) Compensation. Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
Prior Code, § 2- 2- 2) ( Ord. 354, passed 2- 11- 1993; Ord. 444, passed 2- 3- 1997; Ord. 582, passed
9- 27- 2004)
34.022 ORGANIZATION.
A) Officers.
1) Election. The Commission shall elect from among its appointed regular members, a
Chairperson, Vice- Chairperson and the other officers as it may determine. At the first regular
meeting in February, the Chair will call for nominations and the officers shall be elected by voice
or written ballot from among those nominated.
2) Term of office. Officers shall serve for one year and their terms shall begin
immediately upon election. No member shall hold more than one office at a time.
3) Duties of the Chairperson. It shall be the duty of the Chairperson to:
a) Open the meeting at the appointed time and having ascertained that quorum is
present, call the meeting to order;
Page 6 of 27
b) Announce in proper sequence, the business that comes before the Commission;
c) Recognize members who are entitled to the floor;
d) State and put to vote, all questions that come before the Commission as
motions or that otherwise arise in the course of the proceedings;
e) Protect the Commission from frivolous or dilatory motions by refusing to
recognize them;
f) Expedite business in every way compatible with the rights of members and
citizens; and
g) Decide all questions of order.
4) Duties of Vice- Chairperson. In the absence of the Chairperson, the
Vice-Chairperson shall serve and perform all duties of the Chairperson.
B) Meetings, records. Regular meeting shall be scheduled on the fourth Monday of each
month, unless there is no business requiring Commission consideration or as set by the City
Council. All meetings shall operate under parliamentary rules as defined by Robert' s Rules of
Order.
C) Quorum. Four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum. No action may
be taken without a quorum, but a lesser number may adjourn a meeting until a quorum is present.
D) Voting. All action taken by the Commission shall be by a majority vote of members
who are present.
Prior Code, § 2- 2- 3) ( Ord. 354, passed 2- 11- 1993; Ord. 370, passed 2- 10- 1994; Ord. 444,
passed 2- 3- 1997)
34.023 POWERS AND DUTIES.
A) Generally, the Parks, Recreation and Natural Resources Commission shall have the
power and duties given park and recreation agencies generally as provided in M.S. §§ 471. 15
through 471. 19, as they may be amended from time to time.
B) Specific duties of the Parks, Recreation and Natural Resources Commission are:
1) To act in an advisory capacity to the Council regarding park, recreation and natural
resource matters;
2) To advocate the responsible use, preservation, renovation and management of the
city' s natural resources;
Page 7 of 27
3) To make recommendations regarding development and maintenance of all parks,
recreation programs and facilities and natural resources/ open space needs;
4) To review and make recommendations of newly proposed plats or subdivisions for
future development of parks and recreational facilities and their impact on the city' s natural
resources;
5) To develop and continuously review a comprehensive plan, both of long- and
short-range development, for a park system, recreation programs and open space needs;
6) To form any committees within its own body necessary to perform functions and
duties of the Parks, Recreation and Natural Resources Commission;
7) To work in an advisory capacity with the Parks and Recreation Superintendent in
the formation of a budget. The budget should include: administration, maintenance, recreation,
forestry, acquisition and development of parks;
8) To work with the Parks and Recreation Superintendent in the development and
review of a capital improvement budget and other long-range plans;
9) To review all proposals for parks, recreational programs and natural resources as
authorized by the City Council;
10) To build partnerships within the community and promote public education by
supporting existing programs and initiating new programs; and
11) To act as a representative to the public for better lines of communication and
citizen input to all parks, recreation and natural resource matters.
Prior Code, § 2- 2- 4) ( Ord. 354, passed 2- 11- 1993; Ord. 444, passed 2- 3- 1997)
34.024 EXPENDITURES.
Expenditures of the Commission shall be within amounts appropriated for the purpose by
the City Council.
Prior Code, § 2- 2- 5) ( Ord. 354, passed 2- 11- 1993; Ord. 444, passed 2- 3- 1997)
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
34.035 COMMISSION ESTABLISHED; PURPOSE.
A) There is hereby established an Economic Development Commission for the city.
B) The purpose of this Commission is to advise the City Council in all matters relating to
Page 8 of 27
the economic development of the community. The role includes efforts in pursuit of the
following goals of economic development:
1) Recruitment of new business and industry;
2) Retention and expansion of existing business and industry;
3) Diversification of the community' s economy;
4) Jobs;
5) Increased community tax base; and
6) Planning and coordination of the community' s economic development resources
and efforts. (Prior Code, § 2- 3- 1) ( Ord. 406, passed 6- 19- 1995)
34.036 MEMBERSHIP, APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
The Commission shall consist of seven members. All members shall be appointed by the
City Council and shall serve without compensation. All members shall be residents and/ or
operate a business or service within the city. In addition to the membership enumerated herein,
the City Council may also appoint up to two alternate members who may attend all meetings and
participate in all discussions, but who will vote only if a regular member of the Economic
Development Commission is absent. If two alternates have been appointed, the alternates shall
take the place of absent Commission members on the basis of seniority, if applicable.
Prior Code, § 2- 3- 2) ( Ord. 406, passed 6- 19- 1995)
34.037 TERMS OF OFFICE, VACANCIES, OATH AND REMOVALS.
A) Terms.
1) Generally. Regular members and alternate members shall be appointed for a term
of three years. Terms of office shall begin on February 1 and shall expire on January 31.
Members shall be appointed on a rotating basis; three members and the alternates shall be
appointed in year one, two members in year two, and two members in year three, with
subsequent reappointments to be made according to the same schedule.
2) Term limit. Length of service for a Commissioner shall be limited to nine years or
three terms, whichever is less, except that the City Council shall be authorized to grant a
temporary term of one year to an incumbent candidate who has no opposition.
B) Vacancies. The City Council shall fill vacancies created during a term.
Page 9 of 27
C) Oath. Prior to assuming duties and responsibilities, each appointed Commission
member shall take an oath relating to the faithful discharge of Commission duties.
D) Removal. The City Council shall retain authority to remove any member of the
Commission whenever, in its discretion, the best interest of the city shall be served.
Prior Code, § 2- 3- 3) ( Ord. 406, passed 6- 19- 1995; Ord. 582, passed 9- 27- 2004)
34.038 ORGANIZATION.
A) Officers.
1) Election. The Board shall elect from among its appointed regular members, a
Chairperson, Vice- Chairperson and the other officers as it may determine. At the first regular
meeting in February, the Chair will call for nominations and the officers shall be elected by voice
or written ballot from among those nominated.
2) Term of office. Officers shall serve for one year and their terms shall begin
immediately upon election. No member shall hold more than one office at a time.
3) Duties of the Chairperson. It shall be the duty of the Chairperson to:
a) Open the meeting at the appointed time and having ascertained that quorum is
present, call the meeting to order;
b) Announce in proper sequence the business that comes before the Commission;
c) Recognize members who are entitled to the floor;
d) State and put to vote all questions that come before the Commission as
motions or that otherwise arise in the course of the proceedings;
e) Protect the Commission from frivolous or dilatory motions by refusing to
recognize them;
f) Expedite business in every way compatible with the rights of members and
citizens; and
g) Decide all questions of order.
4) Duties of the Vice- Chairperson. In the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice-
Chairperson shall serve and perform all duties of the Chairperson.
B) Membership, records. The City Council shall annually set regular meeting times and
places for the Commission upon advice and counsel from the Commission. Minutes shall be
kept for all proceedings.
Page 10 of 27
C) Quorum. Four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum. No action will
be taken without a quorum, but a lesser number may adjourn a meeting until a quorum is present.
D) Voting. All action taken by the Commission shall be by a majority vote of members
who are present.
E) Bylaws. The Commission is authorized to adopt its own rules and procedures, subject
to City Council review and approval. The Commission shall specifically adopt ethics/ conflict of
interest standards to govern its proceedings and membership.
Prior Code, § 2- 3- 4) ( Ord. 406, passed 6- 19- 1995)
34.039 POWERS AND DUTIES.
A) Generally. The Economic Development Commission shall provide advice to the City
Council on all elements of the community' s economic development program as directed by the
City Council and/ or the Economic Development Authority. It shall recommend, develop and
implement programs to achieve the policy goals enumerated in the purpose clause of this section.
B) Economic development incentives andfinancial assistance.
1) The Economic Development Commission shall recommend, develop and
implement programs to provide economic development incentives and assistance as directed by
the City Council and/ or the Economic Development Authority.
2) Revolving loan funds, tax increment financing and state/ federal grant funds are
examples of this assistance.
3) In all instances, the issuance of assistance or incentives shall require the approval of
the City Council and/ or the Economic Development Authority.
C) Liaison. The Economic Development Commission shall recommend, develop and
implement efforts to establish contacts, coordination and collaboration with other groups,
agencies or individuals actively involved in economic development activities that may affect the
city. The Commission shall also coordinate its work with the efforts of other city boards,
commissions and staff.
D) Marketing. The Economic Development Commission shall recommend, develop and
implement programs to publicize the advantages and opportunities for business location within
the city.
E) Information clearing house. The Economic Development Commission shall
recommend, develop and implement programs to cause the collection and dissemination of
community information that may be relevant to the encouragement of economic development.
Page 11 of 27
F) Annual city budget. The Economic Development Commission shall recommend a
program of revenues and expenditures in support of economic development, in conjunction with
the city' s annual budget process. The Commission may also offer comment as requested by the
City Council regarding the impact of city budgets and community taxes on the economic health
of the community.
G) Special projects. The Economic Development Commission may be assigned special
duties, projects or other assignments by the City Council and/ or the Economic Development
Authority.
Prior Code, § 2- 3- 5) ( Ord. 406, passed 6- 19- 1995)
ECONOMICDEVELOPMENT A UTHORITY
34.050 AUTHORITY CREATED.
There is hereby created an Economic Development Authority, in and for the city, pursuant
to the authority given by M.S. §§ 469. 090 through 469. 108, as they may be amended from time
to time.
Prior Code, § 2- 4- 1) ( Ord. 405, passed 6- 19- 1995)
34.051 MEMBERSHIP, APPOINTMENT, OFFICE TERM, COMPENSATION.
The Authority shall consist of the Mayor and City Council. Terms of office shall coincide
with the members' terms as Council members for the city. Members of the Economic
Development Authority shall serve without compensation.
Prior Code, § 2- 4- 2) ( Ord. 405, passed 6- 19- 1995)
34.052 OFFICERS.
The officers of the Authority shall be as follows:
A) President. The President shall preside at all meetings of the Authority. The President
shall sign all contracts, deeds and other instruments made by the Authority.
B) Vice President. The Vice President shall preside at any meeting of the Authority in the
absence of the President and may exercise all powers and perform all responsibilities of the
President if the President cannot exercise or perform the same due to absence or other inability.
C) Executive Director. The Authority shall appoint an Executive Director who shall have
general supervision over the administration of its business and affairs, subject to the direction of
the Authority.
Prior Code, § 2- 4- 3) ( Ord. 405, passed 6- 19- 1995)
Page 12 of 27
34.053 QUORUM.
A quorum shall consist of a majority of the voting members.
Prior Code, § 2- 4- 4) ( Ord. 405, passed 6- 19- 1995)
34.054 POWERS.
The Authority is authorized to exercise on behalf of the city, all of the powers conferred by
M.S. §§ 469.090 through 469. 108, as they may be amended from time to time, and other law, as
well as any and all powers of the Housing and Redevelopment Authority, which is hereby
dissolved, except as limited by resolution of the City Council.
Prior Code, § 2- 4- 5) ( Ord. 405, passed 6- 19- 1995)
ADVISORY COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION
34.065 COMMISSION ESTABLISHED, PURPOSE.
There is hereby established an Advisory Communications Commission for the city. The
purpose of the Commission is to advise the City Council and provide feedback to staff on matters
relating to the city' s communications program. Areas to be covered by the Commission include
print, video and electronic communication efforts; cable television services; citizen focus groups
and surveys; special events; media relations; community relations; and community identity and
image.
Prior Code, § 2- 5- 1) ( Ord. 557, passed 5- 5- 2003)
34.066 MEMBERSHIP, APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
The Commission shall consist of not less than three nor more than seven members. The
Council may also appoint up to two alternate members who may attend all meetings and
participate in all discussions, but who will vote only if a regular member of the Advisory
Communications Commission is absent. If two alternates have been appointed, the alternates
shall take the place of absent Commission members on the basis of seniority, if applicable. The
members of the Commission shall be appointed by the City Council and shall serve without
compensation.
Prior Code, § 2- 5- 2) ( Ord. 557, passed 5- 5- 2003)
34.067 TERM OF OFFICE, VACANCIES AND REMOVALS.
A) Generally.
Page 13 of 27
1) The members of the Commission shall be appointed for a term of three years.
Terms shall begin on February 1 and shall expire on January 31.
2) All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only by appointment of the City
Council.
3) By unanimous vote of its members, the City Council shall have the authority to
remove any member of the Commission from office whenever, in its discretion, the best interest
of the city shall be served thereby.
B) Term limit. Length of service for a Commissioner shall be limited to nine years or three
terms, whichever is less, except that the City Council shall be authorized to grant a temporary
term of one year to an incumbent candidate who has no opposition.
Prior Code, § 2- 5- 3) ( Ord. 557, passed 5- 5- 2003; Ord. 582, passed 9- 27- 2004)
34.068 ORGANIZATION.
A) Officers.
1) Election. The Commission shall elect from among its appointed regular members a
Chairperson, Vice- Chairperson and the other officers as it may determine. At the first regular
meeting after February 1, the Chair will call for nominations and the officers shall be elected by
voice or written ballot from among those nominated.
2) Term of office. Officers shall serve for one year and their terms shall begin
immediately upon election. No member shall hold more than one office at a time.
3) Duties of Chairperson. It shall be the duty of the Chairperson to open the meeting
at the appointed time and, having ascertained that a quorum is present, call the meeting to order;
announce in proper sequence the business that comes before the Commission; recognize
members who are entitled to the floor; state and put to vote all questions that come before the
Commission as motions, or that otherwise arise in the course of the proceedings; protect the
Commission from frivolous or dilatory motions by refusing to recognize them; expedite business
in every way compatible with the rights of members and citizens; decide all questions of order.
4) Duties of the Vice- Chairperson. In the absence of the Chairperson, the
Vice-Chairperson shall serve in his or her stead and perform all duties of the Chairperson.
B) Meeting times. The Commission will meet regularly on a quarterly basis, with
additional meetings scheduled as necessary. The City Council shall annually set the regular
meeting times and places for the Commission, upon advice and counsel from the Commission.
Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings.
C) Quorum. Four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum. No action will
Page 14 of 27
be taken without a quorum, but a lesser number may adjourn a meeting until a quorum is present.
D) Voting. All action taken by the Commission shall be by a majority vote of members
who are present.
Prior Code, § 2- 5- 4) ( Ord. 557, passed 5- 5- 2003)
34.069 POWERS AND DUTIES.
A) Generally. The Advisory Communications Commission shall provide advice to the
City Council on elements relating to the city' s external communication program, as directed by
the City Council. It shall recommend and provide input and feedback on items intended to
enhance the city' s communication with the community.
B) Duty. Members of the Advisory Communications Commission shall act as
representatives to the public for better lines of communication and citizen input regarding city
services, particularly communication initiatives.
C) Communication plan. The Advisory Communications Commission shall develop and
continuously review a Communication Plan to guide the city' s communication initiatives.
D) Communication tools. The Advisory Communications Commission shall review and
provide input to staff on the content, design and style of the city' s print, video and electronic
communication efforts. The Commission may also provide suggestions for future publications,
television programs and electronic communication initiatives.
E) Cable television service. The Advisory Communications Commission shall advise the
City Council on matters relating to cable television service within the city, to include
programming, customer service, facility construction, institutional telecommunications,
interconnections with other systems, subscriber complaints and other provisions outlined in the
city' s cable television franchise agreement.
F) Community relations. The Advisory Communications Commission shall review and
make recommendations on methods for enhancing the city' s relationship with the public. The
Commission shall evaluate existing outreach programs and recommend new programs; assist
with the development of citizen surveys, focus groups and special events; develop opportunities
for citizen input; and help staff conduct outreach programs as necessary.
G) Media relations. The Advisory Communications Commission shall review and make
recommendations regarding the city' s relationship with the media, including article placements,
advertising and other objectives outlined in the city' s communication plan.
H) Community identity and image. The Advisory Communications Commission shall
review and make recommendations on issues and programs relating to community identity and
image. Examples include advising the City Council on community signage, evaluating press
coverage, suggesting ways to promote city services to the public, recommending programs to
Page 15 of 27
promote the city on a regional scale and developing methods for building a positive identity for
the community.
Prior Code, § 2- 5- 5) ( Ord. 557, passed 5- 5- 2003)
EMERGENCYMANAGEMENT
34.080 SCOTT COUNTY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COMMON
ORGANIZATION.
The city hereby joins the Scott County Emergency Management Common Organization, the
plans and administration of which shall be approved by the City Council from time to time as the
same are amended.
Prior Code, § 2- 6- 1)
34.081 CONFORMITY AND COOPERATION WITH FEDERAL AND STATE
AUTHORITIES.
Every officer and employee of the city shall cooperate with federal, state, county and city
authorities and with authorized agencies engaged in emergency services and emergency
measures to the fullest possible extent consistent with the performance of their other duties.
Prior Code, § 2- 6- 2)
34.082 CITY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR.
The Fire Chief or his or her designee shall serve as the City Emergency Management
Director. The Director may be compensated at a rate to be determined by the City Council and
shall be paid for necessary expenses.
Prior Code, § 2- 6- 3)
34.083 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size and
destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado, blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes,
or from sabotage, hostile action, or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure;
and in order to insure that preparations of this city will be adequate to deal with those disasters,
and generally, to provide for the common defense and to protect the public peace, health and
safety and to preserve the lives and property of the people of this city, it is hereby found and
declared to be necessary:
A) To establish a city emergency management organization responsible for city planning
and preparation for emergency government operations in time of disasters;
Page 16 of 27
B) To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and disasters; and
C) To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city and other political
subdivisions of this state and of other states with respect to the carrying out of emergencypreparedness
functions.
D) To comply with the provisions of M.S. § 12. 25, as it may be amended from time to
time, which requires that each political subdivision of the state shall establish a local
organization for emergency management.
34.084 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DISASTER. A situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment to the health
and safety of any person, or a situation which has resulted in or is likely to result in catastrophic
loss to property, and for which traditional sources of relief and assistance within the affected area
are unable to repair or prevent the injury or loss.
EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for immediate
action to prevent from developing or occurring.
EMERGENCYMANAGEMENT. The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to
prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood,
tornado and other acts of nature, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from industrial hazardous
material mishaps. These functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting services, police
services, emergency medical services, engineering, warning services, communications,
radiological and chemical, evacuation, congregate care, emergency transportation, existing or
properly assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services
and other functions related to civil protection, together with all other activities necessary or
incidental for carrying out the foregoing functions. EMERGENCYMANAGEMENT includes
those activities sometimes referred to as " civil defense" functions.
EMERGENCYMANAGEMENT FORCES. The total personnel resources engaged in citylevel
emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter or
any rule or order thereunder. This includes personnel from city departments, authorized
volunteers and private organizations and agencies.
EMERGENCYMANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION. The staff responsible for
coordinating city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. This organization
provides city liaison and coordination with federal, state and local jurisdictions relative to
disaster preparedness activities and assures implementation of federal and state program
Page 17 of 27
requirements.
34.085 ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.
There is hereby created within the city government an emergency management organization
which shall be under the supervision and control of the City Emergency Management Director,
called the Director. The Director shall be appointed by the City Council for an indefinite term
and may be removed by the Council at any time. The Director shall serve with a salary as
established by the City Council and shall be paid his or her necessary expenses. The Director
shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the
emergency preparedness organization, subject to the direction and control of the Council.
34.086 POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
A) The Director shall represent the city on any regional or state conference for emergency
management. The Director shall develop proposed mutual aid agreements with other political
subdivisions of the state for reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in an
emergency too great to be dealt with unassisted, and shall present these agreements to the
Council for its action. These arrangements shall be consistent with the State Emergency Plan.
B) The Director shall make studies and surveys of the human resources, industries,
resources and facilities of the city as deemed necessary to determine their adequacy for
emergency management and to plan for their most efficient use in time of an emergency or
disaster. The Director shall establish the economic stabilization systems and measures, service
staffs, boards and sub- boards required, in accordance with state and federal plans and directions
subject to the approval of the Mayor.
C) The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for the emergency
preparedness of the city and shall present the plan to the Council for its approval. When the
Council has approved the plan, it shall be the duty of all city agencies and all emergency
preparedness forces of the city to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as
approved. The plan may be modified in like manner from time to time. The Director shall
coordinate the emergency management activities of the city to the end that they shall be
consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plans of the federal government and the state
and correlated with emergency plans of the county and other political subdivisions within the
state.
D) In accordance with the state and city emergency plan, the Director shall institute
training programs, public information programs and conduct practice warning alerts and
emergency exercises as may be necessary to assure prompt and effective operation of the city
emergency plan when a disaster occurs.
E) The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment, supplies and facilities of
existing departments and agencies of the city to the maximum extent practicable. The officers
Page 18 of 27
and personnel of all city departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable,
cooperate with and extend services and facilities to the city' s emergency management
organization and to the Governor upon request. The head of each department or agency in
cooperation with the Director shall be responsible for the planning and programming of those
emergency activities as will involve the utilization of the facilities of the department or agency.
F) The Director shall, in cooperation with those city departments and agencies affected,
assist in the organizing, recruiting and training of emergency management personnel, which may
be required on a volunteer basis to carry out the emergency plans of the city and state. To the
extent that emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or agency for
emergencies, they shall be assigned to the departments or agencies and shall be under the
administration and control of the department or agency.
G) Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director shall coordinate the
activity of municipal emergency management organizations within the city and assist in
establishing and conducting
training programs as required to assure emergency operational capability in the several services
as provided by M.S. § 12. 25, as it may be amended from time to time.
H) The Director shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations issued by the Governor
with reference to emergency management.
I) The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency preparedness activities
when requested by the Mayor.
34.087 LOCAL EMERGENCIES.
A) A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his or her legal successor. It
shall not be continued for a period in excess of three days except by or with the consent of the
Council. Any order, or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency
shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.
B) A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary portions of the response and
recovery aspects of applicable local or interjurisdictional disaster plans, and may authorize aid
and assistance thereunder.
C) No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local emergency unless expressly
authorized by the agreement under which the agency functions. However, an interjurisdictional
disaster agency shall provide aid and services in accordance with the agreement under which it
functions.
34.088 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
A) Whenever necessary, to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for an emergency for
Page 19 of 27
which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the Governor or the Council, the Council
may by resolution promulgate regulations, consistent with applicable federal or state law or
regulation, respecting: the conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies; the
repair, maintenance and safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health, fire and
safety regulations, drills or practice periods required for preliminary training and all other
matters which are required to protect public safety, health and welfare in declared emergencies.
B) Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing; shall be dated; shall refer
to the particular emergency to which it pertains, if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of
the City Clerk. A copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business
hours. Notice of the existence of these regulations and their availability for inspection at the City
Clerk' s Office shall be conspicuously posted at the front of the City Hall or other headquarters of
the city or at other places in the affected area as the Council shall designate in the resolution. By
resolution, the Council may modify or rescind a regulation.
C) The Council may rescind any regulation by resolution at any time. If not sooner
rescinded, every regulation shall expire at the end of 30 days after its effective date or at the end
of the emergency to which it relates, whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule, or regulation
inconsistent with an emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be suspended during
the period of time and to the extent conflict exists.
D) During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provisions of M.S. § 12. 3 1, as it
may be amended from time to time and notwithstanding any statutory or Charter provision to the
contrary, empowered, through its Council, acting within or without the corporate limits of the
city, to enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat the disaster by protecting
the health and safety of persons and property and providing emergency assistance to the victims
of a disaster. The city may exercise these powers in the light of the exigencies of the disaster
without compliance with the time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law
pertaining to the performance of public work, entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of
supplies and materials, limitations upon tax levies, and the appropriation and expenditure of
public funds, including, but not limited to, publication of resolutions, publication of calls for
bids, provisions of personnel laws and rules, provisions relating to low bids, and requirement for
bids.
34.089 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION.
All functions and activities relating to emergency management are hereby declared to be
governmental functions. The provisions of this section shall not affect the right of any person to
receive benefits to which he would otherwise be entitled under this resolution or under the
worker' s compensation law, or under any pension law, nor the right of any person to receive any
benefits or compensation under any act of Congress.
Page 20 of 27
34.090 PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS.
The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form of political
activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for political purposes, nor shall it be
employed in a labor dispute.
ZONING BOARD OFAPPEALS AND ADJUSTMENTS
34. 100 BOARD REQUIRED.
Minnesota Statutes § 462.354, as it may be amended from time to time, requires any
municipality having in effect a zoning ordinance to provide, by ordinance, for a Board of
Appeals and Adjustments. The statute also states that the governing body may provide
alternatively that there be a separate Board of Appeals and Adjustments, or that the governing
body or the Planning Commission, or a committee of the Planning Commission serve as the
Board of Appeals and Adjustments, and it may provide an appropriate name for the Board. The
Board may be given other duties as the governing body may direct.
Prior Code, § 2- 7- 1)
34. 101 ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD.
The City Council is hereby established as the required Board of Appeals and Adjustments,
the Board to be hereinafter referred to as the Board of Appeals or the Board. The City Council,
acting as the Board of Appeals, shall be vested with the administrative authority as is hereinafter
provided or as provided by state law.
Prior Code, § 2- 7- 2)
34. 102 ORGANIZATION.
A) Rules. The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs
and in keeping with the provisions of the Zoning Code.
B) Meetings. Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at other times as the
Board may determine. The Chairperson, or in Chairperson' s absence, the acting Chairperson
may request the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public.
C) Minutes. The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote
of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating the fact, and shall
keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record
and be immediately filed in the office of the City Clerk.
Prior Code, § 2- 7- 3)
Page 21 of 27
34. 103 DUTIES.
The duties of the Board of Appeals shall be:
A) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator;
B) To hear requests for variances from the literal provision of the Zoning Code and to act
on the requests; and
C) To interpret the meaning of the Zoning Code in cases of ambiguity and to make a ruling
with respect to the application of the Zoning Code.
Prior Code, § 2- 7- 4)
BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS
34. 115 CREATION.
The Building Code Board of Appeals, hereinafter referred to as the Board, is created
pursuant to § 1300.023, Subpart 1 of the 2006 International Building Code.
Prior Code, § 2- 8- 1) ( Ord. 262, passed 2- 11- 1988)
34. 116 MEMBERSHIP.
A) The Board shall be composed of three regular members and three alternate members, all
of who shall be appointed by the City Council. The Building Official shall be an ex officio
member. Alternates shall fill the vacancy of a regular member:
1) When a regular member is absent;
2) When, in the determination of the City Council, there exists a conflict of interest
between a regular Board member and the issue to be decided; or
3) When, in the determination of the City Council, one or more alternates possess
expertise germane to a particular issue being discussed.
B) If the latter is the case, the City Council shall also designate which of the regular
member( s) is to be replaced. The regular member(s) may then take part in the discussion, but
may not vote when the subject issue is being decided.
Prior Code, § 2- 8- 2) ( Ord. 262, passed 2- 11- 1988)
Page 22 of 27
34. 117 OFFICERS.
The officers of the Board shall consist of a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson. The
Building Official shall act as secretary of the Board. Officers shall be elected by the Board from
among its membership at the annual meeting. Duties shall be as follows.
A) Chairperson. The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the Board. At each
meeting, the Chairperson shall make reports and perform other duties as are pertinent to the
office.
B) Vice- Chairperson. The Vice-Chairperson shall act in the absence of the Chairperson
and shall perform the duties of the Chairperson whenever the Chairperson has resigned or is
incapacitated and until a new Chairperson is elected.
C) Secretary. The secretary shall keep a true and complete record of the proceedings of the
Board and shall, at the discretion of the Board, prepare all notices, reports, written decisions,
recommendations and other writings as the Board may direct.
Prior Code, § 2- 8- 3) ( Ord. 262, passed 2- 11- 1988)
34. 118 PLACE OF MEETING.
All meetings of the Board shall be held at the City Hall, except that on two days written
notice to all Board members and to any person or persons whose appeal is to be heard at that
time, any regular or special meeting of the Board may be held at any other place within the city
as the notice may designate.
Prior Code, § 2- 8- 4) ( Ord. 262, passed 2- 11- 1988)
34. 119 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
All procedures of the Board shall be governed by the rules of procedure hereinafter set forth
and by the provisions of the Uniform Building Code and the State Building Code.
Prior Code, § 2- 8- 5) ( Ord. 262, passed 2- 11- 1988)
34. 120 MEETINGS.
Meetings of the Board shall be as follows.
A) Annual meetings of the Board shall be held each year on the first Monday in March,
except that the date of the annual meeting may be postponed to a date on or before the second
Monday in March by action of the Board at any regular or special meeting. Notices in writing
specifying the time and place shall be sent to all members. Order of business shall be as follows:
1) Roll call;
Page 23 of 27
2) Approval of minutes of the previous regular or special meeting;
3) Election of officers;
4) Report of the Building Official on matters of general concern to the Board;
5) Old business;
6) New business; and
7) Adjournment.
B) Regular meetings of the Board shall be held upon notice from the Secretary within ten
working days after an appeal is filed with the Board. If additional time is required, an extension
of not more than three working days may be granted with approval of the Board Chairperson.
Notice of the meeting shall be given by mail or telephone to all Board members and to all
persons who have filed appeals to be heard by the Board at least 48 hours in advance of the
meeting. In addition, written notice shall be posted at the City Hall at least 12 hours in advance
of the meeting. Order of business shall be as follows:
1) Roll call;
2) Approval of minutes of the previous meeting;
3) Report of the Building Official on matters of general concern to the Board;
4) Old business;
5) New business:
a) Hearings on appeals;
b) Other new business;
6) Adjournment.
C) Special meetings of the Board may be called by the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or
any two members of the Board by written notice filed with the secretary. All members of the
Board shall be notified of the time and place of the meeting according to the same procedure
required for a regular meeting. Order of business shall be the same as that of a regular meeting,
except that no hearings on appeals shall be held.
D) Any meeting of the Board may be adjourned to a specified date without additional
notice, except that members not in attendance shall be notified of the adjourned meeting.
Prior Code, § 2- 8- 6) ( Ord. 262, passed 2- 11- 1988)
Page 24 of 27
34. 121 QUORUM AND MANNER OF VOTING.
Three members of the Board shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may adjourn a
meeting until a quorum is present. All action taken by the Board shall be by a majority vote of
all members of the Board. All questions, which decide the outcome of an appeal, shall be
decided by roll call vote of members in attendance. All other questions before the Board shall be
decided by voice vote. Any member of the Board who refuses to vote on roll call shall be
considered ineligible to take part in further discussion on the issue. If, thereafter, the matter
cannot be decided by a majority vote of the Board, the member shall be replaced by an alternate
member (to be designated by the City Council) and a final vote shall be taken at an adjourned
meeting.
Prior Code, § 2- 8- 7) ( Ord. 262, passed 2- 11- 1988)
34. 122 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
Appeals shall be considered only as they relate to use of alternate building materials and/ or
alternate methods of construction or dissatisfaction with an interpretation of Building Code made
by the Building Official. The appeal procedure shall be as follows.
A) Each application shall be in writing and must be submitted first to the Building Official
for approval or denial. Each application shall include the following:
1) The name and address of the applicant and, if the applicant is acting as agent for
another, the name and address of the person, firm or corporation for whom the applicant is agent;
2) A description of the type of building or structure and the work to be performed,
along with a description of the alternate materials or method of construction proposed;
3) When applicable, a description of the type of building or structure and the specific
phase of work to be performed which gives rise to a request for an interpretation of Building
Code; and
4) If a test is required by the Building Official pursuant to §§ 106 and 107 of the
Building Code, a report from an approved agency which has tested the proposed alternate
material or methods of construction shall be obtained. The report shall include the findings,
conclusions and recommendations, if any, of the approved agency.
B) The decision of the Building Official shall be in writing and shall be served upon the
applicant by certified mail. Any applicant who is dissatisfied with the decision may thereupon
appeal to the Board as hereinafter provided.
C) Each appeal, upon being filed with the Board, shall be immediately examined by the
Board Chairperson to determine if it complies with the requirements of the ordinance. If an
appeal is determined to be insufficient, the Chairperson shall immediately notify the applicant of
Page 25 of 27
the insufficiency and the same shall not be scheduled for hearing until it is made complete and
sufficient by the applicant.
D) A hearing shall be scheduled by the Building Official with notification given according
to the provisions of§ 34. 120( B).
E) A hearing on the appeal shall be conducted in the following manner.
1) The appeal shall be read a loud by the secretary.
2) The applicant or applicant' s representative shall be heard.
3) The Building Official and any employees of the department desiring to speak on
the matter shall be heard.
4) Anyone else desiring to speak in support of the appeal shall be heard.
5) Anyone else desiring to speak against the appeal shall be heard.
F) At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board shall then act on the appeal or it shall take
the matter under advisement and defer action until a date, which shall be as soon thereafter as
practical.
G) The final Board decision on an appeal shall be in writing, shall contain findings of the
Board, shall be signed by the Chairperson and shall contain the roll call vote of the members of
the Board. A copy of the final decision shall be sent within 15 days of the decision to the
Building Official, to the State Building Inspector and to the applicant.
Prior Code, § 2- 8- 8) ( Ord. 262, passed 2- 11- 1988)
34. 123 CRITERIA.
No variance from the provisions of the Building Code shall be approved by the Board unless
it is determined by the Board that the proposed variance is equal or better than the mode of
construction or the materials required by the Building Code. If the Board acts to reverse or
modify the decision or interpretation of the Building Official, it shall do so only upon a
determination that:
A) The interpretation or decision of the Building Official violates a provision of the
Building Code or any other controlling law or ordinance; and
B) The interpretation or decision of the Building Official exceeds authority of the Building
Official.
Prior Code, § 2- 8- 9) ( Ord. 262, passed 2- 11- 1988)
Page 26 of 27
34. 124 COST RESPONSIBILITY.
The applicant shall be required to reimburse the city for any and all costs that accrue as the
result of the appeal procedure. This shall include, but is not limited to, staff salary, remuneration
to the Board members ( if any), mailing and postage and special research conducted in order to
test the validity of the appeal request.
Prior Code, § 2- 8- 10) ( Ord. 262, passed 2- 11- 1988)
Page 27 of 27
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
50. 01 Definitions
50. 02 Prohibited accumulation; disposal required
50. 03 Refuse storage regulations
50. 04 Refuse collectors
50. 05 Collection vehicles
50. 06 Prohibited acts and conditions
50. 01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CONSTRUCTION DEMOLITION DEBRIS. Waste building materials, packaging and
rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition of buildings.
GARBAGE. Organic waste resulting from the preparation of food, and decayed and spoiled
food from any source.
RECYCLABLES. Includes paper, plastic, tin cans, aluminum, motor oil, glass, other metal
goods, batteries and other items designated, each separately or otherwise prepared so as to be
acceptable to the recycling center where they are to be deposited.
REFUSE. Includes garbage, rubbish and yard waste.
RUBBISH. Inorganic solid waste such as tin cans, glass, sweepings and the like.
YARD WASTE. Includes grass clippings, leaves and pruning form shrubs.
Prior Code, § 4- 6- 1) ( Ord. 487, passed 9- 21- 1998)
50. 02 PROHIBITED ACCUMULATION; DISPOSAL REQUIRED.
Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse and/ or recyclables on any premises is a nuisance
and shall be prohibited. Effective July 1, 1992, the owner or occupant of every household and
business shall be required to contract with a solid waste collection service, duly licensed to
perform the service within the corporate boundaries of the city to dispose of refuse and/or
recyclables that may accumulate upon property owned or occupied by him or her. If the owner
or occupant of any household or business ensure that an environmentally sound alternative is
being used, the household or business shall be exempt from this requirement.
Prior Code, § 4- 6- 2) ( Ord. 336, passed 12- 2- 1991; Ord. 701, passed 8- 6- 2012) Penalty, see §
Page 1 of 5
10. 99
50. 03 REFUSE STORAGE REGULATIONS.
A) Burying refuse. No person shall bury any refuse in the city except on an approved
landfill.
B) Composting.
1) Compost materials. Grass clippings, leaves and easily biodegradable nonpoisonous
garbage may be composted on the premises where the refuse has been accumulated, but only in a
rodent-proof structure and in an otherwise sanitary manner.
2) Location. Compost sites shall be placed in the rear yard not closer than five feet
from rear property line. No persons shall place a compost site in any public right-of-way, front
yard or side yard.
C) Refuse containers.
1) Container required. Every householder, occupant or owner of any residence and
any restaurant, industrial establishment or commercial establishment shall provide on the
premises one or more containers to receive and contain all refuse and/ or recyclables which may
accumulate between collections.
2) Use provisions.
a) All normal accumulations of refuse and/or recyclables shall be deposited in the
closed containers.
b) Leaves, trimmings from shrubs, grass clippings, shavings, excelsior and other
rubbish of similar volume, type and weight may be stored in closed containers not meeting the
requirements of division ( C)( 3) below.
c) Refuse should be drained of liquid and household garbage shall be wrapped
before being deposited in a container. Highly flammable or explosive material shall not be
placed in household garbage containers.
3) Container specifications. It shall be the duty of every person whose refuse is collected
by a licensed refuse collection service to utilize a closed container or containers for refuse and/ or
recyclables sufficient in size and number to accommodate and securely keep all refuse and/ or recyclables
that may accumulate between collections. Containers shall be constructed of a solid and durable material
and be maintained in a good and sanitary condition.
4) Storage and placement ofcontainers. Refuse and/ or recyclables containers shall be so
located as to be out of the public view except on collection day. The container may be placed at the
front property line for collection, but shall not be so placed before 4: 00 p.m. the night before
Page 2 of 5
collection and shall be removed by 8: 00 p.m. the day of the collection.
D) Dumpsters.
1) Dumpsters or other receptacles intended for the collection of construction or
demolition debris shall be kept entirely on private property.
2) If it can be shown that a dumpster cannot reasonably or feasibly be located on
private property, the Superintendent shall be authorized to grant permission for placement of the
dumpster on the street. The property owner and/ or contractor shall comply with all conditions
that the Superintendent may attach thereof.
Prior Code, § 4- 6- 3) ( Ord. 487, passed 9- 21- 1998; Ord. 701, passed 8- 6- 2012; Ord. 759, passed
10- 05- 2015) Penalty, see § 10. 99
50. 04 REFUSE COLLECTORS.
A) License required.
1) It is unlawful for any person to haul for hire any rubbish, refuse and/or recyclables,
construction or demolition debris within the city without first having obtained a license.
2) No license shall be transferable between persons or entities. Any change in
individual or corporate ownership shall constitute a transfer and shall automatically terminate the
license.
B) Application for license. Any person desiring a license shall make application to the
City Clerk on the form prescribed by the city. The application shall include the following:
1) The name and address of the applicant;
2) A description of the kind of service proposed to be rendered and listing of each
piece of equipment proposed to be used;
3) The proposed charges to be made of those who use the service;
4) The place to which the refuse and/ or recyclables is hauled;
5) Evidence of auto liability insurance coverage from an insurance company
authorized to do business within the state;
6) Workers' compensation insurance certificate as required by Minnesota Statutes;
and
7) Other information as the City Clerk shall deem advisable.
Page 3 of 5
C) Term of license, fee. Licenses shall be issued for a period of one year and the fee shall
be set by ordinance.
D) Hauler licensee requirements.
1) Vehicles shall not be parked on any street longer than reasonably necessary to
collect refuse, and/ or recyclables, construction or demolition debris.
2) It shall be the responsibility of the licensee that the name and telephone number of
the owner of any and all containers which are located on and hauled off a construction or
demolition site by the licensee be permanently affixed to each container.
3) No hauler shall operate in a residential district except in full compliance with hours
of operation set forth by § 95. 05( B)( 10) of the city code.
Prior Code, § 4- 6- 4) ( Ord. 487, passed 9- 21- 1998; Ord. 701, passed 8- 6- 2012) Penalty, see §
10. 99
50. 05 COLLECTION VEHICLES.
A) Every refuse and/ or recyclables collection vehicle operating within the city shall be
lettered on the outside so as to identify the owner thereof.
B) Every vehicle used for hauling refuse shall be covered, leakproof, durable and of easily
cleanable construction.
C) Every vehicle used for hauling refuse shall be sufficiently air- tight and so used as to
prevent unreasonable quantities of dust, paper or other collected materials to escape.
D) Every vehicle shall be kept clean to prevent nuisances, pollution or insect breeding and
shall be maintained in good repair.
Prior Code, § 4- 6- 5) ( Ord. 701, passed 8- 6- 2012) Penalty, see § 10. 99
50.06 PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS.
A) Collections by unlicensed collector. No person shall permit refuse and/ or recyclables to
be picked up from that person' s premises by an unlicensed collector.
B) Deposits in public or private property.
1) No person shall place any refuse and/ or recyclables in any street, alley or public
place or upon any private property except in proper containers for collection.
2) No person shall throw or deposit refuse and/ or recyclables in any stream or other
body of water.
Page 4 of 5
C) Scattering ofrefuse. No person shall deposit anywhere within the city any refuse and/ or
recyclables in a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any public or
private premises within the city.
Prior Code, § 4- 6- 6) ( Ord. 701, passed 8- 6- 2012) Penalty, see § 10. 99
Page 5 of 5
CHAPTER 51: MUNICIPAL WATER AND SEWER; GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
51. 01 Water and Sewer Division
51. 02 Use of water or sewer system restricted
51. 03 Application for service
51. 04 Permit to connect
51. 05 Payment of rates and charges; procedure for nonpayment
51. 06 Enforcement
51. 01 WATER AND SEWER DIVISION.
There is hereby established a Water and Sewer Division which shall be under the
supervision of the Utility Services Superintendent. The Division shall be responsible for the
management, maintenance, care and operation of the water works and sanitary sewerage system
of the city.
Prior Code, § 7- 3- 1)( Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015)
51. 02 USE OF WATER OR SEWER SYSTEM RESTRICTED.
No person shall use or repair any water or sewer service installation connected to the city
water or sewer system except pursuant to application and permit as provided in this chapter. No
person shall make use or repair any installation contrary to the regulatory provisions of this
chapter.
Prior Code, § 7- 3- 2) Penalty, see § 10. 99
51. 03 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
Application for a service installation shall be made by the owner of the property to be
served, or by his or her agent. Application for a water or sewer service installation and for water
service shall be made to Public Works on forms prescribed and furnished by the city. By his or
her signature, the applicant shall agree to conform to this chapter and to rules and regulations
that may be established by the city as conditions for the use of water. When a water service
connection has been installed, application for water service may be made either by the owner or
his or her agent or by the tenant or occupant of the premises.
Prior Code, § 7- 3- 3) Penalty, see § 10. 99
51. 04 PERMIT TO CONNECT.
A) Permit required. No connection shall be made to the city water or sanitary sewer
Page 1 of 4
system without a permit received from Public Works.
B) Permitfee. The fee and/ or deposit for the permit for both water main connections and
the permit for sewer connections shall be established, and from time to time amended by
ordinance. The applicant shall, at the time of making application, pay to the city the amount set
forth thereof. These fees shall be in addition to any fees required under this section.
C) Water meter. No meter shall be installed until a permit has first been issued, and the fee
paid thereof. The fee schedule shall be set by ordinance and shall include a separate price for
each sized meter that is larger than the standard residential five-eighths inch meter.
D) Service line. When a connection requires installation of a service line from the main to
the property line, the applicant shall be responsible for all costs of making the necessary
connections, taps and installation of pipe and appurtenances to provide service to the property
and the necessary street repairs before a permit will be issued.
E) Trunk assessments.
1) No permit shall be issued to connect with the municipal water and/ or sewer system
unless the lot or parcel has been assessed for the cost of trunk water, trunk sewer and source
supply (water storage).
2) If the assessment has never been levied, the applicant shall pay to the city a sum
equal to the current construction cost of the trunk facilities.
3) This amount shall be set by ordinance, based upon the current Engineering News
Record (ENR) construction cost index.
F) Lateral assessments.
1) The cost of the construction of lateral facilities shall have been paid by:
a) The developer or builder platting the lot or tract; or
b) By an assessment against the subject parcel.
2) If neither of the foregoing is true, and the applicant is making a connection directly
into a water and/ or sewer main, the applicant shall pay an additional fee based on the total
assessable cost of the facility.
3) The amount shall be determined by the Utility Services Superintendent, and
approved by the City Council.
Prior Code, § 7- 3- 4)( Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015) Penalty, see § 10. 99
Page 2 of 4
51. 05 PAYMENT OF RATES AND CHARGES; PROCEDURE FOR NONPAYMENT.
A) Liabilityfor charges. All accounts shall be carried in the name of the owner. The
owner shall be liable for water supplied to his or her property, whether he or she is occupying the
property or not, and any charges unpaid shall be a lien upon the property.
B) Utility rates. The rate or charges for municipal water and sewer service shall be set
forth by ordinance. The Council is further authorized to establish a penalty for delinquent
payments thereof
C) Bills for service. Water and sewer service charges shall be billed together. Bills shall
be mailed to utility customers at intervals specified by the City Council, and shall specify the
amount of water consumed and the sewer and water charges that have accrued pursuant to rates
set in accordance with this chapter. Bills for service are charged against the property, and the
property owner remains responsible, at all times, for the payment of the charges in a timely
manner.
1) Notification requirement. It is the responsibility of the property owner to provide
the Utility Services Division with all information necessary for proper billing of the account.
The property owner shall specifically provide the Division with current information on the use
and occupancy of the property(ies), including tenant names and billing address( es).
2) Duplicate and alternative bills. At the written request of the property owner, the
city shall bill the account to the name and address specified by the property owner. When utility
charges are billed to a tenant or another person who is not the owner, a duplicate billing
statement shall be sent to the owner of the property. The alternative and duplicate formats are
provided only as an accommodation to the property owner, and shall not relieve the property
owner of primary liability for all fees and charges that accrue for water and sewer service at the
property.
D) Delinquent accounts. All charges for water and sewer shall be due on the date specified
by the city in its bill for the respective account and shall be delinquent 20 days thereafter. When
satisfactory arrangements for payment have not been made, the city may secure payment,
together with penalty charges that have accrued, by either of the following procedures.
1) Water shut-off.
a) Water service to the delinquent customer shall be shut off at the stop box.
The occupant of the premises shall first have been given written notice, delivered by certified
mail, stating that if payment is not made before a day stated in the notice, but not less than
five days after the date on which the notice was given, the water to the premises will be shut
off The notice shall also state that the occupant may, before the date, demand a hearing on
the matter, in which case the supply will not be cut off until after a hearing is held. If the
customer requests a hearing before the date specified, a hearing shall be held on the matter by
the City Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting. If as a result of the hearing, the
Council finds that the amount claimed to be owed is actually due and unpaid, and that there is
no legal reason why the water supply to the delinquent customer may not be shut off in
Page 3 of 4
accordance with this section, the city may immediately shut off the supply. Service shall not
be restored except upon the payment of all delinquent bills, and upon payment of a
reconnection fee, the amount of which shall be set by ordinance.
b) The city, by written request from the property owner and in accordance with
the procedure described in this division, shall shut off the water to rental property if the account
is delinquent.
2) Assessment. Delinquent accounts shall be certified to the City Clerk who shall
prepare an assessment roll each year providing for assessment of the delinquent amounts, along
with interest at a rate determined by the Finance Director, against the respective properties
served. The owner of the property shall be given written notice stating the amount of the past
due charge and the date by which payment shall be made to avoid certification. The notice shall
notify the property owner of the right to appeal the assessment, the hearing time, date, and place,
possible prepayment provisions, any deferment options, and the interest rate on the assessment.
The assessment roll shall be delivered to the Council for adoption, and for certification to the
County Auditor for collection, in accordance with M.S. § 429, as it may be amended from time
to time, along with property taxes.
Prior Code, § 7- 3- 5) ( Ord. 498, passed 4- 19- 1999; Ord. 689, passed 10- 17- 2011,) Penalty, see §
10. 99
51. 06 ENFORCEMENT.
A) Enforcement. The Utility Services Superintendent, the City Engineer, the Building
Official and/ or the other person appointed by the City Council shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter. All work hereafter installed shall be inspected as provided herein and violations of this
chapter shall be corrected. Written notice, stating the corrections to be made, shall be served
upon the installer, or owner of the property, and if the corrections are not duly made, the city
may cause to have removed the work and charge the cost thereof to the person installing the
same, or to the owner of the affected property.
B) Penalty. Any person who covers a plumbing installation before it is inspected or
otherwise refuses to comply with the correction order or in any other way is found in violation of
this chapter shall be upon conviction thereof found guilty of a misdemeanor. Each act of
violation and each day a violation occurs or continues to occur constitute a separate offense.
Prior Code, § 7- 3- 6)( Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015) Penalty, see § 10. 99
Page 4 of 4
CHAPTER52: WATERUSEANDSERVICE
Section
52.01 Waterserviceconnection
52.02 Privatewells
52.03 Permittoturnonwaterandtapmains
52.04 Constructionregulations
52.05 Meters
52.06 Crossconnections
52.07 Plumbingdevices
52.08 Emergencyconservationmeasures
52.09 Unauthorizeduse
52.10 Discontinuanceofservice
52.11 Elevatedstoragetankuse
52.01 WATERSERVICECONNECTION.
A) Connectionrequired, notice. Whenpropertyabutsorhasaccesstoanypublicstreetor
alleyandadwellingonthepropertyiswithin200feetoftheproposedconnectionalongwhich
watermainshavebeenconstructed, theownerofanydwellingorcommercialestablishmenton
thepropertyshallconnecttothewatermainsinaccordancewiththeprovisionsofthischapter,
within90daysafterthedateofmailingordeliveringofficialnoticetodoso. Thenoticeshallbe
giventotheownerinwritingbytheCityClerkonorderoftheCityCouncil.
B) Failuretoconnect. Wheneveranyowneroroccupantfailstocomplywiththewritten
notice, theCouncilshall, byresolution, directthatthewaterconnectionbemadeandthatthecost
oftheinstallationbepaidinthefirstinstanceoutoftheGeneralFundandthenassessedagainst
thepropertybenefitted.
C) Assessmentofcost. Aftertheinstallationandconnectionhavebeencompletedpursuant
toCouncilresolution, theCityClerkshallservewrittennoticeoftheassessmentontheowneror
hisorherrepresentative, directinghimorhertopaytheassessmenttotheCityClerkwithinten
daysaftertheserviceofthenotice. Iftheassessmentisnotpaidwithintendays, theCityClerk
shallcertifytheamounttotheCountyAuditorforcollection, inaccordancewithM.S. §4 29,a s
itmaybeamendedfromtimetotime, inthesamemannerasotherspecialassessments. The
Councilmay, byresolution, spreadtheassessmentoveraperiodnottoexceedthree-yearperiod.
D) Certificaterequired. PursuanttotheauthorityconferredbyM.S. §4 44.075, asitmay
beamendedfromtimetotime, inadditiontoallotherchargesfortappingintoorconnecting
withthemunicipalwatersystem, includinginspectionofconnection, streetopeningfeesand
permitfeesheretoforeestablishedbycitycodeprovisionsorresolution, noconnectionpermit
shallbeissuednorshallanytaporotherconnectionbeinstalledormadewithorintoany
municipalwatersystemofthecity, eitherdirectlyorindirectly, fromanylotortractofland
Page1of10
unlesstheCityClerkshallhavecertifiedasfollows:
1) Thelotortractoflandtobeservedhasbeenassessedforthecostofconstruction
ofthemainwithwhichtheconnectionismade, butthisshallnotincludelotsortractsassessed
underdivision (H) hereof;
2) Ifnoassessmenthasbeenleviedfortheconstructioncostthatproceedingsforthe
levyingoftheassessmenthavebeenorwillbecommencedinduecourse, butthisshallnot
includelotsortractstobeassessedunderdivision (H) hereof; or
3) Thecostofconstructionforthemainhasbeenpaidbythedeveloperorbuilder
plattingthelotortractofland, butthisshallnotincludelotsortractsservedbythemainwhich
werenotapartofthatplatortractdeveloped.
E) Additionalconnectioncharges.
1) IfnoneoftheaboveconditionscanbecertifiedbytheCityClerk, nopermittotap
ormakeconnectiontoanywatermainshallbeissuedunlesstheapplicantshallpayanadditional
connectionfee. Theadditionalconnectionfeeshallbechargedforwatermainmadeavailable
byagreementwithothermunicipalities, counties, orprivatecorporationsorindividuals, aswell
asthoseownedandoperatedbythecityitself. Theadditionalconnectionfeeshallbeequalto
theaverageassessmentleviedagainstlikekindpropertyforasimilarpublicimprovement
constructedandinstalledbythecityprovided, however, foraconnectiontoaresidential
property, theconnectionfeeshallbeequaltotheaverageassessmentleviedagainstresidential
parcelsofone-halfacreorless.
2) Theaverageassessmentshallbedeterminedbytakingthetotalassessmentfora
similarpublicimprovementanddividingthattotalbythetotalnumberofpropertiesassessed,
thedeterminationhavingregardforconstructioncostscurrentonthedateofthedetermination.
Whenevermorethanonetaporotherconnectionisrequestedforservicetoanylotortractor
wheneveranytaporconnectionisrequestedforalotortractwhichhaspreviouslybeenpartofa
lotortractforwhichaconnectionchargehasalreadybeenimposedpursuanttothissection, an
additionalchargeshallbeimposedforeachtaporconnectionrequested.
F) Separatefund. Anysumcollectedandreceivedbythecityunderdivision (E) ofthis
sectionshallbeplacedinaseparatefundandshallbeusedfirsttopaythenormal, reasonable
andcurrentcostsofoperatingandmaintainingthemunicipalwatersystem. Netrevenuesfrom
timetotimereceivedinexcessofthecostsmaybeusedasotherwiseprovidedbylaw.
G) Noticeandhearing.
1) BeforetheCityAdministratororhisorherdesignatemakesafinaldetermination
oftheadditionalconnectionfeeunderdivision (E) ofthissection, heorsheshallcauseawritten
noticetobesenttothepropertyowneraffectedstatingtheamountoftheproposedconnection
feeandthebasisofitscalculation. Thenoticeshallalsostatethattheownermay, withinten
daysofreceiptofthenotice, demandahearingonthematter.
Page2of10
2) Iftheownerrequestsahearingwithinthattime, ahearingshallheldonthematter
bytheCouncilwithinareasonabletimeafterthedateonwhichtherequestismade. Thenotice
shallfurtherstatethattheownermayrequestthatthechargesbeleviedasanassessmentagainst
thelotortracttobeservedandanapplicationfortherequestshallbeprovidedwiththenotice.
Theapplicationshallbemadewithintendaysofreceiptofthenoticereferredtoaboveifno
hearingisrequestedor, ifahearingisrequested, withintendaysfollowingthehearing. Ifasa
resultofthehearing, theCouncilfindsthattheproposedconnectionfeecomplieswiththe
requirementsofdivision (E)ofthissection, itshallsodetermine. Ifitdeterminesthatthe
proposedfeeisinexcessofanamountthatwouldhavebeenassessed, hadthepropertybeen
assessed, itshallmakeadeterminationoftheproperamountofthefeewiththelimitsspecified
indivision (E). Noconnectionshallbemadewithoutpaymentoftheconnectionfeeunlessthe
feeistobeassessedpursuanttodivision (H).
H) Assessments. Uponapplicationbytheownerwaivinghisorherrighttonotice, hearing
andappeal, theCouncilmaycausetheconnectionfeetobeleviedasanassessmentagainstthe
lotortracttobeservedundertheprocedureauthorizedbylawwithreferencetoother
assessmentsforbenefitsoflocalimprovements.
I) Liabilityforchargeandcertificationtocountyauditor. Alladditionalconnectionfees
imposedpursuanttothissection, includingthoseassessedpursuanttodivision (H), shallbea
chargedagainsttheownerofthelotortractoflandtobeserved. TheCityClerkshallcertifyall
unpaidchargestotheCountyAuditorwithtaxesagainstthelotortracttobeservedfor
collectionasothertaxesarecollected.
PriorCode, § 7-3A-1) ( Ord. 95, passed7-13-1978; Ord. 97, passed7-13-1978; Ord. 599,
passed11-7-2005) Penalty, see § 10.99
52.02 PRIVATEWELLS.
A) Anexistingprivatewellthatwasinstalledorreplacedpriortotheconstructionofawater
mainasdescribedin §5 2.01(A)o fthischaptermaybeallowedtocontinueinoperationwithout
thepropertyconnectingtomunicipalwaterifthepropertyownerobtainsawaiverfromthecity.
B) Waiver. Awaivertoallowaprivatewelltocontinueinoperationisconditionedupon
thefollowing:
1) Receiptbythecityofawrittenrequestofthepropertyownerforawaiver.
2) Receiptbythecityof:
a) Awrittenverificationbyacertifiedwellcontractorthatthewellcomplies
withstateandlocalcoderequirementsincludingverificationthatthewellmeetsallapplicable
requirementsforsetbackfromthesepticsystem;
b) Anagreementinrecordableformbyandbetweenthepropertyownerand
Page3of10
thecitywherebythepropertyowneragreestoconnectthepropertytomunicipalwaterandseal
theprivatewellinaccordancewiththerequirementsofMinnesotaRule4725.3850uponthe
earlierofthefollowingevents:
1. Theprivatewellneedstobeabandonedandreplacedwithanewwell
foranyreason, includingthatthecurrentwelldoesnot providepotablewatertotheproperty;
2. Testingresultsidentifyafailureatanytimetocomplywiththe
requirementsofdivision (B)(5) below; or
3. Thefailureoftheprivatewellatanytimetocomplywithstateand
localcoderequirementsincludingbutnotlimitedtotheprovisionsofMinnesotaRulesChapter
4725.
3) Awrittenauthorizationontheformprovidedbythecityexecutedbythe
propertyownerwhichstates:
a) Thatthecityandanyofitsofficers, agentsorassignsmay, butisnot
requiredto, enterontothepropertyandconnectthepropertytomunicipalwaterandsealthe
privatewellifthepropertyownerisrequiredtodosopursuanttodivision (B)(2)(b) ofthis
sectionandfailstodosowithinthirty (30) daysofnoticetodosobythecity;
b) That, ifthecityconnectsthepropertytomunicipalwaterandsealsthe
privatewell, thepropertyownerconsentstothelevyofanassessmentforthecostthereofand
anywaterconnectionfees, meterfees, andanyothercity, countyorstatefeesthatmaybe
applicable, whichcostshallbespecificintheauthorization. Theassessmentwillbeleviedovera
periodnottoexceedfiveyearsataninterestratethatis2% abovetheinterestratepaidbythe
cityonitsmostrecentgeneralobligationbondsale; and
c) Thatthepropertyownerwaivesnoticeofanyassessmenthearingatwhich
theassessmentistobeconsideredbytheCityCouncilandthereafterapprovedandlevied.
4) Asignedwaiverofassessmentappealinrecordableformfromtheowner; and
5) Receiptbythecityoftestingresultsperformedbyanindependentlaboratory
ofthewellfornitrate, totalcoliformbacteria, volatileorganicchemicals (VOC’s), fluorideand
thattheamountsoftheaforementionedcontaminantsintheprivatewell, ifany, arelessthanthe
maximumcontaminatelevelsassetforthinthe40C.F.R. Part141, commonlyknownasthe
NationalPrimaryDrinkingWaterRegulations, whichisherebyincorporatedbyreferenceinits
entirety.
C) Ifthepropertycontainsaprivatesepticsystemthatqualifiesfortheexception
under § 53.02, thenthatpropertydoesnothavetoconnectthepropertytomunicipalwateruntil
thepropertyisrequiredtoconnecttocitysewerpursuantto §5 3.02,u nlesstheprivatewellisin
violationofsubsections1, 2, or3ofdivision (B)(2)(b) ofthissection. Thewaterconnectionand
meterinstallationshallbemadewithin30daysofthesewerconnection.
Page4of10
D) Thepropertyownershallpaypermitfeesapplicableattimeofhookup. Ifthereisa
changeofownership, itshallbetheresponsibilityofthesellertonotifythebuyerofconnection
requirements.
PriorCode, § 7-3A-2) ( Ord. 439, passed10-21-1996; Ord. 466, passed11-3-1997; Ord. 596,
passed9-26-2005; Ord. 793, passed4-2-2018) Penalty, see § 10.99
52.03 PERMITTOTURNONWATERANDTAPMAINS.
Noperson, exceptanauthorizedcityemployee, shallturnonanywatersupplyatthestop
box, orgatevalve, ortapanydistributingmainorpipeofthewatersupplysystemorinseta
corporationstoporotherappurtenancethereinwithoutacitypermit.
PriorCode, § 7-3A-3) Penalty, see § 10.99
52.04 CONSTRUCTIONREGULATIONS.
A) Licensedinstaller. Connectionstothemunicipalwatersystemshallbethe
responsibilityofaplumberwhoislicensedbythestateofMinnesota.
B) Servicepipes.
1) Everyservicepipeshallbelaidwithsufficientexcesstoallownotlessthanone
footofextralengthandinamannerastopreventrupturebysettlement.
2) Theservicepipeshallbeplacednotlessthansevenfeetbelowthesurfaceandbe
soarrangedastopreventrupturebyfreezing.
3) TypeKcoppertubingshallbeusedforallservicesoftwoinchesorless. Jointson
coppertubingshallbeasfewaspossibleandnotmorethanonejointshallbeusedforaservice
upto70feetinlength. Eachjointshallbeleftuncovereduntilinspectedbythecity. Water
servicetubingmaybesubstitutedifapprovedpriortoinstallationbytheUtilityServices
Superintendent.
4) Everyserviceovertwoinchesshallbeductileironpipe.
5) Connectionswiththemainsfordomesticsupplyshallbeatleastoneinch, unless
otherwiseapprovedbythecity.
C) Curbstopsandboxes. Curbstopsshallbeinstalledasnearaspossibletotheproperty
lineataminimumdepthofsevenfeetandamaximumdepthofeightandone-halffeetbelowthe
finishgrade. Curbstopboxesshallbefastenedtothecurbstopandshallextendtothe
establishedgrade. Theyshallbeleftinanaccurateverticalpositionwhenbackfillingis
completed. Nocurbstoporcurbboxshallbeallowedwithinthedrivewayareaoftheproperty.
Anyexceptionrelatingtotheforegoingrequirementsforplacementofacurbboxshallbe
allowedonlybyspecialreviewandapprovalbythePublicWorksDepartment.
Page5of10
D) Inspections. Theapplicantforthebuildingwaterpermitshallnotifythecitywhenthe
waterserviceisreadyforinspection. Nobackfillshallbeplaceduntiltheworkhasbeen
inspectedandapproved.
E) Liabilityofowner. Theownershallbearthecostsandexpensesincidentaltothe
installationandconnectionofthewaterservice. Heorsheshallindemnifythecityforanyloss
ordamagedirectlyorindirectlycausedbyitsinstallation. Totheextentheorsheseems
necessary, theCityEngineerand/ortheUtilityServicesSuperintendentshallestablishrulesand
regulationsfortheproperimplementationoftheserequirementswhich, whenapprovedbythe
Councilbyresolution, shallgoverntheinstallationofwaterservicesandconnections.
F) Maintenanceandrepair. Theconsumerorownershallberesponsibleformaintaining
theservicepipefromtheconnectionpointatthecurbstopintothebuildingserved. Ifheorshe
failstorepairanyleakintheservicepipewithin24hoursafternoticebythecity, thecitymay
turnthewateroff. Thewatershallnotthenbeturnedonagainuntilaturn-onfeehasbeenpaid
tothecity. Whenthewasteofwaterisgreatordamageislikelytoresultfromtheleak, thecity
shallturnthewateroffimmediatelyuponthegivingofnoticeifrepairisnotcommenced
immediately.
G) Waterservicetomorethanonepremise. Nomorethanonehouseorbuildingshallbe
suppliedfromoneserviceconnectionexceptbyspecialpermissionofthecity. Whenevertwoor
morepartiesaresuppliedfromonepipeconnectingwithaservicemain, eachbuildingorpartof
buildingseparatelysuppliedshallhaveaseparatestopboxandaseparatemeter.
H) Oldwaterlines. Whennewbuildingsareerectedonasitewhereanoldorretiredwater
serviceexists, anditisdesiredtoincreaseorchangetheoldwaterservice, nonewconnections
withthemainsshallbemadeuntiltheoldservicehasbeenremovedandthemainplugged. If
anycontractor, worker oremployeeuponthebuildingsshallcauseorallowanyservicepipeto
behammeredtogetherattheendstostoptheflowofwater, ortosaveexpenseinremovingthe
pipefromthemain, theownerofthebuilding, theworkerandcontractorshall, uponconviction
thereof, besubjecttopenaltiessetforthinthiscodeandshallremovetheservicepipefromthe
main. Ifheorsheshouldfailtodosoon24-hournotice, heorsheshallbeobligatedtopaythe
citythecostincurredbyitfortheremoval.
PriorCode, § 7-3A-4) ( Ord. 465, passed11-3-1997; Ord. 759, passed10-05-2015; Ord. 793,
passed4-2-2018) Penalty, see § 10.99
52.05 METERS.
A) Metersrequired. Exceptfortheextinguishmentsoffires, nopersonotherthanan
authorizedcityemployeeshallusewaterfromthecitywatersupplyorpermitwatertobedrawn
therefromunlessthewaterpassesthroughametersuppliedandownedbythecity.
Page6of10
B) Installationofmeters.
1) Installationofthewatermeter, hornandwatermeterwire, raisingthecurbboxto
finishedgrade, turningonthewaterandflushingofthelinesshallbetheresponsibilityofthe
plumberdulylicensedbythestateofMinnesota. Themetersettingshallbeprovidedasfollows.
a) Metersettings. Metersettingsshallbelocatedintheutility, laundryorfurnace
roomandineverycaseshallbelocatednomorethaneightfeetfromthenearestfloordrain.
b) Accessibility. Thewatermetersshallhavefullaccessibility, withaclearspace
oftwofeetinalldirectionsandnolessthan12inchesfromthewall.
c) Settinginstallation. Thesettingshallbeinstalledtoprovidethatthemeteris
between18inchesand36inchesfromthefinishedfloor.
d) Ballvalve. Eachmetersettingshallbeprovidedwithaballvalveonthestreet
sideandthehousesideofthemeter.
e) Locatedinheatedspace. Allmetersshallbeinheatedspaceandshallbe
protectedfromdamageresultingfromfreezing. Thecityshallassumenoliabilityforproperty
damageresultingfromleaks, whichoccurastheresultoffreezingandbreakageofthemeteror
thebuildingplumbing.
f) Meterhorns. Metersettingdevices (meterhorns) shallbeusedforinstallation
ofthree-fourthsinchorsmallermetersandshallbepurchasedfromthecityorbeofadesign,
typeandbrandasapprovedbythePublicWorksDepartment. Themetersettingdeviceinits
entiretyshallbecomepartofthebuildingplumbingandistheresponsibilityoftheproperty
ownertorepairorreplace.
g) Verticalpipingrequirement. Allverticalpipingextendingfromthewater
meteruptothehorizontalrunshallbenosmallerthanoneinch.
h) Watermeterwiring. Thewatermetershallbewiredtotheoutsideofthe
residenceintheareaoftheotherutilitymeters, andshallbelocatedthreetofourfeetabove
finishedgroundlevelonthefinishedexteriorwall. Typicallythewireshouldbewithin12feet
ofthefrontlineofthebuilding. Allwirestotheoutsideoftheresidencefromthewatermeter
insideshallbesecuredbyuseofwiretiesorclips. Thereshallbetwofeetofextrawireoutside
oftheresidence. Thiswireshallbecoiledandmarked (aswatermeterwire). Innocaseshall
thewirebeallowedonthefrontorrearofthebuildingwithoutpriorpermissionfromthecity.
Thewiremustbeofthetree-conductortypeasspecifiedbythecity, andallthreewiresmustbe
hookedupatthemetertotheappropriateterminals.
2) Thecityshallbenotifiedwhenthemetersettingiscomplete, atwhichtimethecity
willinspectandapprovetheinstallation, sealthewatermeterandinstalltheinterfaceunitand
touchpad.
Page7of10
C) Maintenanceandrepair. Watermetersshallbethepropertyofthecityandmaybe
removedorreplacedastosizeandtypewhendeemednecessary. Thecityshallmaintainand
repairatitsexpenseanymeterthathasbecomeunserviceablethroughordinarywearandtearand
shallreplaceitifnecessary. Metersettingdevicesandrelatedappurtenancesarethepropertyof
theownerandwillnotberepairedbythecity. Whenrepairorreplacementofthewatermeteris
madenecessarybyactorneglectoftheowneroroccupantofthepremisesitserves, orwhere
damageresultsfromfreezing, anycityexpensecausedtherebyshallbechargedagainstand
collectedfromthewaterconsumer. Waterservicemaybediscontinueduntilthecauseis
correctedandtheamountchargedispaid.
D) Meterreading, inspection, repairs. Authorizedmeterreadersshallinspectwatermeters
andrelatedappurtenancespursuantto §1 0.20.
E) Testingmeters, depositrequired. Whenaconsumerbelievesthatthebillforanypast
serviceperiodisexcessive, thecitymayhavethemeterrereadonrequest. Iftheconsumer
remainsdissatisfied, heorshemay, onwrittenrequestfromthepropertyownerandthedeposit
thereofofafee, theamountofwhichshallbesetbyordinance, havethemetertested. Ifthetest
showsanerrorexceeding5% ofthewaterconsumed, thedepositshallberefunded, anaccurate
metershallbeinstalled, andthebillshallbeadjustedaccordingly. Theadjustmentshallnot
extendbackmorethanoneserviceperiodfromthedateofthewrittenrequest. Thedepositshall
notberefundedifthemeterisfoundtobeingoodworkingorder.
F) Irrigationorprocesswatermeters, separatewatermetersrequired. Establishments
desiringcreditforwaterconsumedforirrigation, manufacturingorotherpurposeswherethe
waterisnotreturnedtothesewer, mustseparatelymeterthewaterfortheuses. Separatemeters
mustbepurchasedfromthecity, andapermitmustbeissuedforitsinstallationpriorto
commencementofthework. Theseseparatemeterswillconstituteaseparateserviceandbe
plumbedandbilledaccordingly. Nodeductmeterswillbeallowed.
G) Tamperingwithmeter. NopersonnotauthorizedbythePublicWorksDepartmentshall
connect, disconnect, takepartorinanymatterchangeorinterferewithanymeteroritsuse.
PriorCode, § 7-3A-5) ( Ord. 465, passed11-3-1997; Ord. 793, passed4-2-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
52.06 CROSSCONNECTIONS.
Nowaterpipeofthecitywatersupplyshallbeconnectedwithanypump, wellortankthatis
connectedwithanyothersourceofwatersupply. Whenanyconnectionisfound, thePublic
WorksDepartmentshallnotifytheownertosevertheconnectionandifthisisnotdone
immediately, thecityshallturnoffthewatersupplyforthwith. Beforeanynewconnectiontothe
citysystemispermitted, theDepartmentshallascertainthatnocrossconnectionwillexistwhen
thenewconnectionismade.
PriorCode, § 7-3A-6) Penalty, see § 10.99
52.07 PLUMBINGDEVICES.
Page8of10
A) Backflowpreventers. Whendeemednecessarybythecityand/orwhenrequiredbythe
MinnesotaPlumbingCode, MinnesotaRulesChapter4714, itshallbenecessaryfortheownerof
thewaterservicetosupply, installandmaintainabackflowpreventertoinsureagainstthe
reverseflowofwaterintothemunicipalwatersupply. Abackflowpreventershallberequired
witheachhosebibinstalled. Nopersonmayinstallabackflowpreventerwithoutfirsthaving
obtainedauthorization, andthenecessarypermit, fromthecity.
B) Pressurereducers. Apressurereducingvalveshallbeinstalledinconjunctionwith
eachconnectiontomunicipalwaterservice. Supply, installation, repairand/orreplacementof
thepressurereducingvalveshallbetheresponsibilityofthepropertyowner.
PriorCode, § 7-3A-7) ( Ord. 559, passed7-28-2003; Ord. 793, passed4-2-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
52.08 EMERGENCYCONSERVATIONMEASURES.
WhenevertheCouncildeterminesthatashortageofwaterthreatensthecity, itmay, by
resolution, limitthetimesandhoursduringthedayinwhich citywatermaybeusedfor
sprinkling, irrigation, carwashing, airconditioningorotherspecifieduses. Afterannouncement
viabroadcastmedia, orbypublicationinadailynewspaperofgeneralcirculationinthecityofa
noticeofwaterbanregulationssoestablished, ortwodaysafterthemailingofthenoticetoeach
customer, nopersonshalluseorpermitwatertobeusedinviolationoftheresolution, andany
customerwhodoessoshallbechargedwithapettymisdemeanor. Iftheemergencyrequired
immediatecompliancewiththetermsoftheresolution, theCouncilmayprovideforthedelivery
ofacopyoftheresolutiontothepremisesofeachcustomer, andanycustomerwhohasreceived
thenoticeandthereafterusesorpermitswatertobeusedinviolationoftheresolutionshallbe
subjecttothechargeprovidedabove. Continuedviolationshallbecauseforimmediate
discontinuanceofwaterservice.
PriorCode, § 7-3A-8) Penalty, see § 10.99
52.09 UNAUTHORIZEDUSE.
A) General. Nopersonshallpermitcitywatertobeusedforanypurposeexceptuponhis
orherownpremisesexceptinanemergencyandthenonlyifwrittenpermissionisfirstobtained
fromthePublicWorksDepartment.
B) Hydrants. Nopersonotherthananauthorizedcityemployeeshalloperateafire
hydrantorinterfereinanywaywiththecitywatersystemwithoutfirstobtainingauthoritytodo
sofromthePublicWorksDepartment.
PriorCode, § 7-3A-9) Penalty, see § 10.99
Page9of10
52.10 DISCONTINUANCEOFSERVICE.
A) Thecitymaydiscontinueservicetoanywaterconsumerwithoutnoticeforemergency
repairs, oruponnoticeasprovidedin §5 1.05ofthiscodefornonpaymentofcharges, orfor
violationofrulesandregulationsaffectingutilityservice.
B) Allserviceinstallationsconnectedtothewatersystemthathavebeenabandonedor
havenotbeenusedintwoyearsorforanyreasonhavebecomeuselessforfurtherserviceshall
bediscontinuedatthemainbytheowner, andallpipeandappurtenancesremovedshallbethe
propertyofthecity.
PriorCode, § 7-3A-10) Penalty, see § 10.99
52.11 ELEVATEDSTORAGETANKUSE.
A) Licenserequired. Anyuseofacityelevatedstoragetankotherthanforofficialcity
purposesshallbeconsideredatemporaryuse, andmaybepermittedonlyaftertheissuanceofa
licensethereforebytheCityCouncil. Termsbywhichuseofthewatertowershallbeallowed
shallbeincludedinawrittenagreement, tobeexecutedbytheapplicant, theMayorandtheCity
Administrator.
B) Applicationforlicense, issuance. Anyapplicationforthelicenseshallbefiledwiththe
CityClerk. UponapprovalbytheCityCouncilandpaymentofthelicensefee, theCityClerk
shallissuealicense, whichshallbevalidforaperiodoftimespecifiedbytheCouncil.
C) Licensefees. Licensefeesforuseofthecitywatertowershallbeestablishedby
ordinance.
D) Violation. AnyviolationofthissectionmaybeenjoinedbytheCityCouncilthrough
properlegalchannelsandanypersonwhoviolatesthissectionshallbeguiltyofamisdemeanor.
Eachdayaviolationispermittedtoexistshallconstituteaseparateoffense.
PriorCode, § 7-3A-11) (Ord. 126, passed8-14-1980) Penalty, see § 10.99
Page10of10
CHAPTER53: SEWERUSEANDSERVICE
Section
53.01 Sewerserviceconnections
53.02 Privatesystems
53.03 Separatesewersrequired
53.04 Buildingsewersandconnections
53.05 Prohibitionofcleanwaterdischargesintothesanitarysewersystem
53.06 Prohibitedsubstances
53.07 Interceptors
53.08 Industrialwastes
53.09 Seweruseandcharges
53.01 SEWERSERVICECONNECTIONS.
A) Connectionrequired, notice. Whenpropertyabutsorhasaccesstoanypublicstreetor
alleyandadwellingonthepropertyiswithin200feetoftheproposedconstructionalongwhich
sewermainshavebeenconstructed, theownerofanydwellingorcommercialestablishmenton
thepropertyshallconnectwiththesanitarysewerinaccordancewiththeprovisionsofthis
chapterwithin90daysafterthedateofmailingordeliveringofficialnoticetodoso. Thenotice
shallbegiventotheowneroroccupantinwritingbytheCityClerkonorderoftheCouncil.
B) Failureto connect. Wheneveranyowneroroccupantfailstocomplywiththewritten
notice, theCouncilshall, byresolution, directthataconnectiontothebuildingbemadewiththe
sewersystemandthatthecostoftheinstallationbepaidinthefirstinstanceoutoftheGeneral
Fundandthenassessedagainstthepropertybenefitted.
C) Assessmentofcosts. Aftertheinstallationandconnectionhavebeencompleted
pursuanttoCouncilresolution, theCityClerkshallserveawrittennoticeoftheassessmentupon
theownerorhisorherrepresentativedirectinghimorhertopaytheassessmenttotheCity
Clerkwithintendaysaftertheserviceofthenotice. Iftheassessmentisnotpaidwithinten
days, theCityClerkshallcertifytheamounttotheCountyAuditorforcollectioninthesame
mannerasotherspecialassessments. TheCouncilmay, byresolution, spreadtheassessment
overaperiodnottoexceedfiveyears.
D) Certificaterequired. PursuanttotheauthorityconferredbyM.S. §4 44.075, asitmay
beamendedfromtimetotime, inadditiontoallotherchargesfortappingintoorconnecting
withthemunicipalsanitarysystem, includinginspectionofconnection, streetopeningfeesand
permitfeesheretoforeestablishedbycitycodeprovisionsorordinance, noconnectionpermit
shallbeissuednorshallanytaporotherconnectionbeinstalledormadewithorintoany
municipalsanitarysystemofthecity, eitherdirectlyorindirectlyfromanylotortractofland,
unlesstheCityClerkshallhavecertifiedasfollows:
Page1of10
1) Thelotortractoflandtobeservedhasbeenassessedforthecostofconstruction
ofthemainwithwhichtheconnectionismade, butthisshallnotincludelotsortractsassessed
underdivision (H) hereof;
2) Ifnoassessmenthasbeenleviedfortheconstructioncostthatproceedingsforthe
levyingoftheassessmenthavebeenorwillbecommencedinduecourse, butthisshallnot
includelotsortractstobeassessedunderdivision (H) hereof; or
3) Thecostofconstructionforthemainhasbeenpaidbythedeveloperorbuilder
plattingthelotortractofland, butthisshallnotincludelotsortractsservedbythemainwhich
werenotapartofthatplatortractdeveloped.
E) Additionalconnectioncharges. Ifnoneoftheaboveconditionscanbecertifiedbythe
CityClerk, nopermittotapormakeconnectiontoanysanitarysewermainshallbeissued
unlesstheapplicantshallpayanadditionalconnectionfee. Theadditionalconnectionfeeshall
bechargedforsanitarysewermainmadeavailablebyagreementwithothermunicipalities,
countiesorprivatecorporationsorindividuals, aswellasthoseownedandoperatedbythecity
itself. Theadditionalconnectionfeeshallbeequaltotheaverageassessmentleviedagainstlike
kindpropertyforasimilarpublicimprovementconstructedandinstalledbythecityprovided;
however, foraconnectiontoaresidentialproperty, theconnectionfeeshallbeequaltothe
averageassessmentleviedagainstresidentialparcelsofone-halfacreorless. Theaverage
assessmentshallbedeterminedbytakingthetotalassessmentforasimilarpublicimprovement
anddividingthattotalbythetotalnumberofpropertiesassessed, thedeterminationhaving
regardforconstructioncostscurrentonthedateofthedetermination. Whenevermorethanone
taporotherconnectionisrequestedforservicetoanylotortractorwheneveranytapor
connectionisrequestedforalotortract, whichhaspreviouslybeenpartofalotortractfor
whichaconnectionchargehasalreadybeenimposedpursuanttothisdivision, anadditional
chargeshallbeimposedforeachtaporconnectionrequested.
F) Separatefund. Anysumcollectedandreceivedbythecityunderdivision (E) ofthis
sectionshallbeplacedinaseparatefundandshallbeusedfirsttopaythenormal, reasonable
andcurrentcostsoroperatingandmaintainingthemunicipalsanitarysewersystem. Net
revenuesfromtimetotimereceivedinexcessofthecostsmaybeusedasotherwiseprovidedby
law.
G) Noticeandhearing. BeforetheCityAdministratororhisorherdesignatemakesafinal
determinationofadditionalconnectionfeesunderdivision (E) ofthissection, heorsheshall
causeawrittennoticetobesenttothepropertyowneraffectedstatingtheamountofthe
proposedconnectionfeeandthebasisofitscalculation. Thenoticeshallalsostatethatthe
ownermay, withintendaysofreceiptofthenotice, demandahearingonthematter. Ifthe
ownerrequestsahearingwithinthattime, ahearingshallbeheldonthematterbytheCouncil
withinareasonabletimeafterthedateonwhichtherequestismade. Thenoticeshallfurther
statethattheownermayrequestthatthechargesbeleviedasanassessmentagainstthelotor
tracttobeservedandanapplicationfortherequestshallbeprovidedwiththenotice. The
applicationshallbemadewithintendaysofreceiptofthenoticereferredtoaboveifnohearing
isrequestedor, ifahearingisrequested, withintendaysfollowingthehearing. Ifasaresultof
Page2of10
thehearing, theCouncilfindsthattheproposedconnectionfeecomplieswiththerequirements
ofdivision (E) ofthissection, itshallsodetermine. Ifitdeterminesthattheproposedfeeisin
excessofanamountthatwouldhavebeenassessed, hadthepropertybeenassessed, itshallmake
adeterminationoftheproperamountofthefeewiththelimitsspecifiedindivision (E) ofthis
section. Noconnectionshallbemadewithoutpaymentoftheconnectionfeeunlessthefeeisto
beassessedpursuanttodivision (H) ofthissection.
H) Assessments. Uponapplicationbytheownerwaivinghisorherrighttonotice, hearing
andappeal, theCouncilmaycausetheconnectionfeetobeleviedasanassessmentagainstthe
lotortracttobeservedundertheprocedureauthorizedbylawwithreferencetoother
assessmentsforbenefitsoflocalimprovements.
I) Liabilityforchargeandcertificationtocountyauditor. Alladditionalconnectionfees
imposedpursuanttothissection, includingthoseassessedpursuanttodivision (H) ofthis
section, shallbeachargeagainsttheownerofthelotortractoflandtobeserved. TheCityClerk
shallcertifyallunpaidchargestotheCountyAuditorwithtaxesagainstthelotortracttobe
servedforcollectionasothertaxesarecollected.
PriorCode, § 7-3B-1) (Ord. 793, passed4-2-2018) Penalty, see § 10.99
53.02 PRIVATESYSTEMS.
A) Asepticsystemthatwasinstalledorreplacedpriortoconstructionofasanitarysewer
asdescribedin § 53.01(A) ofthischaptermaybeallowedtocontinueinoperationwithoutthe
propertyconnectingtothecitysewerifthepropertyownerobtainsawaiverfromthecity.
B) Waiver. Awaivertoallowasepticsystemtocontinueinoperationisconditionedupon
thefollowing:
1) Receiptbythecityofawrittenrequestofthepropertyownerforawaiver;
2) Receiptbythecityof:
a) Awrittenverificationbyacertifiedsepticsysteminspectorthattheseptic
systemcomplieswithstateandlocalcoderequirements;
b) Anagreementinrecordableformbyandbetweenthepropertyownerand
thecitywherebythepropertyowneragreestoconnectthepropertytothecitysewerandabandon
thesepticsysteminaccordancewiththerequirementsofMinnesotaRule7080.2500uponthe
earlierofthefollowingevents:
1. Thefailureofthesepticsystem; or
2. Thefailureofthesepticsystemtocomplywithstateandlocalcode
requirementsincludingbutnotlimitedtotheprovisionsofMinnesotaRulesChapter7080.
Page3of10
3) Awrittenauthorizationonaformprovidedbythecityexecutedbythe
propertyownerwhichstates:
a) Thatthecityandanyofitsofficers, agentsorassignsmay, butisnot
requiredto, enterontothepropertyandconnectthepropertytothecitysewerandprovidefor
abandonmentofthesepticsystemifthepropertyownerisrequiredtodosopursuanttodivision
B)(2)(b) ofthissectionandfailstodosowithinthirty (30) daysofnoticetodosobythecity;
b) That, ifthecityconnectsthepropertytothecitysewerandprovidesfor
abandonmentofthesepticsystem, thepropertyownerconsentstothelevyofanassessmentfor
thecostthereofandanyconnectionfees, meterfees, andanyothercity, countyorstatefeesthat
maybeapplicable, whichcostshallbespecificintheauthorization. Theassessmentwillbe
leviedoveraperiodnottoexceedfiveyearsataninterestratethatis2% abovetheinterestrate
paidbythecityonitsmostrecentgeneralobligationbondsale; and
c) Thatthepropertyownerwaivesnoticeofanyassessmenthearingatwhich
theassessmentistobeconsideredbytheCityCouncilandthereafterapprovedandlevied.
4) Asignedwaiverofassessmentappealinrecordableformfromtheowner.
C) Ifthepropertycontainsaprivatewellthatqualifiesfortheexceptionunder § 52.02,
thenthatpropertydoesnothavetoconnectthepropertytothecityseweruntilthepropertyis
requiredtoconnecttomunicipalwaterpursuantto §5 2.02,u nlesstheprivatesepticsystemisin
violationofsubsections1or2ofdivision (B)(2)(b) ofthissection. Thesewerconnectionshall
bemadewithin30daysofthewaterconnection.
D) Thepropertyownershallpaypermitfeesapplicableatthetimeofhookup. Ifthere
isachangeofownership, itshallbetheresponsibilityofthesellertonotifythebuyerof
connectionrequirements.
E) Afterobtainingawaiverfromthecity, thepropertyownershall, everythreeyears,
submittothecitywrittenverificationbyacertifiedinspectorthattheprivatesepticsystem
continuestocomplywiththerequirementsofthissectionandallstateandlocalcode
requirements, andthatthereisnobasisunderthissectiontorequirethepropertytoconnecttothe
citysewer. Theverificationshallbedueonthethirdanniversaryofthecity’sgrantingofthe
waiverandeverythirdyearthereafter.
PriorCode, § 7-3B-2) ( Ord. 95, passed7-13-1978; Ord. 439, passed10-21-1996; Ord. 466,
passed11-3-1997; Ord. 599, passed11-7-2005; Ord. 793, passed4-2-2018) Penalty, see § 10.99
Page4of10
53.03 SEPARATESEWERSREQUIRED.
Aseparateandindependentsewershallbeprovidedforeverybuildingconnectedtothe
sewersystemexceptthattheCouncilmaywaivethisrequirementwhereitfindsthataseparate
sewerforabuildingisimpractical.
PriorCode, § 7-3B-3)
53.04 BUILDINGSEWERSANDCONNECTIONS.
A) Permitrequirements.
1) Permitrequired. Nounauthorizedpersonshalluncover, makeanyconnectionwith
oropeninginto, use, alter, ordisturbanypublicsewer, sewerserviceorappurtenancewithout
firstobtainingapermitfromthePublicWorksDepartmentandotherwisecomplyingwiththe
provisionsofthischapter.
2) Requirementforpermittee. Constructionoftheextensionbetweenabuildingdrain
andthesewermainstub, hereincalledthebuildingsewer, andconnectingittothesewermain
stubshallbetheresponsibilityofaplumberwhoislicensedbythestateofMinnesota.
B) Constructionspecifications. Buildingsewerconstructionshallmeettherequirements
setforthinthemostcurrentMinnesotaPlumbingCode, MinnesotaRulesChapter4714.
C) Inspections. Theapplicantforthebuildingsewerpermitshallnotifythecitywhenthe
buildingsewerandconnectionisreadyforinspection. Theconnectionshallbemadeunderthe
supervisionoftheBuildingInspectorand/orthePublicWorksDepartment. Nobackfillshallbe
placeduntiltheworkhasbeeninspectedandapproved.
D) Liabilityofowner: Theownershallbearthecostsandexpensesincidentaltothe
installationandconnectionofthebuildingsewer. Heorsheshallindemnifythecityforanyloss
ordamagedirectlyorindirectlycausedbyitsinstallation. Totheextentheorshedeems
necessary, theCityEngineerand/ortheUtilityServicesSuperintendentshallestablishrulesand
regulationsfortheproperimplementationoftheserequirementswhich, whenapprovedbythe
Councilbyresolution, shallgoverntheinstallationofbuildingsewersandconnections.
E) Maintenanceofbuildingsewer: Thepropertyownershallberesponsibleforthe
maintenanceofthebuildingsewertoitsconnectionpointwiththemainlinecitysewer. Theonly
exceptiontothisistheshallowfrozenbuildingsewersnecessitatedbyshallowcitymainlines. In
theseinstances, thecityshallbenotifiedimmediatelywhenstoppageoccurs.
PriorCode, § 7-3B-4)(Ord. 759, passed10-05-2015; Ord. 793, passed4-2-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
53.05 PROHIBITIONOFCLEANWATERDISCHARGESINTOTHESANITARY
SEWERSYSTEM.
Page5of10
A) Purpose. Inadoptingtheseregulations, theCityCouncilfindsthatthedischargeof
stormwater, groundwaterorsurfacewater, roofdrains, sumppumps, footingtiles, swimming
pools, orunpollutedwaterfromindustrialprocesswork, orothernaturalprecipitationflowing
intothecitysanitarysewerwill, andhasonnumerousoccasionsinthepast, costthecityandits
residentssubstantialsumsofmoneyduetoexcessiveinflow/infiltration (I/I)a,n dsubsequently
increasedtreatmentcosts, increasedthecapitalexpendituresofthecitysanitarysewersystem,
andhasthepotentialtocausefloodingandoverloadingtothesanitarysewersystemstoanextent
astocausesignificantandgravedamagetothepropertyofalargenumberofcityresidents. The
CityCouncil, therefore, findsitessentialforthemaintenanceofhealth, tominimizedamageto
property, andtomeettheMetropolitanCouncilEnvironmentalServicesregulations, requiresthat
theprovisionsofthissectionbestrictlyenforcedtoavoidemergenciesinthefuture.
B) Definitionandmethod. Nowaterfromanyroof, surface, groundwatersumppump,
footingtile, swimmingpoolorothernaturalprecipitationwatershallbedischargedintothe
sanitarysewersystem. Dwellingsandotherbuildingsandstructureswhichrequire, becauseof
infiltrationofwaterintobasements, crawlspacesandthelike, asumppumpdischargesystem,
shallhaveapermanentlyinstalleddischargelinewhichshallnotatanytimedischargewaterinto
thesanitarysewersystem, exceptasprovidedherein. Apermanentinstallationshallbeone
whichprovidesforyear-roundsurfacedischargecapabilitytotheoutsideofthedwelling,
buildingorstructure, orisconnectedtothecitystormsewer. Permanentlyinstalleddischarge
linesdischargingwatertothesurfaceshallbeterminatedonprivatepropertypriortoanycurb,
gutter, orstreet. Apermanentinstallationshallconsistofarigiddischargelinewithoutvalving
orquickconnectionsforalteringthepathofdischarge, andifconnectionsforalteringthepathof
discharge, andifconnectedtothecitystormsewerline, includeacheckvalveandanairgap
locatedinasmalldiameterstructureasshowninthecity’sstandardsplates. TheUtilityServices
Superintendentorhisorherdesignatedagentshalldeterminetheappropriatemethodfor
providingapermanentinstallationtoavoidfloodingofadjacentproperties, sidewalks, streetsand
thelike. Apermanentsumppumpdischargesystemmaynotcreateapublicnuisanceunder
95.01(B) ofthecitycode.
C) Disconnection. BeginningApril1, 1996, anyperson, firmorcorporationhavingaroof
surface, groundwatersumppump, footingtileorswimmingpool, orunpollutedindustrialwaste
nowconnectedand/ordischargingintothesanitarysewersystemshalldisconnectand/orremove
same. Anydisconnectsoropeningsinthesanitarysewershallbeclosedorrepairedinan
effective, approvedmanner, asapprovedbytheUtilityServicesSuperintendentorhisorher
designatedagent.
D) Inspection.
1) Required. Everypersonowningimprovedrealestatethatdischargesintothecity’s
sanitarysewersystemshallallowanemployeeofthecityortheirdesignatedrepresentativeto
inspectthebuildingstoconfirmthatthereisnosumppumporotherprohibiteddischargeintothe
sanitarysewersystem. Thecitywillprovideadequatenotificationtothepropertyownerforthe
inspections. Inlieuofhavingthecityinspecthisorherproperty, anypersonmayfurnisha
certificateofcompliancefromalicensedplumber, certifyingthathisorherpropertyisin
compliancewiththissection.
Page6of10
2) Refusal. Anypersonrefusingtoallowtheirpropertytobeinspectedorrefusingto
furnishaplumberscertificateofcompliancewithin14daysofthedatecityemployeesortheir
designatedrepresentativesaredeniedadmittancetotheproperty, shallimmediatelybecome
subjecttothesurchargehereinafterstated. Anypropertyownerfoundtoviolatethissectionshall
makethenecessarychangestocomplywiththesectionandfurnishproofofthechangestothe
citybyApril1, 1996. AnyhomesinexistencepriortoApril1, 1996thathasasumppump
basketisrequiredtohavethebaskettaggedtoavoidfuturewellstobeconnectedwithoutprior
citynotification.
E) Futureinspections. Eachsumppumpconnectionidentifiedwillbemonitoredor
reinspectedeverytwotothreeyearsbythecityorbyalicensedplumberassetforthin §
53.05(D)(1) toensurecontinuedcompliancewiththissection.
F) Newhomeinspections. Allnewhomeswillberequiredtohavetheirsumppumpsand
rigiddischargepipinginstalledandinspectedpriortoacertificateofoccupancybeingissued.
This
provisioncanbewaivedifthepropertyownercansubmitinformationtothesatisfactionof
theUtilityServicesSuperintendentverifyingthatnoexistingorfuturestormwateror
groundwaterproblemswillexistatthissite.
G) Cityimprovements. Ifitisrequiredthatthecityinstallpublicimprovements, suchas
stormsewers, draintiles, andthelikebeforethesumppumpscanbepermanentlyconnected, the
propertyownerwillbegivenrelieffrommakingthepermanentconnectionuntilatimeasthe
cityimprovementsarecompleted.
H) Winterdischarge. Thosepropertyownersthathavesignificantsumppumpdischarge
duringthewintermonthsthatwouldcauseicingproblemsmayrequestavariancetothissection
fromtheUtilityServicesSuperintendenttoallowforapermittodischargetothesanitarysewer
inthewinter. Thecostofthispermitis $75permonthtooffsetthecostsforclearwater
treatment.
I) Penalty. Asurchargeassetbyordinanceisherebyimposedandaddedtoeverysewer
billingmailedonandafterAprill, 1996topropertyownerswhoarenotincompliancewiththis
section. Thesurchargeshallbeaddedeverymonthandbeleviedmonthlyonpropertiesnot
complyingwiththissection. Allpropertiesfoundduringyearlyre-inspectiontohaveviolated
theseregulationswillbesubjecttothemonthlypenaltyforallmonthsbetweenthetwomost
recentinspections.
PriorCode, § 7-3B-5) ( Ord. 424, passed3-18-1996; Ord. 732, passed3-3-2014; Ord. 759,
passed10-05-2015; Ord. 793, passed4-2-2018)
53.06 PROHIBITEDSUBSTANCES.
Nopersonshalldischargeorpermittobedischargedintoanypublicseweranyofthe
followingwastes.
Page7of10
A) Anyliquidorvaporhavingatemperatureinexcessof180º
F. B )A nywaterorwastehavingafivedaybiologicaloxygendemandexceeding1,000
partspermillionbyweightasaveragedduringany12-month
period. C)A ny gasoline, benzene, naphtha,f uel oil,o rotherflammableorexplosive liquid,
solidor
gas. D) Anygarbagethathasnotbeenproperly
shredded. E)A ny ashes,c inders, sand, mud,s traw,s havings, metal, glass, rags,fe athers, tar,
plastics, w ood,m anure, grit,b rick,c ement, onyx,ca rbideorothermatterthatmayinterferewith
theproperoperationofthesewersorsewagetreatment
plant. F)An ywaterorwastehavingapHlowerthanfiveandfive-tenthsorhigherthannine
orhavinganyothercorrosivepropertycapableofcausingdamageorhazardto
structures,eq uip mentorpersonnelofthesewage
works. G) Anywaterorwastecontainingatoxicorpoisonoussubstanceinsufficientquantities
toconstituteahazardtohumansoranimals,in jureorinterferewithsewage treatment,o rcreate
anyhazardinthereceivingwatersofthesewagetreatment
plant. H) Anynoxiousormalodorousgasorsubstancecapableofcreatingapublic
nuisance. I)Any wasteprohibitedbyappropriate federal,s tateorlocalgovernmental
agency.P rior Code, 7§ -3B- 6)O rd(. 793,pass ed4-2-2018)P en alty, see 1§ 0.
9953.07
INTERCEPTORS. Grease, oilandsandinterceptorsshallbeprovidedwhentheyarenecessaryforthe
properhandlingofanyliquidwastecontaininggreaseinexcessiveamountsoranyflammable
waste,s a ndorotherharmful ingredients;b uttheinterceptorsshallnotberequiredforprivate
livingquartersordwelling units.Inte rcep torsshallbelocatedsoastobeeasilyaccessiblefor
cleaningand
inspection.P rior Code, 7§ -3B-7)Penalty, see 1§ 0.
9953.08INDUSTRIAL
WASTES.T heownerofanypropertyservedbyabuildingsewercarryingindustrialwasteshall
installasuitablecontrolmanholeinthebuildingsewertofacilitateobservationandsamplingof
the waste.T hemanholeshallbeconstructedbytheownerinaccordancewithplansapprovedby
the city.T heownershallmaintainthemanholesoastobesafeandaccessibleatall
times.P r ior Code, 7§ -3B-8)Penalty, see 1§ 0.
99Page8of
53.09 SEWERUSEANDCHARGES.
A) Individualratestudies.
1) Industrialuses. Inthecaseofanindustrialusercontributingwastestothesewage
disposalsystemindisproportionateamountsorconcentrations, thePublicWorksDepartment
shallmakeanindividualstudyoftheparticularuseandfixanindividualchargethatis
commensuratewiththeburdenplacedbythewastesuponthesewagetreatmentplant, liftstation,
and/ormainlinesewerpipes. Ifabuildingservedbysewerisnotservedbycitywaterandthe
Councildeterminesthattheflatratesewerservicechargeinaccuratelymeasuresuseofthesewer
system, itmayordertheinstallationofawatermetertomeasureaccuratelytheamountofwater
usedonthepremises. Inthecaseofanindustryusingsubstantialamountsofwaterthatisnot
dischargedintothesewersystem, theCouncilmayorderinstallationofameteraccurately
measuringtheamountofwaterthatentersthesewersystemandfixthesewerservicechargeon
thebasisoftheamount. Insofaraspractical, installationandmaintenanceofthemetersshall
conformtoregulationscontainedinthiscode.
2) Requiredinformation. Theowner, occupantorpersoninchargeofanypremises
shallsupplythecitywiththeinformationasitmayreasonablyrequirerelatingtouseofwater,
useofsewerorsewerrates. Willfulfailuretoprovidetheinformation, willfulfalsificationofthe
information, orwillfulfailuretocomplywithanyrequirementororderissuedpursuanttothis
sectionconstitutesaviolationofthissection.
B) ChargesoftheMetropolitanCouncilEnvironmentalServices.
1) Industrialusers’ strengthcharge. P ursuanttoM.S. §4 73.517, subd. 10,t he
MetropolitanCouncilisempoweredtoimposeadirectchargeonindustrialusers. Eachindustrial
usershallpaythechargedirectlytotheMetropolitanCouncilwhenitisimposed. . Unpaid
chargestobepaidtotheMetropolitanCouncilmaybecertifiedforcollectiontotheCounty
Auditor, whoshallpayrevenuecollectedforsuchunpaidchargestotheMetropolitanCouncil.
2) Serviceavailabilitycharge (SAC).
a) Purpose. TheMetropolitanCouncilEnvironmentalServicesdivision (MCES)
hasdeterminedtoreserveunusedcapacityintheMetropolitanDisposalSystem (MDS) each
year, commencingin1973, forlocalgovernmentunitsinwhichnewbuildingstobeconnectedto
thesystemandnewconnectionstothesystemarecommencedduringeachyear, andtoallocate
thedebtservicecostsoftheunusedcapacityfortheyearamongthelocalgovernmentunits. In
orderforthecitytopaythecosts, itwillbenecessarytoestablishsewerserviceavailability
chargesforallbuildingsconnectedtothemetropolitandisposalsystemonorafterJanuary1,
1973.
b) Chargesestablished. Fortheabovestatedpurpose, thereisherebyestablished
aserviceavailabilitycharge (SAC) fortheavailabilityoftreatmentworksandinterceptors
comprisingtheMDS. ThechargeshallbeimposedoneachconnectionafterJanuary1, 1973on
buildingsorstructuresbuiltbeforethatdate, butnotpreviouslyconnectedtothesystem, and
Page9of10
witheachbuildingpermitissuedbetweenJanuary1, 1973andDecember31, 1986. Beginning
January1, 1987aserviceavailabilitycharge (SAC) shallbechargedwithbuildingpermitonly
whenthestructurehasimmediateaccess, directlyorindirectlytotheMDS. Nochargeshallbe
dueupontheissuanceofaconnectionpermitifachargewaspreviouslypaiduponissuanceofa
buildingpermit.
3) Computationofcharge. Thechargeforeachbuildingorstructureshallbeequalto
thenumberofunitsofsewagevolume, whichitwilldischargemultipliedbytheannualunitSAC
rate. TheannualSACrate, andcriteriarelatingthereto, shallbeestablishedandfromtimeto
timeamendedbyMCES.
4) Administration. BuildingInspectionsshallprepareorrevisebuildingpermitor
sewageconnectionpermitapplicationformstoprovideinformationnecessaryforthe
computationofthenumberofunitsassignabletothebuildingorstructureinquestion, andshall
collecttheapplicablechargebeforeissuanceofapermit. BuildingInspectionsshallmakethe
informationavailabletotheMCESuponrequest. If, uponfilingareportcoveringthepermit
withtheMCES, MCESdeterminesthatagreaternumberofunitsisassignabletothebuildingor
structureinquestion, anyadditionalamountofcostallocatedtothecityasaresultshallbepaid
bythepersonorcompanytowhomthepermitwasissued.
PriorCode, § 7-3B-9) ( Ord. 52, passed12-28-1972; Ord. 793, passed4-2-2018)
Page10of10
CHAPTER 54: STORMWATER DRAINAGE UTILITY
Section
54. 01 Purpose and policy
54. 02 Definition
54. 03 Stormwater drainage fees
54. 04 Property classifications
54. 05 Credits and appeals
54. 06 Exemptions
54. 07 Billing method
54. 08 Recalculation of fee
54. 09 Penalty for late payment
54. 10 Certification of past due fees on taxes
54. 01 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
It is the intent of this chapter to establish a stormwater drainage utility within the city to
build, construct, reconstruct, repair, enlarge, improve, or in any other manner obtain stormwater
drainage systems including mains, holding areas and ponds, drainage channels, waterways and
other appurtenances and related facilities for the collection and disposal of stormwater and
maintain and operate the same pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from time to
time, from which revenues will be derived subject to the provisions of this chapter and
Minnesota Statutes. The stormwater drainage utility shall be a part of the Public Works
Department and under the administration of the City Administrator.
Prior Code, § 7- 5- 1) ( Ord. 378, passed 5- 26- 1994; Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015)
54. 02 DEFINITION.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT FACTOR (REF). The ratio of the average volume of
stormwater runoff generated by one net acre of a given land use to the average volume of
stormwater runoff generated by one net acre of a typical single-family residential land during a
standard five-year, two-hour rainfall event.
Prior Code, § 7- 5- 2) ( Ord. 378, passed 5- 26- 1994)
Page 1 of 4
54. 03 STORMWATER DRAINAGE FEES.
Stormwater drainage fees for parcels of land shall be determined by multiplying the REF for
a parcel' s land use by the parcel' s net acreage and then multiplying the resulting product by the
stormwater drainage rate set by ordinance, and as established for the particular drainage district
in which the property is located.
A) Property within city limits to he charged. All property within the city limits shall be
charged and the owner shall pay the amount established for stormwater drainage utilities as
outlined. These rates shall be adjusted annually on the first business day of January by
ordinance to reflect construction cost changes, maintenance and operation cost changes and/ or
improvement schedule changes.
B) Stormwater drainage district. Stormwater drainage districts descriptions are available
for inspection at the office of the City Clerk during regular city office hours.
C) Developed and undevelopedproperty. All developed property, which is no longer
considered agricultural/natural land, shall be subject to a stormwater drainage fee based upon the
total net acreage of each parcel. All platted vacant lots shall be charged a stormwater drainage
fee equivalent to one developed single- family property. All undeveloped ( agricultural or
natural) land shall be exempt from the stormwater utility fee.
D) City-ownedproperty. No billings shall be processed for city-owned property. Instead,
the City Council shall determine the total annual stormwater utility fee chargeable to city-owned
properties, and the amount shall be transferred once per annum from the General Fund to the
Stormwater Utility Fund.
E) Determination offees. The City Administrator shall make all determinations regarding
the stormwater drainage fees for each parcel of property within the city.
Prior Code, § 7- 5- 3) ( Ord. 378, passed 5- 26- 1994; Ord. 379, passed 3- 6- 1995; Ord. 759, passed
10- 05- 2015)
54. 04 PROPERTY CLASSIFICATIONS.
A) Classification/ land use.
Classification/Land Use REF
Single-Family Residential 4. 00
Townhome/Double Type Residential 6. 40
Multiple Family Residential, Churches and Government 6. 80
Buildings
Commercial 10. 30
Page 2 of 4
Classification/Land Use REF
Industrial, Warehouse 8. 70
Parks, Open Space, Golf Course, Cemeteries 2.30
Vacant Land 1. 80
Public and Private Schools/ Colleges Individually Assigned
B) Residential acreage. For purposes of calculating stormwater drainage fees, all
developed single-family residential properties shall be considered to have a net acreage of
one-fourth acre and all developed townhome/double type residential properties shall be
considered to have a net acreage of one- eighth acre.
Prior Code, § 7- 5- 4) ( Ord. 378, passed 5- 26- 1994)
54. 05 CREDITS AND APPEALS.
The City Council may, by resolution, adopt policies recommended by the City
Administrator, for adjustment of the stormwater drainage fee for parcels based upon hydrologic
data to be supplied by property owners, which data demonstrates a hydrologic response
substantially different from the standards. Every individual has the right to appeal to the City
Council. The adjustments of stormwater drainage fees shall not be made retroactively.
Prior Code, § 7- 5- 5) ( Ord. 378, passed 5- 26- 1994; Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015)
54.06 EXEMPTIONS.
The following land uses are exempt from stormwater drainage fees:
A) Public rights- of-way;
B) Undeveloped areas having slopes in excess of 35%;
C) Wetlands as defined by the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act of 1991 including,
but not limited to, the wetlands provisions set forth in M.S. Chs. 103A through 103I;
D) Public waters as designated under M.S. § 103G.201, as it may be amended from time to
time;
E) Vacant/undeveloped property that is considered agricultural or natural;
F) Undeveloped or natural state, county, regional and city parklands; and
G) Tax forfeited property.
Prior Code, § 7- 5- 6) ( Ord. 378, passed 5- 26- 1994; Ord. 379, passed 3- 6- 1995)
Page 3 of 4
54.07 BILLING METHOD.
Stormwater drainage fees shall be computed and collected by the city along with other
utilities the as sewer and water. Payment shall be required on or before the due date established
for the other billing. Any prepayment or overpayment of charge shall be retained by the city and
applied against subsequent fees.
Prior Code, § 7- 5- 7) ( Ord. 378, passed 5- 26- 1994) Penalty, see § 10. 99
54. 08 RECALCULATION OF FEE
If a property owner or person responsible for paying the stormwater drainage fee questions
the correctness of any invoice for the charge, the person may have the charge reviewed and
recomputed. The request must be submitted in writing to the City Administrator within two
months of the billing date.
Prior Code, § 7- 5- 8) ( Ord. 378, passed 5- 26- 1994; Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015)
54.09 PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT.
Each billing for stormwater drainage fees not paid when due shall incur a penalty charge as
specified in the city' s fee schedule.
Prior Code, § 7- 5- 9) ( Ord. 378, passed 5- 26- 1994)
54. 10 CERTIFICATION OF PAST DUE FEES ON TAXES.
Any stormwater drainage fees in excess of 90 days past due on October 1 of any year may
be certified to the County Auditor for collection with real estate taxes in the following year
pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time. In addition, the
city shall also have the right to bring civil action or to take other legal remedies to collect unpaid
fees.
Prior Code, § 7- 5- 10) ( Ord. 378, passed 5- 26- 1994)
Page 4 of 4
CHAPTER 55: STREET LIGHTING UTILITY
Section
55. 01 Purpose
55. 02 Charges
55. 01 PURPOSE.
For purposes of general health, safety and welfare, it is in the best interests of the residents
that the city operate and maintain a street lighting system throughout the city. It is the intent of
the city to provide the service and to receive reimbursement for the cost thereof by way of a
street lighting utility.
Prior Code, § 7- 8- 1) ( Ord. 553, passed 12- 16- 2002)
55. 02 CHARGES.
A) Charges for the operation and maintenance of street lighting shall be made against all
property benefitted thereof. Rates shall be established on a flat fee basis as established and from
time to time amended by the City Council.
B) Street lighting utility fees shall be collected by the city together with other utilities such
as water, sewer and stormwater drainage. Payment shall be required on or before the due date
established by the billing. Delinquent charges shall be collected in accordance with §
51. 05( D)( 2).
Prior Code, § 7- 8- 2) ( Ord. 553, passed 12- 16- 2002
Page 1 of 1
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC CODE
Section
70. 01 State Traffic Code
70.02 Definitions
70. 03 Enforcement
70.04 Through streets; one-way streets
70. 05 Traffic signs and signals
70.06 Turning movements
70.07 Vehicle weight restrictions
70. 08 Unreasonable acceleration
70.09 Keys to be removed
70. 10 Traffic signal preemption system
70. 01 STATE TRAFFIC CODE.
A) Code adopted. Minnesota Statutes Chapter 168 ( Motor Vehicle Registration), M.S.
Chapter 169 ( Motor Vehicle Operation) and M.S. Chapter 171 ( Driver License Regulations), as
they may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted and made a part of this section by
reference as if fully set forth herein.
B) Citation. Any charge of a violation of this section may be indicated by charging the
violator with a violation, which shall be identified by the following prefix: " Savage City Code, §
70. 01..." followed by the applicable section of M.S. Chapters 168, 169 or 171, as they may be
amended from time to time.
Prior Code, § 6- 1- 1)
70. 02 DEFINITIONS.
Any term used in this chapter and defined in M.S. § 169. 01, as it may be amended from time
to time, has the meaning given it by that section.
Prior Code, § 6- 1- 2)
70. 03 ENFORCEMENT.
A) The Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this title and the state traffic
laws. Police officers are authorized to direct all traffic within the city, either in person or by
means of a visible or audible signal in conformity with this title and the state traffic laws.
During a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the
Police Department may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of this
title and the state traffic laws.
Page 1 of 5
B) Officers of the Fire Department may direct or assist the police in directing traffic at the
scene of a fire and the immediate vicinity or, as requested by the Police Department, at any other
place in which emergency traffic direction is needed.
Prior Code, § 6- 1- 3)
70. 04 THROUGH STREETS; ONE-WAY STREETS.
A) The City Council, by resolution, may designate any street or portion of street as through
highway or one-way roadway where necessary to preserve the free flow of traffic or to prevent
accidents. The Public Works Superintendent shall post appropriate signs at the entrance to the
street.
B) No trunk highway shall be so designated unless the consent of the Commissioner of
Highways to the designation is first secured.
Prior Code, § 6- 1- 4) ( Ord. 18, passed 4- 28- 1969; Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015)
70. 05 TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS.
The State of Minnesota Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices shall govern the
installation of stop signs, yield signs, warning signs, signals, pavement markers and all the other
traffic devices.
Prior Code, § 6- 1- 5)
70. 06 TURNING MOVEMENTS.
A) The City Council by resolution may, whenever necessary to preserve a free flow of
traffic or to prevent accidents, designate any intersection as one where the turning of vehicles to
the left or to the right or both, is to be restricted at all times during specified hours. The Public
Works Superintendent shall mark, by appropriate signs, any intersection so designated and no
person shall turn a vehicle at any intersection contrary to the directions on the signs.
B) No intersection on a trunk highway shall be so designated until the consent of the
Commissioner of Highways as to the designation is first obtained.
Prior Code, § 6- 1- 6)( Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015)
70.07 VEHICLE WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
A) Truck routes. Truck traffic shall be prohibited on any street or highway within the city
except those streets and roadways designated by the City Council by resolution as truck routes.
Signs shall be posted at major entrances to the city indicating that truck traffic is prohibited
except on designated and signed truck routes. For purposes of this section, trucks shall be
Page 2 of 5
defined to mean commercial vehicles displaying commercial licenses, which are rated either as
one ton or 12, 000 pounds gross weight or more.
B) Truck restrictions. The City Council by resolution may designate streets on which
travel by commercial vehicles in excess of five-ton axle weight or higher, if so designated, is
prohibited. The Public Works Superintendent shall erect appropriate signs on the streets. No
person shall operate a commercial vehicle on the posted streets in violation of the restrictions
stated.
C) Seasonal weight restrictions. The Public Works Superintendent may prohibit the
operation of vehicles upon any street under this jurisdiction or impose weight restrictions on
vehicles to be operated on the street whenever the street, by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or
other climatic conditions, will be seriously damaged or destroyed unless the use of vehicles on
the street is prohibited or the permissible weights thereof reduced. The Public Works
Superintendent shall erect and maintain signs plainly indicating the prohibition or restriction at
each end of that portion of the street affected. No person shall operate a vehicle on a posted
portion in violation of the prohibition or restriction.
Prior Code, § 6- 1- 7)( Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015) Penalty, see § 10. 99
70. 08 UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION.
A) Definition. UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION of a motor vehicle is hereby
defined as acceleration without apparent reason and accomplished in a manner as to cause
squealing or screeching sounds by the tires or the throwing of sand or gravel by the tires of the
vehicle or both. Prima facie evidence of the unnecessary and unreasonable acceleration shall be
squealing or screeching sounds emitted by the tires or the throwing of sand or gravel by the tires
of the vehicle or both.
B) Unreasonable acceleration prohibited. Unreasonable acceleration of any motor vehicle
on any public or private road or way within the city, as unreasonable acceleration is herein
defined, is declared to be a public nuisance and is hereby prohibited.
Prior Code, § 6- 1- 8) ( Ord. 75, passed 8- 12- 1976) Penalty, see § 10. 99
70.09 KEYS TO BE REMOVED.
No person shall leave a motor vehicle, except a truck which is engaged in loading or
unloading, unattended on any street, used car lot or unattended parking lot without first stopping
the engine, locking the ignition and removing all ignition keys from the vehicle.
Prior Code, § 6- 1- 9) Penalty, see § 10. 99
70. 10 TRAFFIC SIGNAL PREEMPTION SYSTEM.
Policy and procedures relating to the use of the traffic signal preemption system ( TSPS) in
the city are hereby adopted. The purpose thereof is to allow for the movement of an emergency
vehicle through a signalized intersection in a safer and timelier manner. The drivers of all
Page 3 of 5
emergency vehicles equipped with TSPS emitters shall be required to follow the procedures in
order that pedestrians and motorists have adequate warning that the normal timing of a traffic
control signal is being changed.
A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE. A vehicle equipped and identified according to law and
operated by Police and/ or Fire Departments or any other vehicle so designated by state statute.
FIRE CHIEF. The Fire Chief of the city or the Fire Chief s designee.
TRAFFIC SIGNAL PREEMPTION SYSTEM( TSPS). A traffic control system
designed for use by emergency vehicles to temporarily control traffic signals at intersections.
Electronic signals, transmitted from the emergency vehicle to the traffic light control box, enable
a driver to hold the existing green light in favor of the approaching emergency vehicle or
accelerate the normal cycle of a signal change to provide green by the time the vehicle reaches
the intersection. A light source directed toward the oncoming emergency vehicle indicates to the
driver whether or not the traffic light has been preempted in his or her favor.
B) Conditions under which the traffic signal preemption system ( TSPS) may be used.
1) Fire Department. City-owned Fire Department vehicles shall use the TSPS while
on emergency responses only. Unless otherwise provided for herein, all other use by the
Department is prohibited. Conditions for the use of TSPS shall hereby become a part of the Fire
Department standard operating procedures.
2) Police Department. City-owned Police Department vehicles shall use the TSPS
while on emergency responses only. Unless otherwise provided for herein, all other use by the
department is prohibited. Conditions for the use of TSPS shall hereby become a part of the
Police Department standard operating procedures.
3) City or county maintenance personnel. The county or city maintenance personnel
or their contractors under written agreement, may activate the TSPS only when testing or
repairing the system. Sirens and flashing red lights need not be used except when the test vehicle
must exceed the posted speed limits. In these instances, the test must be pre-approved and
coordinated through the Fire Chief.
4) Emergency vehicles not owned or operated by the city. The use of TSPS within the
city by non- city emergency vehicles is allowed if the emergency vehicle is one which is
recognized by the city or which receives approval as in division (13)( 5) below. The participating
organization or unit of government shall follow all procedures by the city in utilizing the TSPS.
Page 4 of 5
5) System control officer. The Fire Chief is hereby designed as the system control
officer. Requests for use of the TSPS by other organizations or governmental units and the
conditions required for the use shall be approved yearly by the system control officer.
6) Unlawful to activate TSPS system. Unless specifically approved herein, it shall be
unlawful for any person to activate the TSPS in the city by any means whatsoever. This clause
specifically prohibits the installation of TSPS emitters on any vehicle not identified in divisions
B)( 1) through (4) of this section.
Prior Code, § 6- 1- 10) ( Ord. 368, passed 1- 27- 1994) Penalty, see § 10. 99
Page 5 of 5
CHAPTER 71: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING
Section
71. 01 Angle and parallel parking
71. 02 No parking places
71. 03 General parking restrictions
71. 04 Stopping, standing or parking on certain streets
71. 05 Time limit parking
71. 06 Truck parking in residential districts
71. 07 Truck parking and loading in business districts
71. 08 Parking during snow removal
71. 09 Signs posted
71. 10 Impoundment of illegally parked vehicles
71. 11 Violation
71. 01 ANGLE AND PARALLEL PARKING.
A) Angle parking shall be required on any streets so designated by resolution of the City
Council. On any street, every vehicle shall be parked with the front of the vehicle facing the curb
or the edge of the traveled portion of the street at an angle of approximately 30 degrees and
facing between the painted or other markings on the curb or street indicating the parking space.
On all other streets, cars shall be parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway in accordance
with law.
B) No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of the vehicle next to the curb, except on
one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful to stand or park any vehicle in a street other than parallel
with the curb and with two right wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the regularly
established curb line; except, that upon those streets that have been marked for angle parking,
vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by the marks.
Prior Code, § 6- 2- 1) ( Ord. 18, passed 4- 28- 1969) Penalty, see § 10. 99
71. 02 NO PARKING PLACES.
At any time it shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand in any of the following places,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of
a police officer or traffic- controlling device.
A) On any street, roadway or public parking lot between the hours of 2: 00 a.m. and 6: 00
a.m. on any day from November 1 until March 31, except as may be allowed specifically by
designated signage or by permit;
B) In any intersection;
Page 1 of 7
C) Ina crosswalk;
D) Upon any bridge or viaduct or in any subway or tunnel or the approach thereto;
E) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of a point of the curb
immediately opposite the end of a safety zone;
F) Within 30 feet of a traffic signal, beacon or sign on the approaching side;
G) Within 20 feet of an intersection or crosswalk;
H) At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable width of the roadway
for moving traffic to less than 18 feet;
I) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
J) At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway;
K) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing;
L) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any Fire Department station and on the side
of the street opposite the entrance to any station within 75 feet of an entrance when properly
signposted;
M) On any sidewalk or parkway;
N) At any place where official signs prohibit parking; and
0) In areas posted" No Parking Fire Lane."
Prior Code, § 6- 2-2) ( Ord. 13, passed 9- 6- 1966; Ord. 79, passed 10- 14- 1976; Ord. 309, passed
8- 9- 1990; Ord. 497, passed 4- 5- 1999; Ord. 528, passed 2- 20- 2001; Ord. 753, passed 7- 6- 2015)
Penalty, see § 10. 99
71. 03 GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
The City Council may from time to time by resolution establish limitations or prohibitions
with respect to parking of any vehicles within the city and after the adoption of the resolution and
the posting by sign of the areas, the prohibition or restriction shall be in full force and effect as
though included in this chapter.
A) Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in a manner or under conditions
as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of
vehicle traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in a position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
Page 2 of 7
B) Narrow streets.
1) Parking shall be prohibited on either side of any street located within the city
having a width less than 28 feet measured face-to- face.
2) Parking shall be allowed only on one side of any street located within the city
having a width greater than 27 feet but less than 30 feet measured face- to-face, and the City
Council by resolution shall designate the side of the streets upon which parking is to be allowed.
C) Private property. It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property
without the consent of the owner of the property.
D) Vehicle for sale, peddlingfrom vehicles. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle and/ or
merchandise upon any street, city parking lot or upon city property for the purpose of displaying
it for sale; or to park any vehicle upon any business street, city parking lot or city property from
which merchandise is peddled.
E) Abandonment. It is unlawful for any person to abandon a motor vehicle in the
right-of-way of streets within the city. No person shall park or leave any vehicle in a wrecked,
junked, partially dismantled or inoperative condition in the right- of-way of streets; except that a
reasonable time, not to exceed 24 hours from the time of disability, shall be permitted for the
removal or servicing of a disabled vehicle in an emergency caused by an accident or sudden
breakdown of the vehicle. Violations of this section shall be a misdemeanor.
F) Bus stops and taxi stands.
1) Spaces designated. The City Council by resolution may designate spaces on streets
in the city where vehicles engaged in carrying passengers for hire shall stand or park. The Public
Works Superintendent shall mark by appropriate sign any bus stop or taxi stand so established.
2) Parking restricted. Except for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers, no
driver of any vehicle other than a bus shall stand or park at a bus stop and no driver of any
vehicle other than a taxicab shall stand or park in a taxi stand.
3) Bus and taxi parking. No driver of any bus shall stand or park his or her bus upon
any street except at a bus stop and except for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers; no
driver of any taxicab shall stand or park upon any street except at a taxi stand.
G) No owner of a motor vehicle shall leave, park, or permit the same to stand on any city
street or alley for more than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours.
Prior Code, § 6- 2- 3) ( Ord. 79, passed 10- 4- 1976; Ord. 174, passed 4- 28- 1983; Ord. 246, passed
4- 23- 1987; Ord. 753, passed 7- 6- 2015; Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015) Penalty, see § 10. 99
71. 04 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING ON CERTAIN STREETS.
A) Generally. The City Council may by resolution designate certain streets or portions of
streets as no parking or no stopping or standing zones and may limit the hours in which the
restrictions apply. The Public Works Superintendent shall mark by appropriate signs each zone
so designated.
Page 3 of 7
B) County Road 42. Whoever parks a vehicle, trailer or attachment thereto of any nature
whatsoever on County State Aid Highway No. 42, between the eastern and western boundaries
of the city, shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. Police officers of the city, Deputy Sheriffs of
the county, and members of the Minnesota State Highway Patrol and any other authorized
individuals and officers of those three governmental units, are hereby authorized to direct the
removal of any vehicle, trailer or attachment of any kind parked in violation of this section, and
the owner thereof shall be liable for all costs incurred in the removal.
Prior Code, § 6- 2- 4) ( Ord. 74, passed 6- 10- 1976; Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015) Penalty, see §
10. 99
71. 05 TIME LIMIT PARKING.
A) The City Council may by resolution designate certain areas where the right to park is
limited during hours specified. The Public Works Superintendent shall mark by appropriate
signs each zone so designated. During the hours specified on the sign, no person shall park a
vehicle in any limited parking zone for a longer period than is so specified.
B) Except on Sundays or holidays, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a longer
consecutive period of time than that designated between the hours of 8: 00 a.m. and 6: 00 p.m. in
any area designated as limited parking area and so marked.
Prior Code, § 6- 2- 5)( Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015) Penalty, see § 10. 99
71. 06 TRUCK PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
A) Declaration ofnuisance. The outside parking or outside storage on public property
within a residential use district of certain motorized and non- motorized vehicles not customarily
used or needed for use in connection with the occupancy of residential property for residential
purposes is found to create a nuisance and detrimental influence on public health, safety,
prosperity, good order and general welfare in a district, by obstructing the view or interfering
with orderly passage of traffic on the streets and on other public properties, bringing unhealthful
and noisome odors and materials into residential neighborhoods, creating cluttered and otherwise
unsightly areas, preventing the full use of residential streets for residential parking, and
otherwise adversely affecting residential property values and neighborhood patterns.
B) Unlawful parking/public property. It is unlawful for any person owning, driving or in
charge of a vehicle as hereinafter set forth to cause or permit the parking or continuous standing
of the vehicles on any public street, alley or other public property within any residential use
district.
1) No parking or continuous standing shall be allowed at any time of any commercial
bus, truck, truck/tractor or tractor/trailer combination used primarily for business, which has a
registered gross weight of 10, 000 pounds or more or which is 22 feet or more in length.
Page 4 of 7
2) No parking or continuous standing shall be allowed at any time of any semi-tractor,
semi-trailer or combination thereof.
3) Exceptions.
a) A truck-parking zone has been established by resolution of the City Council,
and appropriate signs have been posted.
b) The regulations shall not apply to any motor vehicle owned by a public utility,
moving company, rental company or similar company while actually being used to service a
residence or to any motor vehicle used in conjunction with an authorized construction site during
a period that construction is actually taking place including non-working hours and holidays.
C) Unlawful parking/private property.
1) No person shall allow any commercial vehicle over 10, 000 pounds gross weight or
which is 22 feet or more in length to be parked on any private property zoned residential.
2) Exceptions. The regulations shall not apply to any motor vehicle while in use for
loading, unloading or rendering a service for a residential property or to a tow truck, utility
vehicle or similar which is parked/stored for the purpose of emergency preparedness, but only
for the period of time in which the resident operator is on call.
D) Penalty. Violations of the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor.
Prior Code, § 6- 2- 6) ( Ord. 231, passed 11- 13- 1986; Ord. 486, passed 8- 17- 1998; Ord. 588,
passed 2- 7- 2005; Ord. 604, passed 1- 3- 2006) Penalty, see § 10. 99
71. 07 TRUCK PARKING AND LOADING IN BUSINESS DISTRICTS.
Except between the hours of 2: 00 a.m. and 6: 00 a.m. and except for the following, truck
parking shall be permitted on public streets within the business district.
A) Parking trucks restricted.
1) The Council may by resolution establish no truck parking zones in the business
district and the Public Works Superintendent shall mark by appropriate signs any zones so
established. The zones may be established in the business district where heavy traffic by trucks
or other traffic congestion makes parking by trucks a hazard to the safety of vehicles or
pedestrians.
2) Parking of a truck for a period of not more than 30 minutes shall be permitted in the
zones for the purpose of having access to abutting property when it cannot be conveniently
secured otherwise.
B) Truck zones and loading zones.
Page 5 of 7
1) Zones are hereby established, signs posted. The City Council may by resolution
establish spaces in streets as loading zones or truck zones. The hours 8: 00 a.m. to 6: 00 p.m. of
any day except Sunday, New Year' s Day, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day
and Christmas Day or any other time as the City Council may specify in the resolution
establishing the zone, shall be the loading zone or truck zone hours. The Public Works
Superintendent shall mark each zone by appropriate signs.
2) Parking restrictions.
a) Truck zones. During truck zone hours, no person shall stop, stand or park any
vehicle except a truck in a truck zone. No person shall stop, stand or park a truck in a truck zone
during truck zone hours except to receive or discharge passengers or freight and then only for a
period of no longer than is necessary for the purpose.
b) Loading zone. During loading zone hours, no person shall stop, stand or park
any vehicle in a loading zone except to receive or discharge passengers or freight and then only
for a period no longer than necessary for the purpose. No person shall occupy a loading zone
with a vehicle other than a truck for more than five minutes during those hours.
3) Property owner initiative.
a) Any person desiring the establishment of a loading zone or truck zone abutting
the premises occupied by him or her shall make written application therefore to the City Council.
b) If the Council grants the request, the proper city officer shall bill the applicant
for the estimated cost of placing signs and of painting the curb.
c) When the amount is paid to the City Treasurer, the Public Works
Superintendent shall install the necessary signs and paint the curb.
C) Semi- trailers. No person shall allow a semi-trailer to stand or be parked on any public
parking lot between 12: 00 a.m. and 8: 00 a.m., except in an emergency in order to change
tractors.
Prior Code, § 6- 2- 7)( Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015) Penalty, see § 10. 99
71. 08 PARKING DURING SNOW REMOVAL.
A) Prohibitedparking. No person shall park any motor vehicle in an unplowed area of any
street or road for a period of 48 hours after a two-inch or more snowfall until the snowplowing is
completed in the street, road or area involved.
B) Removal of vehicle, redemption. If motor vehicles have been parked prior to a snow
storm, the vehicle shall promptly be removed by owner or person having control over the vehicle
upon accumulation of two or more inches of snowfall and any motor vehicle parked in violation
of this section may be removed, without notice to the owner, to any parking lot or garage
Page 6 of 7
designated by the City Council and the vehicle may be redeemed by the owner only upon paying
the cost of removing, towing and storage to any party having the claim for services rendered in
the removing, towing and storing of the motor vehicle. For purposes of this section, any person
who operates or allows another to operate his or her vehicle in the public roads or streets of the
city shall be deemed to have consented to the removal and storage of the vehicle under the terms
of this section and consent shall extend to the storage thereof without liability for any damage to
the vehicle or its contents while being removed or so stored.
C) Lien, sale ofvehicle. All fines and costs levied under this section, including the cost of
removal and storage, shall be a lien upon the vehicle in question and if not paid within 15 days
following the removal of the vehicle and the imposition of fines in the event of prosecution, the
city may sell the property in the manner provided by § 93. 04.
Prior Code, § 6- 2- 8) ( Ord. 11, passed 12- 7- 1965) Penalty, see § 10. 99
71. 09 SIGNS POSTED.
The Public Works Superintendent shall cause signs to be posted in all areas where parking is
limited or prohibited, indicating the limitations or prohibitions.
Prior Code, § 6- 2- 9) ( Ord. 79, passed 10- 14- 1976; Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015)
71. 10 IMPOUNDMENT OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES.
Any police officer may remove a vehicle from a street to a garage or any other place of
safety when the vehicle is left unattended and constitutes an obstruction to traffic or hinders
snow removal or street improvement or maintenance operations. The vehicle shall not be
released until the fees for towing and storage are paid.
Prior Code, § 6- 2- 10)
71. 11 VIOLATION.
The presence of any motor vehicle on any street when standing or parked in violation of this
Chapter is prima facie evidence that the registered owner of the vehicle committed or authorized
the commission of the violation. Unless otherwise specified, any violation of this Section shall
be a petty misdemeanor.
Page 7 of 7
CHAPTER 72: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
72.01 Regulation of recreational vehicles; intent
72.02 Definitions
72.03 Recreational vehicle operation restricted
72.04 Designation of public areas for use
72.05 Hours for use
72.06 Violation
72. 01 REGULATION OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES; INTENT.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide reasonable regulations for the use of recreational
motor vehicles on public and private property in the city to protect life, property and to prevent
public nuisances. No section hereafter shall be construed to minimize regulations set forth in the
M.S. Chapter 168 ( Motor Vehicle Registration), M.S. Chapter 169 ( Motor Vehicle Operation),
M.S. Chapter 171 ( Driver License Regulations) and M.S. Chapter 84 ( Snowmobile Regulations),
as they may be amended from time to time.
Prior Code, § 6- 3- 1) ( Ord. 586- 2004, passed 12- 6- 2004)
72. 02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
OPERATE. To ride in or on and control the operation of a recreational motor vehicle.
RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle designed for or capable of
being used for sport, amusement or recreation, including but not limited to motorbikes, golf carts,
mini-bikes, go karts, hovercrafts, all terrain vehicles or dune buggies, but excluding motor
vehicles designed for commercial, industrial or agricultural use, children' s battery-operated
vehicles, electric personal assistive mobility devices as defined in M.S. § 169. 01, Subd. 90, as it
may be amended from time to time, and wheelchairs as defined in M.S. § 169. 01, Subd. 24( a), as
it may be amended from time to time. Snowmobiles shall not be regulated by this chapter, but
shall be regulated by Chapter 73.
Prior Code, § 6- 3- 2) ( Ord. 586- 2004, passed 12- 6- 2004)
72. 03 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OPERATION RESTRICTED.
It shall be unlawful to operate a recreational motor vehicle within the city:
Page 1 of 3
A) Within 150 feet of a residence other than their own provided, however, between 150 to
300 feet of a residence, a recreational motor vehicle may be operated at speeds not to exceed ten
mph. The restriction of this division does not apply when:
1) Loading, unloading or testing the recreational vehicle at a speed not to exceed ten
mph on the owner' s property;
2) Operation on an owner' s property at a speed not to exceed ten mph, where the
owner lives immediately adjacent to property on which it is lawful to operate recreational
vehicles; and
3) Notwithstanding the above, recreational vehicles may be used on a person' s
property as a service vehicle for yard, driveway and sidewalk maintenance including but not
limited to snowplowing, landscaping and yard maintenance at speeds not to exceed ten mph.
B) On publicly-owned land including school, undesignated park property, playgrounds,
recreation areas and golf courses;
C) In a manner so as to create a loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs, annoys
or interferes with the peace and quiet of other persons;
D) On a public sidewalk or walkway provided or used for pedestrian travel;
E) While under the influence of an intoxicating or alcoholic beverage or narcotics of
habit- forming drugs;
F) At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all existing circumstances;
G) In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any
person or property or to cause injury or damage thereto;
H) On any city street, state or county highway or right- of-way, without a valid vehicle
license to operate on the city street, state or county highway or right-of-way except to cross the
street, highway or right-of-way at right angles thereto;
I) In a manner to intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any animal, wild or domestic;
J) On land not his or her own, except where otherwise allowed by law, without the written
or oral permission of the owner, occupant or lessee of the land. Written permission may be given
on a posted notice of any kind or description that the owner, occupant or lessee prefers, so long as
it specifies the kinds of vehicles allowed, such as saying, " recreational vehicles allowed," " trail
bikes allowed," " all-terrain vehicles allowed," or words substantially similar; and
K) Exceptions:
1) The prohibitions set forth in §§ 72. 03( A),(B), ( C), ( D), ( H), ( J) and 72.05 shall not
Page 2 of 3
apply to the use of a recreational vehicle for a rescue, emergency or law-enforcement purpose; or
2) The prohibitions set forth in §§ 72. 03( A),(B), ( C), ( D), ( H), ( J) and 72.05 shall not
apply to the use of recreational vehicles for park maintenance or official city use.
Prior Code, § 6- 3- 3) ( Ord. 586- 2004, passed 12- 6- 2004) Penalty, see § 10. 99
72. 04 DESIGNATION OF PUBLIC AREAS FOR USE.
The Council may designate areas for use of recreational vehicles by approval of a majority
of the members of the City Council upon public notice being given. The areas designated may
be changed from time to time by the City Council. Any area designated shall be published in the
official newspaper of the city in a conspicuous place after the approval. If an area is changed,
the change shall be published in like manner in the official newspaper of the city. An up to date
map of designated park areas open for recreational motor vehicles shall be kept on file in the
office of the City Clerk, and the City Clerk shall provide, on request, a copy of the map together
with the applicable rules, regulations and this chapter to each person requesting the information
from the city.
Prior Code, § 6- 3- 4) ( Ord. 586- 2004, passed 12- 6- 2004)
72. 05 HOURS FOR USE.
Hours for use are 7: 00 a.m. to 10: 00 p.m., except that on Friday and Saturday nights and
evenings preceding legal holidays, the hours shall be between 7: 00 a.m. and 1: 00 a.m.
Prior Code, § 6- 3- 5) ( Ord. 586- 2004, passed 12- 6- 2004) Penalty, see § 10. 99
72. 06 VIOLATION.
Any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Prior Code, § 6- 3- 6) ( Ord. 586- 2004, passed 12- 6- 2004) Penalty, see § 10. 99
Page 3 of 3
CHAPTER 73: SNOWMOBILES
Section
73. 01 Regulation of snowmobiles; state laws adopted
73. 02 Snowmobile operation restricted
73. 03 Responsibility of owner
73. 04 Exceptions
73. 05 Violation
73. 01 REGULATION OF SNOWMOBILES; STATE LAWS ADOPTED.
A) The use and operation of certain vehicles commonly called snowmobiles within the city
limits is hereby regulated as set forth in this chapter.
B) The Snowmobile Laws, M.S. §§ 84. 81 through 84. 89, as they may be amended from
time to time, are hereby adopted and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
C) Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, the Parks, Recreation and Natural
Resources Commission shall have the authority to regulate events or programs conducted on
public property in which snowmobiles are used. The City Council, after having considered
recommendations of the Parks, Recreation and Natural Resources Commission, shall have the
authority to designate city park areas as it shall deem available for that use.
D) For the purposes of this chapter, a designated snowmobile trail is one that is maintained
by a snowmobile club recognized by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
E) For the purposes of this chapter, direct snowmobile trial access is defined as the most
direct route from a starting point to or from the closest designated snowmobile trail.
F) For the purposes of this chapter, a snowmobile is defined as a self-propelled vehicle
designed for travel on snow or ice steered by skis or runners.
Prior Code, § 6- 3A- 1) ( Ord. 600, passed 11- 7- 2005)
73. 02 SNOWMOBILE OPERATION RESTRICTED.
A) Unlawful operations. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile within
the city limits of the city in violation of the following restrictions:
1) Between the hours of 11: 00 p.m. and 7: 00 a.m. every day;
2) On any land not his or her own, except where otherwise allowed by law, without the
written or oral permission of the owner, occupant or lessee of those lands;
Page 1 of 3
3) No snowmobile may be operated within 300 feet of a residence at a speed greater
than 15 mph unless the snowmobile is operated on a designated snowmobile trial;
4) Within public right-of-way at a speed in excess of 15 mph;
5) At any place in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger or be
likely to endanger any person or property of another or to cause injury or damage thereto;
6) On any sidewalk or bituminous trails in the city provided for pedestrian travel
except those sidewalks and bituminous trails that are located on a designated snowmobile trail;
7) On any school property within 100 feet of any building, sliding, skating or other
athletic areas during the period of one hour before through one hour after normal school hours;
8) Within 100 feet of any person fishing, skating rink area or sliding area or any other
area where the operation would conflict with the use of, or endanger other persons or property;
9) Ina cemetery;
10) No snowmobile may be operated on a designated snowmobile trail at a speed of
greater than 25 mph or the posted speed limit, whichever is less;
11) No snowmobile may be operated on a designated snowmobile trail when the trail
has been marked as closed; and
12) No snowmobile may be operated in the city except:
a) While loading or unloading a snowmobile from a trailer or other similar form
of transport;
b) While performing maintenance and repair of a snowmobile within 300 feet of
the registered owner' s place of residence;
c) For direct snowmobile trail access to or from the closest designated
snowmobile trail; or
d) On a designated snowmobile trail.
B) Keys in ignition, motor running; towing. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or
allow any snowmobile to be or remain unattended while the motor is running or with keys to
start the snowmobile in the ignition switch; and no snowmobile shall tow any person or thing on
any public street or highway or rights- of-way, except through the use of a rigid tow bar attached
to the rear of the snowmobile.
C) Operation at intersections. No snowmobile shall enter any uncontrolled intersection
Page 2 of 3
without making a complete stop and then the operator shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle
or pedestrian in the intersection, or so close to the intersection as to constitute an immediate
hazard. No snowmobile shall be operated at any uncontrolled intersection in violation of the
controls as may there be established and without conforming to the laws and regulations in effect
at the controlled intersections regulating vehicular and pedestrian movement therein.
Prior Code, § 6- 3A-2) ( Ord. 600, passed 11- 7- 2005) Penalty, see § 10. 99
73. 03 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for the owner of any snowmobile to permit the
snowmobile to be operated contrary to the provisions hereof.
Prior Code, § 6- 3A-3) Penalty, see § 10. 99
73. 04 EXCEPTIONS.
A) The limitations of this chapter shall not apply in the case of emergency when any street,
road or highway to reach a given location within the city is impassable by other motor vehicles.
B) The prohibitions set forth in § 73. 02( A)( 3), ( A)( 6) and ( A)( 12) shall not apply to
snowmobiles with a motor size of 130 cubic centimeter cylinder displacement or less
children' s snowmobiles").
Prior Code, § 6- 3A-4) ( Ord. 600, passed 11- 7- 2005)
73. 05 VIOLATION.
Any person violating this chapter shall, upon conviction therefore, be found guilty of a
misdemeanor.
Prior Code, § 6- 3A-5) Penalty, see § 10. 99
Page 3 of 3
CHAPTER74: TRAFFICSCHEDULES
Schedule
I. Truckroutes
SCHEDULEI: TRUCKROUTES.
Thefollowingaretruckrouteswithinthecity:
LynnAvenue, fromTrunkHighway13to123rdStreet
GlendaleRoad, fromMcCollDrivetoCountyRoad42
CountyRoad16, fromBurnsvillebordertoShakopeeborder
TrunkHighway13
CountyRoad42, fromBurnsvillebordertoPriorLakeborder
CountyRoad27
123rdStreet, fromLynnAvenuetoYosemiteAvenue
TrunkHighway13FrontageRoad, fromYosemiteAvenueto
RhodeIslandAvenue
RhodeIslandAvenue, fromTrunkHighway13FrontageRoadto
126thStreet
126thStreet, fromLouisianaAvenuetoTrunkHighway13
LouisianaAvenue, fromTrunkHighway13FrontageRoadto
126thStreet
PennsylvaniaAvenue, fromTrunkHighway13FrontageRoadto
126thStreet
TrunkHighway13FrontageRoad, from126thStreettoTrunk
Highway101FrontageRoad
TrunkHighway101FrontageRoad, fromTrunkHighway13
FrontageRoadtoShakopeeborder
QuentinAvenue, fromTrunkHighway13to123rdStreet
154thStreet, fromCountyRoad27toHanrehanLakeBoulevard
HanrehanLakeBoulevard, from154thStreettoBurnsvilleborder
PriorCode, § 6-1-7) (Ord. 782, passed3-6-2017) Penalty, see § 10.99
Page1of1
CHAPTER 75: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
L Truck parking
SCHEDULE L• TRUCK PARKING.
A) Permitted. Truck parking is hereby permitted on 123rd Street behind 4749
Highway 13 ( between Ottawa Avenue and the eastern property line of 4749 Highway 13)
between the hours of 6: 00 a.m. and 10: 00 p.m.
B) Prohibited. Truck parking is prohibited on 123rd Street from Ottawa Avenue to
Natchez Avenue except between the hours of 6: 00 a.m. and 10: 00 p.m., during which time truck
parking is permitted on the north side of 123rd Street from Ottawa Avenue to Natchez Avenue
and on that portion of the south side of 123rd Street 111 feet east from Ottawa Avenue.
Page 1 of 1
CHAPTER 90: AIR POLLUTION
Section
90. 01 Minnesota Rules Section 7009.0020 prohibited emissions
90. 02 Enforcement
90. 01 MINNESOTA RULES SECTION 7009.0020 PROHIBITED EMISSIONS.
Minnesota Rules Section 7009.0020, one copy of which has been marked as an official copy and
which is on file in the office of the City Administrator, is hereby adopted. Every provision contained
in this rule, except as modified or amended by this chapter, is hereby adopted and made a part as if
fully set forth herein and any and all future amendments or modifications to Minnesota Rules Section
7009. 0020 shall be adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
Prior Code, § 4- 5- 1) ( Ord. 122, passed 4- 24- 1980)
90. 02 ENFORCEMENT.
The Chief of the Fire Department serving the city, a representative authorized by the Chief of the
Fire Department, or an agent duly appointed by the city, shall enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Prior Code, § 4- 5- 2) ( Ord. 122, passed 4- 24- 1980)
Page 1 of 1
CHAPTER91: ANIMALCONTROL
Section
91.01 Definitions
91.02 Dogsandcats
91.03 Non-domesticanimals
91.04 Farmanimals
91.05 Impounding
91.06 Kennels
91.07 Nuisances
91.08 Animalwarden; animalshelter
91.09 Animalspresentingadangertohealthandsafetyofthecity
91.10 Diseasedanimals
91.11 Dangerousanimals
91.12 Dangerousanimalrequirements
91.13 Basiccare
91.14 Breedingmoratorium
91.15 Interferencewithofficers
91.16 DesignatedOutdoorDogAreas
91.17 Violations
91.01 DEFINITIONS.
Forthepurposeofthischapter, thefollowingdefinitionsshallapplyunlessthecontextclearly
indicatesorrequiresadifferentmeaning.
ANIMAL. Anymammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird (includingallfowlandpoultry) orother
membercommonlyacceptedasapartoftheanimalkingdom. ANIMALSshallbeclassifiedasfollows:
1) DOMESTICANIMALS. Thoseanimalscommonlyacceptedasdomesticatedhousehold
pets. Unlessotherwisedefined, theseanimalsshallincludedogs, cats, cagedbirds, gerbils, hamsters,
guineapigs, domesticatedrabbits, fish, non-poisonous, non-venomousandnon-constrictingreptilesor
amphibians, andothersimilaranimals. RegisteredpurebredminiatureVietnamesepotbellypigsand
othersimilarregisteredminiaturepigslimitedtooneperhouseholdnotexceeding120pounds, andnot
keptforbreedingpurposes, allowedwiththesamelicensingrequirementsandcontrolsasrequiredby
thischapterforkeepingdogs.
2) FARMANIMALS. Thoseanimalscommonlyassociatedwithafarmorperformingwork
inanagriculturalsetting. Unlessotherwisedefined, theanimalsshallincludemembersofthe
equestrianfamily (horses, mules), bovinefamily (cows, bulls), sheep, poultry (chickens, turkeys), fowl
ducks, geese), swine, goats, beesandotheranimalsassociatedwithafarm, ranch, orstable.
3) NON-DOMESTICANIMALS. Thoseanimalscommonlyconsideredtobenaturallywild
andnotnaturallytrainedordomesticated, orwhicharecommonlyconsideredtobeinherently
Page1of20
dangeroustothehealth, safetyandwelfareofpeople. Unlessotherwisedefined, theanimalsshall
include:
a) Anymemberofthelargecatfamily (familyfelidae) includinglions, tigers, cougars,
bobcats, leopardsandjaguars, butexcludingcommonlyaccepteddomesticatedhousecats;
b) Anynaturallywildmemberofthecaninefamily (familycanidae) includingwolves,
foxes, coyotes, dingoesandjackals, butexcludingcommonlyaccepteddomesticateddogs;
c) Anycrossbreeds, suchascrossbreedsbetweendogsandcoyotes, ordogsandwolves,
butdoesnotincludecrossbreedsbetweendomesticatedanimals;
d) Anymemberorrelativeoftherodentfamilyincludinganyskunk (whetherornot
de-scented), raccoon, orsquirrel, butexcludingthosemembersotherwisedefinedorcommonly
acceptedasdomesticatedanimals;
e) Anypoisonous, venomous, constricting, orinherentlydangerousmemberofthe
reptileoramphibianfamiliesincludingrattlesnakes, boaconstrictors, pythons, pitvipers, crocodiles
andalligators; and
f) Anyotheranimalwhichisnotexplicitlylistedabovebutwhichcanbereasonably
definedbythetermsofthischapter, includingbutnotlimitedtobears, deer, monkeys, gamefishand
anyanimalorspeciesprohibitedbyMinnesotaorfederallaw.
ANIMALWARDEN/ANIMALCONTROLOFFICER. Anypersondesignatedbythecityto
enforcethischapter.
ATLARGE. Offthepremisesoftheownerandnotunderthecustodyandcontroloftheowneror
otherperson, eitherbyleash, cord, chain, orotherwiserestrainedorconfined.
CAT. Boththemaleandfemaleofthefelidaespeciescommonlyacceptedasdomesticated
householdpets.
DOG. Boththemaleandfemaleofthecaninespecies, commonlyacceptedasdomesticated
householdpetsandotherdomesticatedanimalsofadogkind.
KENNEL. Thekeepingoffourormoredogsandthekeepingoffourormorecatsonthesame
premises, whetherownedbythesamepersonornotandforwhateverpurposekept, exceptthatafresh
litterofpupsorkittensmaybekeptforaperiodof16weeksbeforethekeeping, shallbedeemedtobe
aKENNEL.
OWNER. Anypersonorpersons, firm, associationorcorporationowning, keeping, orharboring
ananimal.
QUARANTINE. Isolatingananimaltopreventthespreadof
acontagiousdisease.
UNDERCONTROL. Ananimalwhenitisoff-leashduringanorganizedcompetitiveeventor
Page2of20
duringtrainingfortheorganizedcompetitionandisimmediatelyresponsivetothecommandsofits
ownerortrainer.
UNDERRESTRAINT. Ananimal, whenitiscontrolledbyachainorleash, iswithinthelimits
oftheowner’sproperty, orisconfinedwithinavehicle.
PriorCode, § 5-4-1) ( Ord. 579, passed7-26-2004)
91.02 DOGSANDCATS.
A) Numberofdogsandcatsallowed. Nomorethanthreedogsandnomorethanthreecatsshall
bemaintainedatanypropertywithinaresidentialdistrict.
B) Runningatlargeprohibited. Itshallbeunlawfulforthedogorcatofanypersonwhoowns,
harbors, orkeepsadogorcat, torunatlarge. Aperson, whoowns, harbors, orkeepsadogorcat
whichrunsatlargeshallbeguiltyofamisdemeanor. Dogsorcatsonaleashandaccompaniedbya
responsiblepersonoraccompaniedbyandunderthecontrolanddirectionofaresponsibleperson, so
astobeeffectivelyrestrainedbycommandasbyleash, shallbepermittedinstreetsoronpublicland
unlessthecityhaspostedanareawithsignsreading “DogsorCatsProhibited.”
C) Licenserequired.
1) Alldogsovertheageof16weekskept, harboredormaintainedbytheirownersinthe
city, shallbelicensedandregisteredwiththecity. DoglicensesshallbeissuedbytheSavagePolice
Departmentuponpaymentofthelicensefee. Theownershallstate, atthetimeapplicationismadefor
thelicenseanduponformsprovidedforthepurpose, hisorhernameandaddressandthename, breed,
colorandsexofeachdogownedorkeptbyhimorher. Theownershallalsoindicatewhetherthedog
hasbeendesignatedasadangerousorpotentiallydangerousdogasdefinedbyM.S. §3 47.50,a sitmay
beamendedfromtimetotime, inanyjurisdiction. Nolicenseshallbegrantedforadog, whichhasnot
beenvaccinatedagainstrabies, asprovidedinthissection. Newresidentstothecitymustlicensetheir
dogswithin30daysaftertheymoveintothecity.
2) ItshallbethedutyofeachownerofadogsubjecttothissectiontopaytotheSavage
PoliceDepartmentthelicensefeeasimposedbytheCouncilbyordinance. Thefeesmay, fromtimeto
time, beamendedbytheCouncilbyordinance.
3) Uponpaymentofthelicensefee, theSavagePoliceDepartmentshallissuetotheownera
licensecertificateandmetallictagforeachdoglicensed. Thetagshallhavestampedonittheyearfor
whichitisissuedandthenumbercorrespondingwiththenumberonthecertificate. Everyownershall
berequiredtoprovideeachdogwithacollartowhichthelicensetagmustbeaffixedandshallseethat
thecollarandtagareconstantlyworn. Incaseadogtagislostordestroyed, aduplicateshallbeissued
bytheSavagePoliceDepartment. AchargeasdeterminedbytheCityCouncilshallbemadeforeach
duplicatetag. Dogtagsshallnotbetransferablefromonedogtoanotherandnorefundsshallbemade
onanydoglicensefeeortagbecauseofdeathofadogortheowner’sleavingthecitybeforethe
expirationofthelicenseperiod. AlllicensesarerenewedannuallyandarevaliduntilDecember31of
thatyear.
4) Thelicensingprovisionsofthissectionshallnotapplytodogswhoseownersare
Page3of20
non-residentstemporarilywithinthecity, nortodogsbroughtintothecityforthepurposeof
participatinginanydogshow. “Temporaryresidents” withinthecityisdefinedasresidinginthecity
forlessthan30days.
5) ThefundsreceivedbytheSavagePoliceDepartmentfromalldoglicensesandmetallic
tagsfeesshallfirstbeusedtodefrayanycostsincidentaltotheenforcementofthissection; including,
butnotrestrictedto, thecostsoflicenses, metallictags, andimpoundingandmaintenanceofthedogs.
D) Cats. Catsshallbeincludedascontrolledbythissectioninsofarasrunningatlarge, pickup,
impounding, boardingandproofofrabiesvaccineisconcerned. Allotherprovisionsofthissection
exceptfortherequirementofalicenseunder § 91.02(C) shallalsoapplytocatsunlessotherwise
provided.
E) Vaccination.
1) Alldogsandcatskeptharbored, maintained, ortransportedwithinthecityshallbe
vaccinatedbyalicensedveterinarianforrabies, witharabiesvaccine, andthereaftertobeimmunized
fromrabiesatalltimes. Vaccinationshallbeperformedonlybyadoctorqualifiedtopractice
veterinarymedicineinthestateinwhichthedogorcatisvaccinated. Aveterinarianwhovaccinatesa
dogorcatinthecityshallcompleteacertificateofvaccination. Onecopyshallbeissuedtothedogor
catowner.
2) Acertificateofvaccinationmustbekeptbytheowneronwhichisstatedthedateof
vaccination, owner’snameandaddress, theanimal’sname (ifapplicable), sex, descriptionandweight,
thetypeofvaccine, andtheveterinarian’ssignature. UpondemandmadebytheSavagePolice
Department, animalwardenorapoliceofficer, theownershallpresentforexaminationtherequired
certificate(s) ofvaccinationfortheanimal(s). Incaseswherethecertificate(s) arenotpresented, the
ownerorkeeperoftheanimal(s) shallhavesevendaysinwhichtopresentthecertificate(s) toapolice
officerunlesstheanimalhasbittenoraggressivelyattackedapersonorotheranimalinwhichcase
immediatecertificationshallbenecessary. Failuretodososhallbedeemedaviolationofthissection.
PriorCode, § 5-4-2) ( Ord. 579, passed7-26-2004; Ord. 678, passed12-20-2010) Penalty, see § 10.99
91.03 NON-DOMESTICANIMALS.
Itshallbeillegalforanypersontoown, possess, harbor, orofferforsale, anynon-domesticanimal
withinthecitylimits. Anyownerofananimalatthetimeofadoptionofthiscodeshallhave30daysin
whichtoremovetheanimalfromthecityafterwhichtimethecitymayimpoundtheanimalas
provided
forinthischapter. Anexceptionshallbemadetothisprohibitionforanimalsspecificallytrainedfor
andactuallyprovidingassistancetothehandicappedordisabled, andforthoseanimalsbroughtintothe
cityaspartofanoperatingzoo, veterinarianclinic, scientificresearchlaboratoryoralicensedshowor
exhibition.
PriorCode, § 5-4-3) ( Ord. 579, passed7-26-2004) Penalty, see § 10.99
91.04 FARMANIMALS.
Page4of20
Farmanimalsshallbeallowedonlyasalegalnon-conformingusewhereasimilaruseoccurred
beforethemostrecentchangeintheZoningCodeandcontinuesconsistentlythereafter. Animals
broughtintothecityaspartofanoperatingzoo, veterinarianclinic, scientificresearchlaboratoryora
licensedshoworexhibitionarenotconsideredfarmanimals. Further, notwithstandingtheabove, the
keepingofhenchickensshallbeallowed, subjecttothefollowingstandardsidentifiedinSections (A)
through (D) below. BeekeepingshallbepermittedsubjecttostandardsidentifiedinSections (E)
through (I).
A) Nomorethan4henchickensareallowedonanyparceloflandintheCity. Theraising
ofchickensforbreedingpurposesisprohibited.
B) Everypersonwhoowns, controls, keeps, maintainsorharborshenchickensmustkeep
themconfinedonthepremisesatalltimesinachickencooporchickenrun. Chickensovertheageof
4weeksshallnotbekeptinsideofadwellingorgarage.
C) Chickensshallbeproperlyprotectedfromtheweatherandpredatorsinashelterorcoop
andhaveaccesstotheoutdoorsinanenclosureorfencedarea. Theshelterand/orenclosureshallmeet
thefollowingrequirements:
1) Anychickencooporchickenrunmustcomplywithallapplicablebuildingandzoning
codesandregulations.
2) Nochickencooporrunshallbeconstructedonanyparceloflandpriortoconstructionof
theprincipalbuilding.
3) Achickencooporruncannotbelocatedinthefrontorsideyard.
4) Achickencooporrunmustbesetbackatleast50feetfromanyexistingresidential
structureonanadjacentlotandatleast10feetfromthepropertyline.
5) Achickencooporrunmustbescreenedfromviewwithasolidfenceorlandscaped
bufferwithaminimumheightof4feet.
6) Achickencoopcanbenolargerthan10squarefeetperchickenandcannotexceed6feet
inheight. Achickenruncannotexceed20squarefeetperchickenandthefencingcannotexceed6feet
inheight. Achickenrunmaybeenclosedwithwoodorwovenwirematerials, andmayallowchickens
tocontacttheground. Achickenrunmusthaveaprotectiveoverheadnettingtokeepthechickens
separatedfromotheranimals.
7) Achickencoopmustbeelevatedaminimumof12inchesandamaximumof24inchesto
ensurecirculationbeneaththecoop.
D) Ownersshallcareforchickensinahumanemannerandshallpreventnuisance
conditionsbyensuringthefollowingconditionsaremet:
1) Chickengrainsandfeedmustbestoredinrodentproofcontainers.
Page5of20
2) Nochickenmaybekeptorraisedinamannerastocauseinjuryorannoyancetopersons
onotherpropertyinthevicinitybyreasonofnoise, odor, orfilth.
3) AnychickenrunningatlargemaybeimpoundedbytheCityand, afterbeingimpounded
forthreedaysormorewithoutbeingreclaimedbytheowner, maybedestroyedorsold. Aperson
reclaiminganimpoundedchickenmustpaythecostofimpoundingandkeepingthesame.
E) AsusedinSections (F) through (I) below, thefollowingdefinitionsshallapply:
1) “Apiary” meanstheassemblyofone (1) ormorecoloniesofhoneybeesonasinglelot.
2) “Apiarysite” meansthelotuponwhichanapiaryislocated.
3) “Beekeeper” meansapersonwho: (i) ownsorhaschargeofone (1) ormorecoloniesof
honeybees; and/or (ii) whoownsorcontrolsalotonwhichacolonyislocatedwhetherornotthe
personisintentionallykeepinghoneybees.
4) “Beekeepingequipment” meansanythingusedintheoperationofanapiary, suchashive
bodies, supers, frames, topandbottomboardsandextractors.
5) “Colony” meansanaggregateofhoneybeesconsistingprincipallyofworkers, buthaving,
whenperfect, one (1) queenandattimesdrones, brood, combs, andhoney.
6) “Hive” meansthereceptacleinhabitedbyacolony.
7) “Honeybee” meansalllifestagesofthecommondomestichoneybee, apismellifera
species.
8) “Lot” meansoneunitofarecordedplat, subdivisionorregisteredlandsurvey, ora
recordedparceldescribedbymetesandbounds.
9) “Nucleuscolony” meansasmallquantityofhoneybeeswithaqueenhousedinasmaller
thanusualhiveboxdesignedforaparticularpurpose, andcontainingnosupers.
10) “Person” meansanyindividual, partnership, corporation, company, limitedliability
company, otherentity, orunincorporatedassociation.
11) “Swarming” meanstheprocesswhereaqueenbeeleavesacolonywithalargegroupof
workerbees.
12) “Undevelopedproperty” means: (i) anylotthatisnotimprovedwithastructurethathas
orisrequiredtohaveacertificateofoccupancy; and (ii) allstreetsandhighways.
13) Unusualaggressivebehavior” meansanyinstanceinwhichunusualaggressive
characteristicssuchasstingingorattackingwithoutprovocationoccurs.
F) Requiredconditionsforbeekeepingshallbeasfollows:
Page6of20
1) Honeybeecoloniesshallbekeptinhiveswithremovableframes, whichframesshallbe
keptinsoundandusablecondition.
2) Eachcolonyontheapiarysiteshallbeprovidedwithaconvenientsourceofwaterlocated
ontheapiarysite. Everyeffortshouldbemadetoensurethatthewatersourceisfreeofchemicalsthat
aretypicallyfoundintapwater.
3) Materialsfromahiveorcolonywhichmightencouragethepresenceofhoneybees, such
aswaxcomb, shallbepromptlydisposedofinasealedcontainerorplacedwithinabuildingorother
bee-proofenclosure.
4) ForeachcolonypermittedtobemaintainedunderthisSection, theremayalsobe
maintaineduponthesameapiarysite, onenucleuscolonyinahivestructurenottoexceedonestandard
9-5/8inchdepth10-framehivebody, withnosupers.
5) Beekeepingequipmentshallbemaintainedingoodcondition, includingkeepingthehives
paintediftheyhavebeenpaintedbutarepeelingorflaking, andsecuringunusedequipmentfrom
weather, potentialtheftorvandalism, andoccupancybyswarminghoneybees.
6) Hivesshallbecontinuouslymanagedtoprovideadequatelivingspacefortheirresident
honeybeesinordertopreventswarming.
7) Inanyinstanceinwhichacolonyexhibitsunusualaggressivebehavior, itshallbetheduty
ofthebeekeepertopromptlyre-queenthecolony. Wheneverpossible, queensshallbeselectedfrom
Europeanstockbredforgentlenessandnon-swarmingcharacteristics.
8) Fruittreesandotherfloweringtreeswhicharelocatedonanapiarysiteshallnotbe
sprayed, whileinfullbloom, withanysubstancewhichisinjurioustohoneybees.
G) Colonylocationshallbegovernedbythefollowingrequirements:
1) Excludinglotsthatareten (10) acresormoreinsize, nohiveshalloccupyanyfrontyard.
ForthepurposesofthisSection, acornerlotshallbeconsideredtohavetwo (2) frontyards.
2) Innoinstanceshallanypartofahivebelocatedwithintwenty-five (25) feetofanylot
line.
3) Innoinstanceshallanypartofahivebelocatedwithinfifty (50) feetofanydwellingunit
inanyzoningdistrict.
4) AllapiarieslocatedwithinaresidentialzoningdistrictshallcomplywithSavageCity
CodeSection152.097(V) pertainingtohomeoccupations.
H) Colonydensityshallbegovernedasfollows:
1) EverylotwithintheCityshallbelimitedtothefollowingnumberofcoloniesbasedonthe
sizeofthelot:
Page7of20
1acreorsmaller = 2colonies
morethan1acreto5acres = 4colonies
morethan5acres = norestriction
2) Ifanypersonremoveshoneybeesfromlocationswheretheyarenotdesired, thatperson
shallnotbeconsideredinviolationoftherestrictioninthisSubdivision5, ifthepersontemporarily
housesthehoneybeesontheapiarysiteofabeekeeperregisteredunderthisSectionfornomorethan
30daysandremainsatalltimesincompliancewiththeotherprovisionsofthisSection.
I) Uponpriornoticetotheowneroftheapiarysite, theZoningAdministratorordesignee
shallhavetherighttoinspectanyapiaryforthepurposeofensuringcompliancewiththisSection. It
shallbedeemedaviolationofthisSectionforanypersontoresist, impedeorhindertheZoning
Administratorordesigneeintheperformanceoftheirdutiesininspectinganyapiaryandapiarysite.
PriorCode, § 5-4-4) ( Ord. 579, passed7-26-2004; Ord. 740, passed07-21-2014; Ord. 771, passed05-
02-2016) Penalty, see § 10.99
91.05 IMPOUNDING.
A) Runningatlarge. Anyanimalrunningatlargeisherebydeclaredapublicnuisance. Any
animalcontrolofficer/wardenorpoliceofficermayimpoundanyanimalrunningatlargeandshallgive
noticeoftheimpoundingtotheowneroftheanimal, ifknown. Exceptasotherwiseprovidedinthis
section, itshallbeunlawfultokill, destroy, orotherwisecauseinjurytoanyanimalrunningatlarge.
B) Aggressiveandbitinganimals. Wheneverananimalaggressivelyapproachesorbitesany
humanbeingordomesticanimal, theanimalshallimmediatelybequarantinedforatleasttendaysas
follows.
1) Iftheanimalhasbeeninoculatedwitharabiesvaccineandtheownerhasproofofthe
vaccinationbyacertificatefromalicensedveterinarian, theownermayquarantinethedogorother
animaltotheowner’spropertyexceptasprovidedbelow.
2) Iftheanimalisnotcurrentlyvaccinatedagainstrabies, theanimalshallbequarantinedfor
therequiredtimeperiodinaveterinaryhospitaloftheowner’schoosing, notoutsideofthecountyin
whichthecityislocated, andtheownershallprovideimmediateprooftothecityoftheconfinementin
amannerasmayberequired.
3) Theanimalmaybeconfinedwiththecity’sanimalcontrolfacilityorinaveterinary
facilityforthenecessaryquarantineperiodattheexpenseoftheowner. Theownershalldepositwith
theanimalcontrolofficer/wardenorcity $200forimpoundmentinthecityanimalshelter.
4) Theanimalmaybereleasedattheendofthetimeifalicensedveterinariancertifiesthat
theanimalishealthyandfreefromsymptomsofrabies.
C) Reclaiming. Allanimalsconveyedtothecityanimalsheltershallbekeptinaccordancewith
M.S. §3 5.71, asitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime, unlesstheanimalisadangerousanimalas
definedunder § 91.11, inwhichcaseitshallbekeptforsevenregularbusinessdaysforthetime
specifiedin §9 1.11,w ithhumanetreatmentandsufficientfoodandwaterforitscomfort, atleastfive
Page8of20
regularbusinessdays, unlesstheanimalisadangerousanimalasdefinedunder § 91.11inwhichcase
itshallbekeptforsevenregularbusinessdaysorthetimesspecifiedin §9 1.11andexceptifthe
animalisacruelly-treatedanimalinwhichcaseitshallbekeptfortenregularbusinessdays, unless
soonerreclaimedbytheirownersorkeepersasprovidedbythissection. Incasetheownerorkeeper
shalldesiretoreclaimtheanimalfromthecityanimalshelter, thefollowingshallberequired, unless
otherwiseprovidedforinthisdivisionorestablishedfromtimetotimebyresolutionoftheCouncil:
1) Paymentofimpoundingfees, asprovidedbytheanimalshelter, perdayoranypartofday
theanimaliskeptintheanimalshelter; and
2) Ifadogisunlicensed, paymentofaregularlicensefeeandvalidcertificateofvaccination
forrabiesshotsisrequired.
D) Unclaimedanimals. Attheexpirationofthetimesestablishedindivision (C) ofthissection, if
theanimalhasnotbeenreclaimedinaccordancewiththeprovisionsofthissection, theanimalcontrol
officer/wardenmayletanypersonclaimtheanimalbycomplyingwithallprovisionsinthissection, or
causetheanimaltobedestroyedinaproperandhumanemannerandshallproperlydisposeofthe
remainsthereof. Anymoneycollectedunderthissectionshallbepayabletotheanimalcontrol
officer/warden.
PriorCode, § 5-4-5) ( Ord. 579, passed7-26-2004) Penalty, see § 10.99
91.06 KENNELS.
Becausethekeepingoffourormoredogsandthekeepingoffourormorecatsonthesame
premisesissubjecttogreatabuse, causingdiscomforttopersonsintheareabywayofsmell, noise,
hazard, andgeneralaestheticdepreciation, thekeepingoffourormoredogsandthekeepingoffouror
morecatsonthepremisesisherebydeclaredtobeanuisanceandnopersonshallkeepormaintaina
kennelwithinthecityunlessexemptpursuantto91.06(A)(11).
A) Kennellicense. Akennellicenseshallberequiredforthekeepingoffourormoredogsand
thekeepingoffourormorecats, ofatleast16weeksofage. Byordinance, theCouncilshallestablish
anannualfeeforakennellicense. TheapplicationshallbereferredtotheCouncil, whichmaygrantor
denytherequest. Inadditiontoanyprovisionofstatelawregulatingkennels, thefollowingconditions
andregulationsshallapply.
1) Enclosure. Nopermitshallbegrantedunlesstheprimaryenclosurewithinwhichthe
dogsaretosleep, eatandexerciseshallbeenclosedcompletelywithwiremeshfenceatleastsixfeetin
heightandofsufficientgaugetoensurethedogs’ confinement. Akennelforcatsmustbeoperated
entirelywithintheprincipalstructureonthepremises.
2) Conditionalusepermit. Conditionalusepermit, ifrequiredbytheZoningCode.
3) Terms. PermitsshallexpireonDecember31ofeachyear, andapplicationforrenewal
shallbeaccompaniedbytheannualfee.
4) Application. Theapplicationforkennellicenseshallstatethenameandaddressofthe
owner, thelocationwherethekennelistobekept, thenumberofdogsand/orcatsproposedtobekept
Page9of20
andascaledrawinganddescriptionoftheprimaryenclosureinwhichthedogsand/orcatsare
proposedtobekept. Theownermustalsoindicatewhetherthedogand/orcathasbeendesignatedasa
dangerousorpotentiallydangerousanimalinanyjurisdiction.
5) Notificationofsurroundinghouseholds. Uponreceivinganapplicationforakennel
license, theCityClerkshallnotifyallabuttinghouseholds (allsides, excludingright-of-way) and14
dayspriortotheissuanceofthelicenseforreviewandcomment. Thenotificationshallbea
requirementfortheannualrenewalofthelicense
6) Councilapproval. AllkennellicensesshallbereviewedbytheCouncil. Approvalmay
bedeniedduetoexcessiveconfirmedcomplaintsorotherviolationsofthissection.
7) Healthandsanitaryconditions. Everykennelshallbemaintainedandoperatedinaclean
andhealthfulconditionatalltimes. Theanimalcontrolofficer/wardenorotherpersonchargedwith
enforcementofthiscodemayconductinspectionsofkennelspursuantto §1 0.20. A llrefuse, garbage
andanimalwasteshallberemovedatregularintervalssoastokeepthesurroundingareafreeof
obnoxiousodors.
8) Nuisanceprohibited. Nopersonshallkeep, orallowtobekept, anyanimalwhichis
determinedtobeanuisanceunderthischapter.
9) Exclusions. Thefollowingdonotrequirepermitsunderthissection, butaresubjectto
otherapplicablezoningandordinancerequirements:
a) Petshops;
b) Professionalgroomingfacilities;
c) Veterinaryclinics; and
d) Serviceanimaltrainingfacilitiesforwhichaninterimusepermithasbeengranted
locatedonaparcelgreaterthan6.5acresinsizeandtrainingnomorethantwelve (12) animalsatone
time.
10) Revocation. AnykennellicensemayberevokedbytheCouncilbyreasonoftheviolation
ofanyhealthornuisanceregulation, order, relevantlaworregulation.
11) Grandfatherclause. Allholdersofahobbykennellicenseatthetimeofpassageofthis
chapterareexemptfrom § 91.02(A) ofthischapterprovided:
a) Thelicenseholdershallsubmittothecitythefollowingdocumentationwithrespect
totheanimalscurrentlyintheirpossession:
1. Dogs: Documentationoflicensureforeachdog.
2. Cats: Certificateofvaccinationforeachcat.
b) Adeceasedanimalmaynotbereplaceduntilthetotalnumberofanimalsislessthan
Page10of20
thenumberrequiredforakennellicenseunderthissection.
B) Allpersonswhoownmorethanthreecatsormorethanthreedogsattheeffectivedateofthis
chaptermayapplytothecityforgrandfatherstatus. Theownersmustpresenttothecityacertificateof
vaccinationforeachcatresidinginthehome. Deceaseddogsorcatsmaynotbereplaceduntilthetotal
numberofcatsinthehomeisthreeorless.
PriorCode, § 5-4-6) ( Ord. 579, passed7-26-2004; Ord. 678, passed12-20-2010; Ord. 689, passed10-
17-2011; Ord. 702, passed8-6-2012) Penalty, see § 10.99
91.07 NUISANCES.
A) Habitualbarking. Itshallbeunlawfulforanypersontokeeporharboradog, which
habituallybarksorcries. Habitualbarkingshallbedefinedasbarking, cryingorhowlingforrepeated
intervalsofatleastthreeminuteswithlessthanoneminuteofinterruption. Thebarkingmustalsobe
audibleoffoftheownerorcaretaker’spremises.
B) Damagetoproperty. Itshallbeunlawfulforanyanimaltodamageanylawn, garden, orother
property, whetherornottheownerhasknowledgeofthedamage. Anyanimalcoveredbythis
subdivisionmaybeimpoundedasprovidedinthissectionoracomplaintmaybeissuedbyanyone
aggrievedbyananimalunderthissection, againsttheowneroftheanimalforprosecutionunderthis
section.
C) Cleaninguplitter. Theownerofanyanimalorpersonhavingthecustodyorcontrolofany
animalshallberesponsibleforcleaningupanyfecesoftheanimalanddisposingofthefecesina
sanitarymannerwhetherontheirownproperty, onthepropertyofothersoronpublicproperty. Any
personviolatingthissectionmaybechargedwithamisdemeanorpursuanttothissection.
D) Warrantrequired. Theanimalcontrolofficerorpoliceofficershallnotenterthepropertyof
theownerofananimaldescribedinthissectionunlesstheofficerhasfirstobtainedthepermissionof
theownertodosoorhasobtainedawarrantissuedbyacourtofcompetentjurisdiction, asprovided
forin §1 0.20, tosearchforandseizetheanimal.
E) Other. Anyanimalskeptcontrarytothissectionaresubjecttoimpoundmentasprovidedin
91.05.
PriorCode, § 5-4-8) ( Ord. 579, passed7-26-2004) Penalty, see § 10.99
91.08 ANIMALWARDEN; ANIMALSHELTER.
A) Animalwarden/animalcontrolofficer, animalshelter. Theanimalwardenshallbeappointed
bytheCouncilandshall, alongwithanyothercity-appointeddesignees, havefullauthoritytoenforce
theprovisionsofthischapter. TheCouncilshallsetthecompensationforservicesoftheanimal
warden.
Page11of20
B) Reportsbytheanimalwarden. Theanimalwardenshallaccountforandpayovermonthlyto
thecityallmoneyreceivedbyhimorheronbehalfofthecityandshallgiveanaccuratewrittenreport
eachmonthtothecitystatingallanimalsimpounded, thedurationoftheimpoundment, allanimals
destroyed, themethodofdisposaloftheseanimalsandanyfeesorotherservicesrendered.
C) Animalshelter. TheCouncilshalldesignateasthecityanimalshelter (impound) asuitable
kenneleitherwithinoroutsidethelimitsofthecity.
PriorCode, § 5-4-9) ( Ord. 579, passed7-26-2004)
91.09 ANIMALSPRESENTINGADANGERTOHEALTHANDSAFETYOFTHECITY.
A) If, inthereasonablebeliefoftheanimalcontrolofficer/wardenorpoliceofficer, ananimal
presentsanimmediatedangertothehealthandsafetyofanyperson, ortheanimalisthreatening
imminentharmtoanyperson, ortheanimalisintheprocessofattackinganyperson, theofficermay
destroytheanimalinaproperandhumanemanner.
B) Otherwise, theanimalcontrolofficer/wardenorofficermayapprehendtheanimalanddeliver
ittotheanimalshelterforconfinementunder § 91.05.
C) Iftheanimalisdestroyed, achargeasestablishedbytheCounciltodisposeoftheanimalis
payablebytheowneroftheanimal. Iftheanimalisfoundnottobeadangertothehealthandsafetyof
thecity, itmaybereleasedtotheownerorkeeperinaccordancewith § 91.05(C).
PriorCode, § 5-4-10) (Ord. 579, passed7-26-2004)
91.10 DISEASEDANIMALS.
A) Runningatlarge. Nopersonshallkeeporallowtobekeptonhisorherpremises, oron
premisesoccupiedbyhimorher, norpermittorunatlargeinthecity, anyanimalwhichisdiseasedso
astobeadangertothehealthandsafetyofthecity, eventhoughtheanimalisproperlylicensedunder
thissection.
B) Confinement. Anyanimalreasonablysuspectedofbeingdiseasedandpresentingathreatto
thehealthandsafetyofthepublic, maybeapprehendedandconfinedintheanimalshelterbythe
animalcontrolofficer/wardenorapoliceofficer. Theanimalcontrolofficer/wardenorpoliceofficer
shallhaveaqualifiedveterinarianexaminetheanimal. Iftheanimalisfoundtobediseasedina
mannersoastobeadangertothehealthandsafetyofthecity, theofficershallcausetheanimaltobe
destroyedinaproperandhumanemannerandshallproperlydisposetheremains. Theownerorkeeper
oftheanimaldisposedunderthissectionshallbeliableforthecostofmaintaininganddisposingthe
animal, plusthecostsofanyveterinarianexaminations.
C) Release. Iftheanimal, uponexamination, isnotfoundtobediseasedwithinthemeaningof
thissection, theanimalshallbereleasedtotheownerorkeeperfreeofcharge.
PriorCode, § 5-4-11) (Ord. 579, passed7-26-2004) Penalty, see § 10.99
91.11 DANGEROUSANIMALS.
Page12of20
A) Attackbyananimal. Itshallbeunlawfulforanyperson’sanimaltoinflictorattempttoinflict
bodilyinjurytoanypersonorotheranimalwhetherornottheownerispresent. Thissectionshallnot
applytoanattackbyadogunderthecontrolofanon-dutylawenforcementofficerortoanattack
uponanuninvitedintruderwhohasenteredtheowner’shomewithcriminalintent.
B) Definitions.
DANGEROUSANIMAL. Ananimal, whichhas:
a) Withoutprovocation, causedbodilyinjuryordisfigurementtoanypersononpublic
orprivateproperty;
b) Engagedinanyattackonanypersonundercircumstanceswhichwouldindicate
dangertopersonalsafety;
c) Exhibitedunusuallyaggressivebehavior, suchasanattackonanotheranimal;
d) Bittenoneormorepersonsontwoormoreoccasions;
e) Beenfoundtobepotentiallydangerous, andaftertheownerhasnoticethatthedogis
potentiallydangerous, thedogaggressivelybites, attacks, orendangersthesafetyofhumansor
domesticanimals; or
f) Killedadomesticanimalwithoutprovocationwhileofftheowner’sproperty.
EXEMPTION. Ananimalmaynotbedeclareddangerousifthethreat, injury, ordangerwas
sustainedbyaperson:
a) Whowascommitting, atthetime, awillfultrespassorothertortuponthepremises
occupiedbytheowneroftheanimal;
b) Whowasprovoking, tormenting, abusingorassaultingthedogorwhocanbeshown
tohaverepeatedly, inthepast, provoked, tormented, abused, orassaultedthedog; or
c) Whowascommittingorattemptingtocommitacrime.
POTENTIALLYDANGEROUSANIMAL. Ananimal, whichhas:
a) Withoutprovocation, bittenahumanoradomesticanimalonpublicorprivate
property;
b) Withoutprovocation, chasedorapproachesapersonincludingapersononabicycle
uponthestreets, sidewalks, oranypublicorprivateproperty (otherthantheowner’sproperty) inan
apparentattitudeofattack;
c) Hasengagedinunprovokedattackscausinginjuryorotherwisethreateningthesafety
ofhumansordomesticanimals; or
Page13of20
d) Hasaknownpropensity, tendency, ordispositionforunprovokedattacks.
PROPERENCLOSURE. Securelyconfinedindoorsorinasecurelylockedpenorstructure
suitabletopreventtheanimalfromescapingandtoprovideprotectionfortheanimalfromthe
elements. APROPERENCLOSUREdoesnotincludeaporch, patio, oranypartofahouse, garage, or
otherstructurethatwouldallowtheanimaltoexitofitsownvolition, oranyhouseorstructurein
whichwindowsareopenorinwhichdoororwindowscreensaretheonlybarrierswhichpreventthe
animalfromexiting. Theenclosureshallnotallowtheegressoftheanimalinanymannerwithout
humanassistance. Forexample, apenorkennelforalargedogshallmeetthefollowingminimum
specifications:
a) Haveaminimumoverallfloorsizeof32squarefeet;
b) Sidewallsshallhaveaminimumheightoffivefeetandbeconstructedof11-gaugeor
heavierwire. Openingsinthewireshallnotexceedtwoinches, supportpostsshallbeoneand
one-quarterinchorlargersteelpipeburiedintheground18inchesormore. Whenaconcreteflooris
notprovided, thesidewallsshallbeburiedaminimumof18inchesintheground;
c) Acoverovertheentirepenorkennelshallbeprovided. Thecovershallbe
constructedofthesamegaugewireorheavierasthesidewallsandshallalsohavenoopeningsinthe
wiregreaterthantwoinches;
d) Anentrance/exitgateshallbeprovidedandbeconstructedofthesamematerialas
thesidewallsandshallalsohavenoopeningsinthewiregreaterthantwoinches. Thegateshallbe
equippedwithadevicecapableofbeinglockedandshallbelockedatalltimeswhentheanimalisin
thepenorkennel;
e) Mustbescreenedfromviewofadjacentpropertyandnotplacedcloserthantenfeet
toanylotline, exceptnodogenclosureshallbeplacedinafrontyard, andinnoeventshalladog
enclosurebeplacedcloserthan50feettoanydwellingunitotherthantheowner’sproperty;
f) Theenclosureshallnothavefeces, urine, orfoodscrapsremainingintheenclosure
foraperiodthatislongerthanreasonableandconsistentwithhealthandsanitationandtheprevention
ofodors; and
g) Anyownerofanexistingdogenclosurewhichisanuisanceorsourceoffilthmaybe
requiredtocomplywiththissectionbynoticeofcompliancegivenbythecity. Failuretocomplywith
anoticewithin30daysofissuanceshallbeinviolationofthissection.
UNPROVOKED. Theconditioninwhichtheanimalisnotpurposelyexcited, stimulated,
agitatedordisturbed.
C) Designationaspotentiallydangerousanimal. ThePoliceDepartmentshalldesignateany
animalasapotentiallydangerousanimaluponreceivingtheevidencethatthepotentially
dangerousanimalhas, whenunprovoked, thenbitten, attacked, orthreatenedthesafetyofa
personoradomesticanimalasstatedindivision (B)(2) above. Whenananimalisdeclared
potentiallydangerous, thePoliceDepartmentshallcauseoneownerofthepotentially
Page14of20
dangerousanimaltobenotifiedinwritingthattheanimalispotentiallydangerous. Everyowner
ofapotentiallydangerousanimalshallalsoberequiredtomeetthecriteriasetin §§
91.12(A)(1), ( 4), ( 7), ( 8) and (9) hereof. Theownerofananimaldeclaredpotentiallydangerous
mayfileanapplicationrequestingahearingforthedeterminationastothepotentially
dangerousnatureoftheanimal. TheownershalldepositwiththeCityatthetimeofsubmitting
theapplicationthesumof $1,000. ThehearingshallbeheldbeforeaHearingOfficerwithin14
daysofthefilingoftheapplicationandthedepositofthe $1,000. Intheeventthepotentially
dangerousanimaldeclarationisupheld, actualexpensesofthehearingupto $1,000shallbe
withdrawnfromthedepositbytheCityClerkforreimbursementtotheCityforsaidexpenses.
Theamountremaininginthedeposit, ifany, afterpaymentoftheexpensesshallbereturnedto
theowner. TheHearingOfficershallbeanimpartialemployeeoftheCityoranimpartialthird
partychosenbytheCity. TheHearingOfficershallissueadecisiononthematterwithinten
daysafterthehearing. ThedecisionoftheHearingOfficershallbefinal. Thefailuretofilethe
applicationrequestingahearinganddepositingthe $1,000within14daysofthedateofthe
noticereferredtoabovewillterminatetheowner'srighttoahearing.
D) Designationasadangerousanimal. TheSavagePoliceDepartmentshalldesignateany
animalasadangerousanimaluponreceivingevidencethattheanimalhasviolatedoneofthe
provisionsstatedin §9 1.11(B). T heownerofananimaldeclareddangeroushastherighttoahearing
byanimpartialHearingOfficertodisputethedeclarationasestablishedunder § 91.11(E).
E) Procedure. TheSavagePoliceDepartment, afterhavingdeterminedthatananimalis
dangerous, mayproceedinthefollowingmanner.
1) TheSavagePoliceDepartmentshallcauseoneowneroftheanimaltobenotifiedin
writingorinpersonthattheanimalisdangerousandmayordertheanimalseizedormakesuchorders
asdeemedproper. Thisnoticeshallbeprovidedwithin14daysandshallinclude:
a) Adescriptionoftheseizedanimal; theauthorityforandpurposeofthedangerous
animaldeclarationandseizure; thetime, place, andcircumstancesunderwhichtheanimalwas
declareddangerous; and, iftheanimalhasbeenseized, thetelephonenumberandcontactpersonwhere
thedogiskept;
b) Astatementthattheowneroftheanimalmayrequestahearingconcerningthe
dangerousanimaldeclarationand, ifapplicable, priorpotentiallydangerousanimaldeclarationsunless
ahearingwaspreviouslyheldonapriorpotentiallydangerousanimaldeclarationorwaivedeitherby
theownerorbyoperationoflaw, andthatfailuretodosowithin14daysofthedateofthenoticewill
terminatetheowner’srighttoahearing;
c) Astatementthatifarequestforahearingismadewithin14daysofthenotice, the
ownermustimmediatelycomplywiththerequirementsof §§9 1.11(G)a nd91.12(A)4( ),a nduntilsuch
timeastheHearingOfficerissuesanopinion;
d) AstatementthatiftheHearingOfficeraffirmsthedangerousanimaldeclaration, the
ownerwillhave14daysfromreceiptofthatdecisiontocomplywithallotherrequirementsof §9 1.12;
e) Aformtorequestahearingunderthissubsection; and
Page15of20
f) Astatementthatallactualcostsofthecare, keeping, anddispositionoftheanimal
aretheresponsibilityofthepersonclaiminganinterestintheanimal, excepttotheextentthatacourt
orHearingOfficerfindsthattheseizureorimpoundmentwasnotsubstantiallyjustifiedbylaw.
2) Theownermayrequestahearingforthedeterminationastothedangerousnatureofthe
animal, tobeheldbeforeaHearingOfficerwithin14daysoftherequest. TheHearingOfficershallbe
animpartialemployeeofthecityoranimpartialthirdpartychosenbythecity. Intheeventthe
dangerousanimaldeclarationisupheld, actualexpensesofthehearingupto $1,000willbethe
responsibilityoftheanimal’sowner. TheHearingOfficershallissueadecisiononthematterwithin
tendaysafterthehearing. ThedecisionoftheHearingOfficershallbefinal.
3) Nopersonshallharborananimalafterithasbeenfoundtobedangerousandorderedinto
custodyuntiltherequirementsof §9 1.12aremet.
4) Anownerofadangerousanimalmayrequestperiodicreviewofthedangerousanimal
designationpursuanttoM.S. §3 47.51,S ubd. 3(a).
F) Stoppinganattack. Ifanypoliceofficeroranimalcontrolofficeriswitnesstoanattackbyan
animaluponapersonoranotheranimal, theofficermaytakewhatevermeanstheofficerdeems
appropriatetobringtheattacktoanendandpreventfurtherinjurytothevictim.
G) Notificationofnewaddress. Theownerofananimal, whichhasbeenidentifiedasdangerous
orpotentiallydangerous, mustnotifytheanimalcontrolofficerinwritingiftheanimalistobe
relocatedfromitscurrentaddressorgivenorsoldtoanotherperson. Thenotificationmustbegivenin
writingatleast14dayspriortotherelocationortransferofownership. Thenotificationmustinclude
thecurrentowner’snameandaddress, therelocationaddressandthenameofthenewowner, ifany.
PriorCode, § 5-4-12) (Ord. 579, passed7-26-2004; Ord. 649, passed12-1-2008; Ord. 678, passed12-
20-2010; Ord. 738, passed7-7-2014) Penalty, see § 10.99
91.12 DANGEROUSANIMALREQUIREMENTS.
A) Requirements. IftheHearingOfficerdoesnotorderthedestructionofananimalthathasbeen
declareddangerous, theSavagePoliceDepartmentshallorderthefollowing:
1) Iftheanimalisadog, theownermustcomplywithalldangerousdogrequirementsasset
forthinM.S. §§3 47.52etseq., asitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime;
2) Postthefrontandtherearofthepremiseswithclearlyvisiblewarningsigns, includinga
warningsymboltoinformchildren, thatthereisadangerousanimalonthepropertyasspecifiedin
M.S. §3 47.51,a sitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime;
3) Provideandshowproofannuallyofpublicliabilityinsuranceintheminimumamountof
300,000;
Page16of20
4) Iftheanimalisadogandisoutsidetheproperenclosure, thedogmustbemuzzledand
restrainedbyasubstantialchainorleash (nottoexceedsixfeetinlength) andunderthephysical
restraintofaperson16yearsofageorolder. Themuzzlemustbeofadesignastopreventthedog
frombitinganypersonoranimal, butwillnotcauseinjurytothedogorinterferewithitsvisionor
respiration;
5) Iftheanimalisadog, itmusthaveaneasilyidentifiable, standardizedtagidentifyingthe
dogasdangerousaffixedtoitscollaratalltimesasspecifiedinM.S. §3 47.51,a sitmaybeamended
fromtimetotime;
6) AllanimalsdeemeddangerousbythePoliceDepartmentshallberegisteredand
specificallylicensedasadangerousanimalalongwithpaymentoftheappropriatefeeestablishedby
city. Theanimalshallberegisteredandlicensedwithin14daysafterthedatetheanimalwasso
deemedandprovidesatisfactoryproofthereoftothePoliceDepartment. Animalsdeemeddangerous
byanotherjurisdictionmustberegisteredandlicensedwiththecitypriortotheanimalbeingbrought
intothecity. Allotherrequirementsinthisdivisionmustbesatisfiedbeforethecitywillregistera
dangerousanimal;
7) Iftheanimalisadog, thedogmustbelicensedanduptodateonrabiesvaccination. If
theanimalisacatorferret, itmustbeuptodatewithrabiesvaccination;
8) Theownerofadangerousorpotentiallydangerousanimalmusthaveamicrochip
implantedintheanimalforidentification, andthenameofthemicrochipmanufacturerand
identificationnumberofthemicrochipmustbeprovidedtotheanimalcontrolauthorityorPolice
DepartmentasrequiredunderM.S. §3 47.515,a sitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime; and
9) Iftheanimalisadog, thedogmustbekeptinaproperenclosureasdefinedin
91.11(B).
B) Seizure. AnimalcontrolorthePoliceDepartmentshallimmediatelyseizeanydangerous
animaliftheownerdoesnotmeeteachoftheaboverequirementswithin14daysafterthedatenotice
issenttotheownerthattheanimalisdangerous. Anydangerousanimalbeingrelocatedtothecitythat
hasbeendeclaredinanotherjurisdictionmaybeseizedimmediatelyiftheownerhasnotcomplied
withthestandardssetindivision (A) abovepriortotheanimalbeingbroughtintothecity. Seizure
maybeappealedpursuantto §9 1.11(E)(2).
C) Reclaiminganimals. Adangerousanimalseizedunderdivision (B) abovemaybereclaimed
bytheowneroftheanimaluponpaymentofimpoundingandboardingfeesandpresentingproofto
animalcontrolthateachoftherequirementsunderdivision (A) aboveisfulfilled. Ananimalnot
reclaimedunderthissectionwithin14daysmaybedisposedofasprovidedunder § 91.05(D) andthe
ownerisliabletoanimalcontrolforcostsincurredinconfiningtheanimal.
D) Subsequentoffenses.
1) IfapersonhasbeenconvictedofamisdemeanorforviolatingaprovisionofM.S.
347.51, 347.515, or347.52, andthepersonischargedwithasubsequentviolationrelatingtothe
samedog,t heSavagePoliceDepartmentshallseizethedog,a ndtheprovisionsofM.S. §3 47.54,
Subd. 3shallapply.
Page17of20
2) Ifanownerofananimalotherthanadoghassubsequentlyviolatedtheprovisionsunder
91.11withthesameanimal, theanimalmustbeseizedbyanimalcontrol. Theownermayrequesta
hearingasdefinedin §9 1.11(E).I ftheownerisfoundtohaveviolatedtheprovisionsforwhichthe
animalwasseized, theAnimalControlOfficershallordertheanimaldestroyedinaproperandhumane
mannerandtheownershallpaythecostsofconfiningtheanimal. Ifthepersonisfoundnottohave
violatedtheprovisionforwhichtheanimalwasseized, theownermayreclaimtheanimalunderthe
provisionsofdivision (C) ofthissection. Iftheanimalisnotyetreclaimedbytheownerwithin14days
afterthedatetheownerisnotifiedthattheanimalmaybereclaimed, theanimalmaybedisposedofas
providedunder § 91.05(D) andtheownerisliabletotheanimalcontrolforthecostsincurredin
confining, impoundinganddisposingoftheanimal.
E) Restrictionsondogownership.
1) Exceptasprovidedin §9 1.11(E)(3),n opersonmayownadogifthepersonhas:
a) BeenconvictedofathirdorsubsequentviolationofM.S. §§3 47.51,3 47.515, or
347.52;
b) BeenconvictedofaviolationofunderM.S. §6 09.205(4);
c) BeenconvictedofagrossmisdemeanorunderM.S. §6 09.226, Subd. 1;
d) BeenconvictedofaviolationunderM.S. §6 09.226, Subd. 2;o r
e) HadadogordereddestroyedunderM.S. §3 47.56andbeenconvictedofoneormore
violationsofM.S. §§3 47.51,3 46.515,3 47.52,o r609.226, Subd. 2.
2) Ifanymemberofahouseholdisprohibitedfromowningadogbydivision (E)(1), unless
specificallyapprovedbythePoliceDepartment, nopersoninthehouseholdispermittedtoownadog.
3) Beginningthreeyearsafteraconvictionunderdivision (E)(1) thatprohibitsapersonfrom
owningadog, andannuallythereafter, thepersonmayrequestthattheSavagePoliceDepartment
reviewtheprohibition. TheSavagePoliceDepartmentmayconsidersuchfactsastheseriousnessof
theviolationorviolationsthatledtotheprohibition, anycriminalconvictions, orotherfactsthatthe
SavagePoliceDepartmentdeemsappropriate. TheSavagePoliceDepartmentmayrescindthe
prohibitionentirelyorrescinditwithlimitations. TheSavagePoliceDepartmentalsomayestablish
conditionsapersonmustmeetbeforetheprohibitionisrescinded, including, butnotlimitedto,
successfullycompletingdogtrainingordoghandlingcourses. IftheSavagePoliceDepartment
rescindsaperson’sprohibitionandthepersonsubsequentlyfailstocomplywithanylimitations
imposedbytheSavagePoliceDepartmentorthepersonisconvictedofanyanimalviolationinvolving
unprovokedbitesordogattacks, theSavagePoliceDepartmentmaypermanentlyprohibittheperson
fromowningadoginthisstate.
PriorCode, § 5-4-13) (Ord. 579, passed7-26-2004; Ord. 649, passed12-1-2008; Ord. 689, passed10-
17-2011) Penalty, see § 10.99
Page18of20
91.13 BASICCARE.
Allanimalsshallreceivefromtheirownersorkeeperskindtreatment, housinginthewinterand
sufficientfoodandwaterfortheircomfort. Anypersonnottreatingtheirpetinahumanemannerwill
besubjecttothepenaltiesprovidedinthischapter.
PriorCode, § 5-4-14) (Ord. 579, passed7-26-2004) Penalty, see § 10.99
91.14 BREEDINGMORATORIUM.
Everyfemaledogorfemalecatinheatshallbeconfinedinabuildingorotherenclosureina
mannerthatitcannotcomeincontactwithanotherdogorcatexceptforplannedbreeding. Upon
captureandfailuretoreclaimtheanimal, everydogorcatshallbeneuteredorspayedpriortobeing
transferredtoanewowner.
PriorCode, § 5-4-15) (Ord. 579, passed7-26-2004) Penalty, see § 10.99
91.15 INTERFERENCEWITHOFFICERS.
Nopersonshallinanymannermolest, hinder, orinterferewithanypersonauthorizedbythe
Counciltocapturedogs, catsorotheranimalsandconveythemtothepoundwhileengagedinthe
operation. Norshallanyunauthorizedpersonbreakopenthepound, orattempttodoso, ortakeor
attempttotakefromanyagentanyanimaltakenupbyhimorherincompliancewiththischapter, orin
anyothermannertointerferewithorhindertheofficerinthedischargeofhisorherdutiesunderthis
chapter.
PriorCode, § 5-4-16) (Ord. 579, passed7-26-2004) Penalty, see § 10.99
91.16 DESIGNATEDOUTDOORDOGAREAS.
Licensedfoodandliquorestablishmentsmayapplyforapprovaltoallowdogstoaccompany
personspatronizingthedesignatedoutdoordogareas. Thedesignatedoutdoordogareashallbe
limitedtoapprovedoutdoorareas; however, adogmaybepresentinanapprovedinteriorcorridor
solelyforthepurposeofbeingtransporteddirectlybetweentheentryoftheestablishmentanda
designatedoutdoordogareaifdirectaccesstothedesignatedoutdoordogareaisnotcapableofbeing
provided.
A) ApplicationforPermit. AllapplicationsforapermitissuedunderthisChaptershallbe
madeonformssuppliedbytheIssuingAuthority. Allquestionsaskedorinformationrequiredbythe
applicationformsshallbeansweredfullyandcompletelybytheapplicant.
Anapprovalforadesignatedoutdoordogareaissuedpursuanttothischaptermaynotbe
transferredtoasubsequentowneruponthesaleoftheestablishmentbutshallexpireautomatically
uponthesaleoftheestablishment. Thesubsequentownershallberequiredtoreapplyforapproval
pursuanttothischapterifthesubsequentownerwishestocontinuetoaccommodatepatrons’ dogs, in
additiontocomplyingwithallotherapplicablelicensingrequirementsofthisCode.
B) LicenseRequirements. Anyestablishmentobtainingapprovalforadesignatedoutdoor
Page19of20
dogareashallcomplywiththefollowingrequirements, which, alongwiththeprohibitionsimposedby
Minn. Stats. §157.175, mustbeclearlyprintedonasignorsignspostedonthepremisesinlocationsas
establishedinthissection:
1) Employeesmustbeprohibitedfromtouching, petting, orotherwisehandlingdogs;
2) Employeesandpatronsmustnotallowdogstocomeintocontactwithservingdishes,
utensils, tableware, linens, paperproducts, oranyotheritemsinvolvedinfoodserviceoperations;
3) Patronsmustkeeptheirdogsonaleashatalltimesandmustkeeptheirdogsunder
reasonablecontrol;
4) Dogsmustnotbeallowedonchairs, tables, orotherfurnishings; and
5) Dogwastemustbecleanedimmediatelyandtheareasanitized.
Thesignrequiredbythissectionshallbepostedwithinthedesignateddogareainamannerand
placethatisconspicuoustoemployeesandpatrons. Additionally, aclearlyprintedsignshallbeposted
withintheentryoftheestablishmentthatindicateswheredogsareallowedonthepremises.
C) Prohibitions. Patronsmustabidebythefollowingrequirementswhenbringingdogs
intoestablishmentswithdesignatedoutdoordogareas:
1) DangerousandpotentiallydangerousdogsasdefinedinMinn. Stats. §347.50shallnot
accompanypatronsintotheestablishment; and
2) Alldogsmustbelicensedandrestrainedbyaleash.
D) ServiceAnimals. Nothinginthischaptershallbeconstruedtolimit:
1) Therightofapersonwithdisabilitiestoaccessplacesofpublicaccommodationwhile
accompaniedbyaserviceanimalasprovidedinMinn. Stats. §§ 256C02and363A.19; or
2) Thelawfuluseofaserviceanimalbyalicensedpeaceofficer.
Ord. 790, passed06-19-2017) Penalty, see § 10.99
91.17 VIOLATIONS.
A) Separateoffenses. Eachdayaviolationofthischapteriscommittedorpermittedtocontinue
shallconstituteaseparateoffenseandshallbepunishableasunderthissection.
B) Misdemeanor. UnlessotherwiseprovidedbythischapterorbyM.S. §3 47.55,v iolationof
thischaptershallconstituteamisdemeanorpunishablebyafineofupto $1,000orimprisonmentforup
to90days.
PriorCode, § 5-4-17) (Ord. 579, passed7-26-2004) Penalty, see § 10.99
Page20of20
CHAPTER 92: PARADE, RACE & PUBLIC ASSEMBLY
Section
92.01 Purpose and findings
92.02 Definitions
92.03 Permit and application requirements
92.04 Fees
92.05 Exemptions from permit fee and application
92.06 Procedures
92.07 Permit restrictions and permit revocation
92.08 Prohibitions
92. 01 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
A) The Council finds that persons and groups have a right to organize and participate in peaceful
assemblies on the streets, sidewalks, walkways and parks in the city and to engage in assembly near the
object of their protest so that they may be seen and heard, subject to reasonable restrictions designed to
protect public safety, persons and property, and to accommodate the interests of persons not
participating in the assembly to use the street, sidewalk or walkway to travel to their intended
destinations and to use the parks for recreational purposes. Races, parades and public assemblies on
public grounds, including but not limited to outdoor concerts, rallies, festivals, demonstrations, and
ceremonies can potentially result in:
1) A danger to the safety and welfare of persons using public rights- of-way, including, but
not limited to pedestrians, motorists, persons entering and leaving motor vehicles and buildings, and
persons performing essential traffic control and emergency services;
2) Excessive noise likely to distract motorists and disturb the public peace;
3) A danger to the safety of the participants, as well as other persons in their vicinity;
4) Territorial disputes between competing users of public property; and
5) Damage to public parks, public grounds, streets, walkways, property and facilities.
B) It is the purpose of this chapter to:
1) Protect the safe movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic contiguous to the site of the
expressive activity by advance planning and appropriate staffing;
2) Protect the rights of persons engaging in expressive activities in public areas to be free
from danger, interruption, or disruption;
3) Protect the general public by adequate staffing of necessary police, fire and rescue
resources so that the diversion of resources to a public assembly does not impair the ability of
Page 1 of 11
emergency responders to provide adequate services throughout the city;
4) Protect the quiet enjoyment of private property and the dedicated use of public property;
5) Coordinate multiple, competing uses of limited public space;
6) Prevent use of public property, public grounds or facilities in a manner that is potentially
dangerous, unlawful or impermissible under city, county, state or federal laws, rules or regulations;
7) Provide a mechanism by which there is financial accountability for private use of public
property, public grounds or facilities so as to preserve that property for the benefit of the public; and
8) Recover the costs to the city attributable to private use of public property.
Ord. 655, passed 08- 03- 2009)
92. 02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of Police for the Savage Police Department, or the Police Chief
designee.
CIVIC EVENT. An event to which the public is welcomed and encouraged to attend.
COMMERCIAL PROMOTION OR ACTIVITY. Ordinary activities of trade and commerce where
profit motive is the primary purpose of the event.
PARADE.
1) Any procession of pedestrians, vehicles or animals or any combination thereof traveling in
unison along or upon a street, road or highway within the city which is organized and conducted for the
purposes of attracting the attention of the general public or expressing or celebrating views or ideas by
use of verbal, visual, literary or auditory means of communication.
2) A PARADE shall not mean a procession of vehicles operated in compliance with ordinary
traffic laws or a procession of pedestrians along or upon a public sidewalk or private property, or
alongside a public street, road or highway in compliance with ordinary traffic laws.
PERSON. One ( 1) or more natural persons; a partnership, including a limited partnership; a
corporation; a trust; any other business organization; or association of any of the above.
PUBLICASSEMBLY. Any ceremony, show, pageant, fair, exhibit, promotion, block party,
demonstration, picket line, rally or other gathering on public grounds in a place open to the general
public where the person or group conducting or organizing the event reasonably anticipates that 50 or
more persons will participate in the assembly. A PUBLIC ASSEMBLY does not include any immediate
and spontaneous expression of views in response to a public event occurring within the preceding five
Page 2 of 11
days.
PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT. The Public Works Superintendent or duly authorized
designee.
RACE. Any scheduled public event or gathering of persons for a planned athletic event that moves
upon a public street, sidewalk or other public grounds from one location to another such as bicycle or
running races, which may potentially interfere with the normal flow or regulation of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
SCHOOL (K-12). Establishments primarily engaged in providing instructional services to
elementary or secondary students with a curriculum that complies with state regulations, including
public schools governed by an elected school board, private schools and charter schools.
SPECIAL EVENT. A parade, race or public assembly as hereinafter defined.
Ord. 655, passed 08- 03- 2009; Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015)
92. 03 PERMIT AND APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
A) Permit required. No person shall transgress upon any public street or roadway, or public area
for the purpose of conducting a special event within the city, without having first secured a permit
therefore from the Clerk. No person shall conduct or engage in any parade, race or public assembly
without a permit issued by the City Clerk. Any person organizing or conducting an event for which a
permit is not required by this policy may voluntarily register the event with the Clerk.
B) Permit application.
1) Filing.
a) A person seeking issuance of a permit required by this chapter must file a signed and
completed application with the Clerk on forms provided by the Clerk. In order to allow sufficient time
for an appeal from a permit denial, it is suggested that the application be filed at least 60 days prior to
the special event. Nevertheless, a fully completed, signed application filed within the minimum filing
periods set forth below will be accepted during business hours as follows:
1. For events involving 200 or more persons or 30 or more animals, not less than
seven business days prior to the planned event;
2. For any event that will make use of any portion of a public roadway, street or
highway, not less than seven business days prior to the planned event; and
3. For all other public assemblies, not less than four business days prior to the
planned event.
b) The Clerk may waive the minimum filing period for good cause shown if, after due
consideration of the date, time, place and nature of the event the anticipated number of participants, and
the city services required in connection with the event, it is determined that the waiver will not
adversely impact public health, safety or welfare.
Page 3 of 11
2) Contents. The application for a special event permit shall request the following
information:
a) The name, address, e- mail address, facsimile and telephone number of the person,
group or entity responsible for the sponsorship of the event.
b) The names, addresses, e- mail addresses, facsimile and telephone numbers of the
headquarters of the organization for which the event is to be conducted, if any, and the name(s) of the
person( s) within that organization responsible for the event.
c) A letter of authorization from the person organizing the event, or on whose behalf the
event is being organized, if different from the applicant.
d) The names, addresses, e- mail addresses, facsimile and telephone numbers of the
persons who will act as the coordinators responsible for the event.
e) The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of any sound technicians for the event.
f) The date and hours when the event will start and terminate, including set- up and
teardown times.
g) A description of the planned activities, including the approximate number of
participants, the type and number of any animals or vehicles involved and the approximate number of
spectators and guests reasonably anticipated.
h) Where the Chief of Police determines based upon an assessment of the location, date,
time of day, concentration of persons, vehicles, animals or equipment, use of sound amplification
equipment or other equipment generating noise, vibration, dust or smoke, that the event appears likely
to interfere with the safe and orderly movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic contiguous to its route
or location, interfere with the movement of emergency response vehicles, lack adequate essential
facilities for the health and safety of participants, or unreasonably interfere with the quiet enjoyment of
neighboring properties or the dedicated use of the public property on which the planned event is to be
situated, the Chief of Police may require, without reference to or consideration of the content of the
expressive activity, views expressed or anticipated to be expressed or the response it may provoke, one
or more of the following:
1. A site plan for the location of the event, the route to be traveled, if any, including
the starting point and the termination point, and the maximum and minimum speeds of any travel. A
required site plan shall also describe the amount of the public right of way, sidewalk, walkway, park or
other public ground that will be occupied by the participants, guests and onlookers of the event,
including any loading or unloading areas.
2. A parking, pedestrian circulation and traffic directional plan.
3. A neighborhood notification plan for any properties within 500 feet of the
property lines of the site of an event to be held at a single location covering two square blocks or less,
or along the route of any race, march or parade, along with a signed statement by the applicant attesting
Page 4of11
that the applicant will send by regular mail or hand- delivery notice of the date, time, location and size
of the event to the owners or occupants of those properties at least 48 hours prior to the commencement
of the event.
i) A description of any tents, stages, platforms, temporary structures, devices, tables,
booths, first- aid or relief stations, dumpsters, fencing, portable toilets, signs, or banners to be used in
conjunction with the event and their proposed location.
0) A description of any sound amplification equipment and its positioning and other
mechanical or electronic equipment to be used in connection with the event.
k) A description of any public facilities or equipment to be utilized.
1) A description of the applicant' s plan to clean up and restore the site.
m) A description of any food or beverage service provided to the public or event
participants.
n) A description of any merchandise sales or fundraising.
o) A description of applicant' s plan for protecting surfaces, such as bricks and pavement.
p) Name of the last city or town in which any parade, race, outdoor concert, or public
assembly was conducted by the applicant or the person on whose behalf the event is to be conducted
and whether or not the applicant has had a parade, race, outdoor concert or public assembly permit or
license revoked within the preceding five years.
q) Such other information as the Clerk, Chief of Police or Public Works Superintendent
requires in order to make a fair determination as to whether or not a permit should be issued.
C) Depositfor barricades and/or cones. In addition to any required permit fee, the applicant may
be required to make, at a minimum, a $ 50 deposit with the City Clerk for barricades and/or cones as a
condition to permit issuance. The applicant' s deposit shall be refunded upon return of the barricades
and/ or cones in good condition.
D) Indemnification. The application for the special events permit shall provide and require an
indemnification agreement signed by the applicant which shall read as follows:
In consideration for the use of public grounds and the grant of a permit for the purposes set
forth in this application, the applicant agrees to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City
of Savage, its officers, agents, and employees against any and all claims, suits, actions, debts,
losses, damages, costs, charges, including but not limited to claims for personal injury, death,
and/ or property damage arising from related to or caused by any act of negligence, either
active or passive, on the part of the applicant in the applicant' s use of public property specified
in the application."
E) Conditions ofapplication. An application for a parade, race, and/ or public assembly shall be
executed by the applicant( s) who shall each therein certify that:
Page 5 of 11
1) The applicant will provide, if required, enclosed toilets for men and women, meeting all
state and local specifications, conveniently located throughout the event, sufficient to provide facilities
for the maximum number of people to be assembled in accordance with the Minnesota State Board of
Health Regulations and Standards, which toilets shall be kept clean, operable, and free of refuse.
2) The applicant will, without expense to the city, immediately clean up, remove and dispose
of all litter or material of any kind associated with the event which is placed or left on the property on
which the event is held; and also on any immediately adjacent blocks. If the applicant neglects or fails
to cleanup within the three-hour period immediately following the end of the event, or within the time
limit set forth in the event permit, or if cleanup is done in an inadequate manner, the Public Works
Superintendent is authorized to do the cleanup and the applicant shall be charged the cost thereof.
3) Adult supervision will be required of all children attending the special event under 14
years of age.
4) The applicant will be responsible for the placement, maintenance, removal and return of
street barricades and/ or cones, provided by the city.
5) If applicable, that the applicant will apply for a temporary on-sale license for beer and
wine, or temporary expansion of premises license and comply with Chapter 111.
6) The applicant shall pay all costs for traffic control personnel required by the Public Works
and/ or Police Departments.
7) If applicable, that upon compliance with all other provisions noted above, the applicant( s)
shall file a liability insurance policy, or evidence thereof, which provides coverage for potential liability
claims and names the city as joint insured on the liability policy.
F) Application consideration. A completed application shall be submitted to the Clerk. The Clerk
shall route the application to the Public Works Superintendent and the Chief of Police for approval. The
Chief of Police and Public Works Superintendent are empowered to conduct and shall conduct
investigations to verify the information on the application. The Chief of Police and Public Works
Superintendent shall review and consider the application based on applicable laws or regulations
relating to the proposed event and an assessment of the event' s likely impact on the public health, safety
and welfare. The Chief of Police and Public Works Superintendent may place conditions on a permit as
may be necessary to ensure adequate parking and traffic circulation, to minimize impacts on adjacent
property, to ensure compliance with all applicable laws and to otherwise protect the health, safety and
welfare of the community. A permit shall be issued by the Clerk when it is found by the Chief of Police
and Public Works Superintendent that:
1) The application complies with applicable requirements of this chapter;
2) The place where the event is to be held is not under construction or is scheduled to be
under construction on the date when the event is to be held;
3) The place where the event is to be held is not in such close proximity to a fire station as to
unduly interfere with the movement of emergency vehicles;
Page 6 of 11
4) The applicant, or organization on whose behalf the application is made, has not within the
previous 18 months violated the provisions of this policy;
5) The event would not conflict with a prior scheduled event so as to substantially interrupt
the safe and orderly movement of traffic;
6) The event would not interfere with emergency activities or maintenance operations such
as snow removal or street sweeping;
7) The event is not scheduled to take place within one block of a polling place during the
hours of voting;
8) The event is city-sponsored or can otherwise be considered a civic event;
9) The event' s prime objective is not commercially or financially motivated, or constitutes a
private commercial promotion or activity;
10) The event would not unduly restrict pedestrian and vehicular traffic to an abutting
business or property;
11) The event would not unduly deny access to private property;
G) Consideration by Council. The applicant may be required to submit an application to the
Council for consideration if there has been a total of at least one incident involving the applicant and
any of the following, as defined by state law and/ or city ordinance:
1) Assault or indecent or disorderly conduct.
2) The illegal sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages.
3) The illegal sale or distribution of food.
4) A violation pertaining to noise.
Ord. 655, passed 08- 03- 2009; Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015) Penalty, see § 10. 99
92. 04 FEES.
A) Permitfee. A permit fee may be required by the Council and shall be established from time to
time by ordinance of the Council. Additional permits and fees maybe required if the event includes a
public facility rental, tents or other attributes subject to separate regulation.
B) Contractual police overtime deposit. A fee for contractual police overtime must be paid prior
to issuance of the permit if the Chief of Police determines, based upon the event' s size, date, time of
day, location, concentration of persons, vehicles, animals or equipment, that additional police services,
over and above that which can be provided by regularly scheduled on- duty police personnel, is
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. In making this determination, the Chief of
Page 7 of 11
Police may not reference or consider the content of the expressive activity or views expressed or
anticipated to be expressed or the response it may provoke. The fee for contractual police overtime shall
be based upon the established contractual overtime rates for the patrol and supervisory officers
available, which include regular salary, plus regular fringe benefits. Contractual police overtime rates
shall be those established by the city' s annual fee ordinance.
C) Other city staff overtime deposit. A fee for estimated city staff overtime must be paid prior to
issuance of the permit if the Chief of Police or Public Works Superintendent determines, based upon the
event' s size, date, time of day, location, concentration of persons, vehicles, animals or equipment, that
additional city staffing is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. In making this
determination, the Chief of Police or Public Works Superintendent may not reference or consider the
content of the expressive activity or views expressed or anticipated to be expressed or the response it
may provoke. The fee for city staff overtime shall be based upon the actual overtime rates for the city
staff available to serve the event, which shall include regular salary, plus regular fringe benefits. City
staff overtime rates shall be those established by the city' s annual fee ordinance.
D) Equipmentfee. An equipment fee may be required by the Chief of Police or Public Works
Superintendent, based upon the event' s size, date, time of day, location, concentration of persons,
vehicles, animals or equipment. Equipment fees shall be those established by the city' s annual fee
ordinance.
Ord. 655, passed 08- 03- 2009; Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015)
92. 05 EXEMPTIONS FROM PERMIT FEE AND APPLICATION.
A) Councilfindings on exemptions. The Council makes the following findings regarding the need
to exempt certain persons from paying a permit fee and submitting a permit application for public
assemblies:
1) Schools conduct and sponsor several public assemblies, such as outdoor concerts, athletic
competition, field trips and music events on a regular basis, including marching band events, sporting
events with musical components, art festivals, and student fund-raisers on property owned or leased by
the school or used pursuant to a written agreement with the city. A permit application and fee for each
event would adversely impact the events, which benefit the community as a whole, and, in most cases,
would represent a transfer of public monies between governmental units without any corresponding
benefit to the community.
2) The city and other governmental agencies acting within the scope of their functions,
sponsor many public assemblies. Payment of permit fees for each city or other governmental agency
sponsored event would adversely impact the events and would represent an internal transfer of public
monies for no justifiable reason.
B) Exemptions from permitfees for public assemblies. In light of the Council findings, the
following persons are exempt from the fee for a permit under this section for public assemblies, not
including races or parades:
1) Schools conducting public assemblies on property described in division (A)( 1) under the
immediate direction and supervision of proper school authorities;
Page 8 of 11
2) Persons who have entered into a written use agreement with the city for a planned event
where the activities are limited to the authorized use set forth in the permit or agreement;
3) Persons who have entered into a rental or use agreement with the city for use of city parks
or facilities or persons who have entered into a rental or use agreement with another governmental
agency or who have been issued a permit from another governmental agency for use of parks or
facilities located within the city which are owned or operated by said governmental agency; and
4) The city for city sponsored events or other governmental agencies for events sponsored by
such agency acting within the scope of its functions.
C) Exemptions from permit application for public assemblies; registration. Those persons exempt
from a permit fee in division (B) of this section, shall not be required to complete a permit application.
However, whenever amplified sound is a component to the event or the event may potentially interfere
with the normal flow of traffic, the exempt person must register with the city providing notice of the
planned public assembly at least five business days prior to the proposed event. The registration notice
shall include the name and phone number of the person sponsoring or conducting the event; the date
and time of the event; the location of the event; a description of any sound amplification equipment, or
other mechanical or electronic equipment to be used in connection with the event; and such other
information as the Chief of Police requires in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare.
D) Responsibilities ofexempt event sponsors. Those persons exempt from a permit fee and
application in division (B) of this section are nonetheless subject to all applicable state laws and code
provisions, including without limitation § 95. 05, Chapters 96, 98, 112, and 130, and may be required to
pay the cost of any law enforcement services over and above the level of city services available with
regular on- duty staffing that are directly attributable to their event. The city' s cost of repair, clean-up, or
replacement of city property, public grounds or facilities damaged as a direct result of the event shall
also be recoverable from the exempt event sponsor, as well as any city liability to third parties resulting
from the exempt person' s event.
Ord. 655, passed 08- 03- 2009)
92. 06 PROCEDURES.
A) Approval or denial. The Clerk shall act promptly upon receipt of a completed permit
application but in no event shall fail to grant or deny a permit more than 20 days after his or her receipt
or less than 48 hours prior to the event without the written consent of the applicant. If the application is
denied, in whole or in part, the Clerk shall notify the applicant of the city' s determination in writing,
setting out the specific reason therefore. The notice shall be mailed, e- mailed, or sent by facsimile to the
applicant at the street address, e- mail address, or facsimile number provided in the application and it
shall inform the applicant of the applicant' s right, within 20 days after the date the notice was mailed to
request an administrative review by the City Administrator or the City Administrator' s designated
representative of the city' s determination. The Clerk in denying an application for a permit may
authorize an alternative permit for the parade, race, or public assembly at a date, time, location, route or
under conditions different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an
alternative permit shall, within five days after notice of the denial, file a written notice of acceptance
with the Clerk.
Page 9 of 11
B) Administrative review. An applicant has a right to request an administrative review by the City
Administrator or the City Administrator' s designated representative of the determination to deny a
permit within 20 days after the date the notice of denial was mailed by serving the City Administrator
with a written request for administrative review along with all documents and written arguments
serving as a basis for the applicant' s position. If a request for administrative review is timely received
by the City Administrator, the City Administrator or the City Administrator' s designee shall issue a
written decision, setting forth the reasons therefore within a reasonable time period, in no case later than
20 days from the date of receipt of the request for administrative review. The decision of the City
Administrator shall be mailed to the applicant at the address on the permit application. Exhaustion of
administrative remedies is not a precondition to judicial review.
Ord. 655, passed 08- 03- 2009)
92. 07 PERMIT RESTRICTIONS AND PERMIT REVOCATION.
A) Limitations. The applicant, along with any person acting under the applicant' s control or
direction, must conduct and control the event so that it remains at all times in complete conformity with
all conditions set forth in the approved permit application.
B) Application ofother laws. In addition to the provisions of this section, parades, races and
public assemblies shall be subject to all other applicable state laws and code provisions, including
without limitation § 95. 05, Chapters 96, 98, 112 and 130.
C) Revocation. The Clerk shall have the authority to revoke a permit issued hereunder instantly
upon notice from the Chief of Police or Public Works Superintendent of a violation of the conditions or
standards for issuance as set forth in this section, violation by any participant of code or state law, or in
case of a public emergency.
Ord. 655, passed 08- 03- 2009; Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015)
92. 08 PROHIBITIONS.
A) No person shall stage, present, conduct or start any event without first obtaining a permit as
required by this section.
B) No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, or impede or interfere with any permitted
event or person, animal or vehicle participating therein. No driver of any vehicle shall drive between the
vehicles, persons or animals comprising a parade or race when such parade or race is in motion. The
Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of
vehicles along the route of the race or parade in areas contiguous thereto and shall post signs to such
effect and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave a vehicle unattended in violation thereof.
C) No person shall participate in an event for which the person knows or reasonably should have
known that a required permit has not issued.
D) No person in charge of, or responsible for the conduct of, a permitted event shall intentionally
violate any condition of the permit.
Page 10 of 11
E) No person shall intentionally engage in, participate in, aid or start any event that poses a
substantial hazard to the public safety.
F) No persons participating in an event shall utilize sound amplification equipment at decibel
levels that exceed those limits imposed by § 95. 05 unless otherwise specifically authorized in the
permit.
G) No person participating in an event shall possess any length of lumber, wood or wood lath
unless it is one- fourth inch or less in thickness and two inches or less in width, or if not rectangular, not
more than three- quarters inch in its thickest dimension.
Ord. 655, passed 08- 03- 2009) Penalty, see § 10. 99
Page 11 of 11
CHAPTER 93: DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Section
93. 01 Definitions
93. 02 Disposal procedure for vehicles
93. 03 Right to reclaim
93. 04 Public sale
93. 05 Immediate sale
93. 06 Disposal ofproperty other than motor vehicles
93. 01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled, to include snowmobiles and motor
homes.
NETPROCEEDS. The sale price of any item ofproperty or of a motor home, less any costs of
handling, storage and sale.
PROPERTY. All forms of tangible personal property.
Prior Code, § 4- 4- 1)
93. 02 DISPOSAL PROCEDURE FOR VEHICLES.
Motor vehicles impounded by the city and its duly designated agents, or otherwise lawfully having
come into its possession during the course of municipal operations, shall be disposed of as follows.
A) The city shall give notice as provided herein.
B) The notice shall set forth the date and place of impoundment, the year, make, model and serial
number of the vehicle if the information can be reasonably obtained and the place where the vehicle is
being held.
C) The notice shall inform the owner and any lienholders of the right to reclaim the vehicle.
D) The notice shall state that failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their right to reclaim
shall be deemed a waiver by them of all right, title and interest in the vehicle and contents and a consent
to the sale of the vehicle and contents at a public auction or sale.
E) At least ten days prior to the disposal, the notice shall be sent by mail to the registered owner, if
any, of the vehicle and to all readily identifiable lienholders of record. If it is impossible to determine
with reasonable certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and lienholders, the notice
Page 1 of 3
shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the motor vehicle was
impounded.
Prior Code, § 4- 4- 2)
93. 03 RIGHT TO RECLAIM.
The owner or lienholders shall have the right to reclaim the vehicle form the city upon payment of
all towing, storage and other charges resulting from the impoundment within 15 days of the notice
required by this chapter.
Prior Code, § 4- 4- 3)
93. 04 PUBLIC SALE.
A) If the vehicle is not reclaimed pursuant to § 93. 03, it shall be sold to the highest bidder at a
public auction or sale. The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle. The receipt shall entitle the
purchaser to register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of
ownership. Before the vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must receive a motor vehicle safety
check.
B) Proceeds of the sale shall be used to reimburse the city for costs involved in towing, preserving
and storing the vehicle, and administrative, notice and publication costs. Any remainder from the
proceeds of the sale shall be held for the previous owner or entitled lienholders for 90 days and then
shall be deposited in the treasury of the city.
Prior Code, § 4- 4- 4)
93. 05 IMMEDIATE SALE.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, if a motor vehicle is more than seven model
years of age, is lacking vital component parts, and does not display a license plate currently valid in
Minnesota or any other state or foreign country, it shall immediately be eligible for public sale pursuant
to § 93. 04, and shall not be subject to the notification, reclamation or title provisions specified herein.
Prior Code, § 4- 4- 5)
93. 06 DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY OTHER THAN MOTOR VEHICLES.
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, property having lawfully come into the possession of the
city and its duly designed agent in the course of its municipal operations shall be stored and safely
maintained by the city for a period of 60 days. The property shall be disposed of by the city in the
following manner.
A) During the 60- day period, the city may deliver the property to the true owner thereof upon
proof of ownership, and upon ten days' notice by mail to other persons who may assert a claim of true
ownership. In the event ownership cannot be determined to the satisfaction of the City Administrator or
the City Administrator' s designee, the City Administrator may refuse to deliver the property to anyone
until ordered to do so by the court. The City Administrator may deposit the property with the court if
there are sufficient competing claims to the property.
B) If the true owner does not claim the property during the 60- day period, the city may release the
unclaimed property to the finder of the property if, at the time of the delivery to the city, the finder
indicated in writing that the finder wished to assert a claim to the property as finder. This division is
not applicable if the property was found by a city employee in the ordinary course of that employee' s
duties.
C) Upon the expiration of the 60- day period, property remaining unclaimed may be sold by the
city to the highest bidder at public auction or sale following one week published notice thereof. In lieu
of public auction or sale, any unclaimed property may be appropriated to the use of the city upon
approval of the appropriation by the City Administrator. If the property is not sold at the public auction
or sale and is not deemed appropriate for use by the city, the City Administrator may then dispose of the
property in any manner deemed appropriate.
D) The City Administrator or designee may, at any time without notice and in a manner as the
City Administrator determines to be in the public interest, dispose summarily of any property coming
into the city' s possession which the City Administrator determines to be dangerous or perishable. The
City Administrator shall make a record of the pertinent facts of the receipt and disposal of the property.
Prior Code, § 4- 4- 6)
Page 3 of 3
CHAPTER 94: LOCAL IMPROVEMENT POLICY
Section
94. 01 Classification of improvement projects
94.02 Methods of financing projects
94. 03 Local Improvement Manual
94.04 Financial aid to city
94. 05 Special assessments deferred
94.06 Assessment roll
94.07 Permanent Improvement Revolving Fund
94. 01 CLASSIFICATION OF IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS.
Public improvements are divided into the three classes specified in the following sections
according to their respective benefit to the whole city and to property specially served by the
improvement and taking into account past city practice.
A) Class A. Class A improvements are those which are of general benefit to the city at
large including:
1) Public buildings, except a building, which is part of an improvement described in
one of the following sections;
2) Any public park, playground or recreational facility; and
3) Any improvement not described in M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended from time
to time.
B) Class B. Class B improvements are those which are of both general benefit and special
benefit to abutting or nearby property. Class B improvements include:
1) Trunk water mains larger than eight inches in size in residential areas and larger
than 12 inches in size in commercial/industrial areas;
2) Trunk sanitary sewer mains larger than ten inches in size;
3) Permanently surfacing arterial streets;
4) Storm drainage facilities;
5) Construction of off-street parking facilities; and
6) Construction of sidewalks/ pedestrian pathways.
Page 1 of 6
C) Class C. Class C improvements are those which are primarily if not exclusively of
benefit to property abutting or in the area of the improvement, including:
1) The construction of water mains no larger than eight inches in diameter in
residential areas and no larger than 12 inches in diameter in commercial/industrial areas;
2) The construction of sanitary sewer mains no larger than ten inches in diameter;
3) The construction of curbs and gutters;
4) Grading, graveling, application of sealcoating or dust control agents to streets;
5) Permanently surfacing residential streets; and
6) The abatement of nuisances and the drainage of swamps, marshes and ponds on
public or private property and filling the same.
Prior Code, § 7- 2- 1)
94. 02 METHODS OF FINANCING PROJECTS.
It is the policy of the city to finance Class A, B and C improvements by the methods
prescribed in this section. The apportionment of the cost between benefitted property and the city
at large and the method of levying assessments prescribed in this section shall be followed in
each case unless the Council, by resolution, finds that because of special circumstances stated in
the resolution, a different policy is necessary or desirable in the particular case. Any local
improvement described in M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended from time to time, and not placed
in Class A, B or C by § 94. 01 of this chapter shall be financed as the Council determines to be
most feasible and equitable in each case.
A) Financing Class A improvements. Any Class A improvement shall be financed from
general city funds and not from special assessments.
B) Assessments for Class B improvements.
1) Trunk sewer and water mains. When a water or sewer main is laid across or
adjacent to unplatted property, the city shall not defer the assessment against the unplatted
property if the assessment would be made for an improvement in the case of platted property,
but the city shall make the assessment at the time the assessment against other property is made,
apportioning the assessment against the unplatted property on the basis of area. When a
building site abuts a trunk sanitary sewer and/ or trunk watermain and accesses it as a lateral
with a service line, a portion of the cost of the trunk shall be attributed to lateral cost, and lateral
assessments as well as trunk assessments shall be levied against the site. The amount of the
lateral assessment in cases shall be based on the cost of a normally sized lateral sewer and
watermain by either a frontage or unit basis as deemed appropriate by the City Council. The
Page 2 of 6
cost of a lift station shall be assessed on the basis of area against that property actually
benefitted by the lift station.
2) Higher street surfacing standards. When it is determined by the city that a stronger
or wider street than the standard residential street is required, as specified by § 151. 11( B), the
city will establish the parameters for design, and undertake the project. Residential properties
abutting the collector street shall be assessed an amount equal to the cost of a standard city
residential street based on frontage or unit basis as deemed appropriate by the City Council. The
balance of the cost between the total project cost and the residential standard cost will be
defrayed by a combination of area assessments and city contributions. These area assessments
will be spread over a service area to be determined by spacing between collector streets and other
factors deemed appropriate by the Council. This method of assessment shall also apply to
commercial/industrial streets, except that the basis for the assessment shall be the city standards
for commercial/ industrial streets.
3) Storm drainage facilities. The cost of constructing storm drainage facilities ( in
existing developments) shall be assessed against the property in the area served by the storm
drainage facility on the basis of the square footage of the property. The area to be assessed shall
be determined on the basis of topographical maps and other pertinent data. All land parcels shall
be liable for drainage assessments for benefit, up to the storm drainage assessment rate approved
by, and from time to time adjusted by the City Council.
4) Sidewalks/pathways. Pedestrian circulation systems located within or adjacent to
the boundaries of a subdivision are to be constructed and paid for by the developer or, in an
existing development, assessed on a frontage or unit basis against lots within the development, as
deemed appropriate by the City Council.
C) Assessments for Class C improvements.
1) Streets. The cost of construction of curbs and gutters on any street, of grading,
applying dust control agents or applying nonpermanent surfaces to residential streets shall be
assessed on the basis of frontage or unit assessment, as deemed appropriate by the City Council.
2) Water and sewer. The cost of lateral water mains not exceeding eight inches in
size in residential areas and 12 inches in size in commercial/ industrial areas, and lateral sanitary
sewer mains not exceeding ten inches in diameter shall be assessed against abutting property on
the basis of frontage, or unit assessment as deemed appropriate by the City Council. The cost of
watermains to be assessed includes all hydrants, leads, valves, and the like. The cost of sewer
mains includes all manholes, and the like. Individual sewer and/ or water service lines shall be
assessed to the property served on an individual basis ( per each), if furnished.
3) Cost ofabatement. The cost of abating nuisances and draining of swamps, marshes
and ponds on public or private property and filling the same shall be assessed in a manner
determined by the Council, in each case to measure most equitably the benefit received by
property to be assessed. The assessment in any case may be made against the non-abutting
property to the extent the property is benefitted by the improvement.
Prior Code, § 7- 2- 2) Penalty, see § 10. 99
Page 3 of 6
94. 03 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT MANUAL.
The City Administrator, together with the City Engineer and City Attorney, shall prepare an
administrative manual specifying more detailed procedures for the conduct of local
improvements, the special regulations and computations that shall apply to the assessment of
individual properties, and the levy of special assessments in supplementation of this chapter and
consistent herewith. The Manual, which shall be approved by and, from time to time amended
by the City Council, shall be used with this chapter in the conduct of all local improvement
proceedings to which they apply by their terms.
Prior Code, § 7- 2- 3)
94. 04 FINANCIAL AID TO CITY.
If the city receives financial assistance from the federal government, the state, or the county
to defray a portion of the cost of an improvement project, the aid shall be used first to reduce the
share of the project cost, which would be met from general city funds according to the
assessment formula contained in this chapter. Any aid remaining after defraying the city portion
of the cost shall be allocated by the City Council on an individual project by project basis.
Prior Code, § 7- 2- 4)
94.05 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS DEFERRED.
A) Deferment qualifications. Pursuant to M.S. §§ 435. 193 to 435. 195, as they may be
amended from time to time, a deferment of special assessments shall be considered for the owner
of homestead property who meets one of the following qualifications:
1) The gross household monthly income of the applicant is less than most recent
limitations by which a property owner could qualify for food stamp assistance;
2) And further provided that the gross liquid assets of the household excluding the
homestead property and one vehicle is less than $ 2, 000 ($ 3, 000 if the head of household is 65
years of age or older); or
3) The owner demonstrates unusual hardship or exceptional circumstance such as a
permanent and total disability, unusual medical expense.
B) Application for deferment. The property owner shall make application on a form
supplied by the City Clerk. He or she shall further provide the city with a waiver of financial
disclosure for each financial holder (bank(s), life insurance and the like and any other
information necessary to establish
qualification thereof. The application shall be made within 30 days after the adoption of the
assessment roll by the Council and shall be renewed each following year not later than
Page 4 of 6
September 30.
C) Eligibility determination. The City Council shall consider each application for
deferment based upon qualifications set forth in division (A) above, or upon demonstration of
exceptional and unusual circumstance not covered by the guidelines. The determination shall be
made in a nondiscriminatory manner, and shall not give the applicant unreasonable preference or
advantage over other applicants. If the Council grants the deferment, the City Administrator
shall notify the County Auditor who shall, in accordance with M.S. § 435. 194, as it may be
amended from time to time, record a notice of the deferment with the County Recorder.
D) Termination ofdeferment. The option to defer the payment of special assessments shall
terminate upon the occurrence of any one of the following events:
1) The death of the owner provided that the spouse is otherwise not eligible for
deferment;
2) The sale, transfer or subdivision of the property;
3) Loss of homestead status on the property;
4) If for any reason the hardship situation no longer exists;
5) Failure to file a renewal application within the time prescribed by division (B)
above; or
6) Other situations as determined by the City Council.
E) Upon termination of the deferment, the property owner shall be required to pay to the
city the total of all deferred installments, both principal and interest, that have accrued. The
remaining principal balance shall become an active assessment, and shall be collected on the tax
statement in the same manner as other assessments ( for the same improvement project) that were
not deferred.
Prior Code, § 7- 2- 5)
94.06 ASSESSMENT ROLL.
A) Prepayment. During a 30- day period following the adoption by the Council of the
assessment roll in any local improvement proceeding, the owner of any property specifically
assessed in the proceeding may pay to the City Treasurer all or a portion (but not less than $ 100)
of the assessment. The remaining unpaid balance shall be spread over the period of time
established by the Council for installment payment of the assessment. Partial payments, when
received 31 or more days after the assessment roll has been adopted( whether certified or not yet
certified), shall be accepted in an amount not less than one- third of the balance that remains,
except that assessment balances of$ 100 or less shall be paid in full. Interest shall be added in
the amount specified in the resolution by which the City Council adopted the subject assessment
roll.
Page 5 of 6
B) Certification ofassessments. After the adoption of any special assessment by the
Council, the City Clerk shall transmit a certified duplicate of the assessment roll with each
installment, including interest, set forth separately to the County Auditor to be extended on the
property tax lists of the county.
Prior Code, § 7- 2- 6) ( Ord. 366, passed 01- 13- 94)
94.07 PERMANENT IMPROVEMENT REVOLVING FUND.
A) Fund established. There is hereby established a Permanent Improvement Revolving
Fund of the city to be held and administered by the Finance Officer, separate and apart from all
other funds of the city, for the purpose of financing local improvements.
B) Source offunds. The Fund shall be a permanent fund of the city and the moneys
necessary for its maintenance shall be provided by taxation, by the appropriation of available
moneys from other funds of the city, and/ or by the issuance and sale of Permanent Improvement
Revolving Fund bonds of the city as deemed necessary from time to time by the Council.
C) Use offunds.
1) Disposition of improvementfunds. Moneys in the Fund shall be used only as
directed by resolution of the Council for the purpose of advancing to local improvement funds
the cost of improvements for which assessments are to be levied. All moneys so advanced to an
improvement fund shall be restored as soon as sufficient moneys are received in the
Improvement Fund, together with interest rate fixed by the Council.
2) Investment. Whenever there are moneys in the Fund not immediately needed for
local improvements, the moneys shall be invested by the Finance Officer under the direction of
the Council in any securities authorized for investment of municipal sinking funds by law.
3) Surplus funds transferred. When the Fund accumulates unencumbered moneys in
excess of any amounts reasonably anticipated to be needed for local improvement fund advances,
the Council may, by resolution adopted by a four-fifths vote, declare any part of the excess to be
surplus and transfer it to the General Fund or other fund deemed appropriate.
Prior Code, § 7- 2- 7)
Page 6 of 6
CHAPTER 95: PUBLICNUISANCES
Section
95. 01 Public nuisances defined
95. 02 Public nuisances affecting health
95. 03 Public nuisances affecting peace and safety
95. 04 Public nuisances affecting lake waters
95. 05 Public noise nuisances
95. 06 Public light nuisances
95. 07 Public nuisances affecting welfare and visual environment
95. 08 Abatement of public nuisances
95.01 PUBLIC NUISANCES DEFINED.
Whoever by act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally does any of the following is guilty
of maintaining a public nuisance, which is a misdemeanor:
A) Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or endangers the safety,
health, morals, comfort or repose of the public;
B) Unlawfully interferes with the use of or obstructs, or tends to obstruct or render dangerous for
passage a lake, stream, navigable river or public water, park, square, sidewalk, street, alley or highway;
C) Depreciates the value of the property of the inhabitants of the city;
D) In any manner renders the inhabitants of the city insecure in life or in use of property; or
E) Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or this chapter to be a public nuisance
and for which no sentence is specifically provided.
Prior Code, § 4- 2- 1) Penalty, see § 10. 99
95. 02 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
A) Accumulations of manure, rubbish, garbage, tin cans, bottles, junk, debris, decayed or
unwholesome food or vegetable matter, or other waste which are kept so as to result in offensive odors,
unsightly conditions, or excessive manifestation of flies to the discomfort and annoyance of adjacent
property owners or the public, except as expressly authorized by statute or ordinance;
B) Garbage cans which are not fly-tight, rodent free or which are accessible to animals;
C) Dumping the contents of any cesspool, septic tank or garbage can except at places authorized
by law;
Pagel of 8
D) The throwing, dumping or depositing of dead animals, manure, garbage, waste, decaying
matter, ground, sand, stones, ashes, rubbish, tin cans, paper or other materials of any kind or on private
or public property, except as expressly authorized by statute or ordinance;
E) Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after death;
F) Dense smoke, noxious or offensive fumes or odors, gas, soot or cinders in unreasonable
quantities; or
G) The pollution of any public well, stream, river, lake or body of water by sewage, creamery,
industrial waste or other substances.
H) Installing or allowing the installation of any equipment, device, appliance, apparatus, or any
part thereof, which is installed, affixed or situated outdoors or in structures not normally occupied by
humans for the primary purpose of combustion of fuel to produce heat or energy used as a component
of a heating system.
Prior Code, § 4- 2- 2) ( Ord. 653, passed 5- 18- 2009) Penalty, see § 10. 99
95.03 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
The following are declared to be nuisance affecting public peace and safety:
A) All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks within 24 hours after the snow or other
precipitation causing the condition has ceased to fall;
B) The keeping of horses, cattle, swine, sheep, goats, rabbits, dogs, or other animals or fowl so as
to result in offensive odors to the discomfort of adjacent property owners, and allowing any animal or
fowl to run at large; ATLARGE means off the premises of the owner and not under restraint;
C) All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous substances or materials stored or
accumulated in any matter or in any amount other than that provided by law or ordinance;
D) All use, possession or display of fireworks except as provided by law or ordinance;
E) All wires, limbs of trees, or the like which are so close to the surface of a sidewalk or street as
to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
F) Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use by the public of streets, alleys, public
sidewalks or public grounds except under conditions as are permitted by this code or other applicable
law;
G) All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over public streets or public sidewalks,
which are situated so as to endanger public safety, or which are not constructed and maintained as
provided by law or ordinance;
H) Any use of property abutting on a public street or public sidewalk or any use of a public
sidewalk which obstructs traffic and the free uses of the streets or sidewalks;
I) Radio aerials for television antennas erected or maintained in a dangerous manner;
J) Any barbed wire fence less than six feet above the ground and within three feet of a public
sidewalk or way;
K) All un- safeguarded dangerous machinery in any public place, or so situated or operated on
private property as to attract the public;
L) Wastewater cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other public property;
M) Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in any other condition as to
constitute a hazard to any person coming on the premises where it is located;
N) Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a public street, drain, gutter,
ditch or drainage easement with trash or other materials;
0) The placing or throwing on any street, public sidewalk or other public property of any glass,
tacks, nails, bottles or other substances which may injure any person or animal or damage any tire
when passing over the substance;
P) Placing entrance culverts or doing any act which may alter or affect the drainage of public
streets or alleys or the surface or grade of public streets, alleys or public sidewalks without proper
permit;
Q) Making repairs to motor vehicles or tires in public streets or alleys, excepting only emergency
repairs which will not unduly impede or interfere with traffic;
R) Throwing, placing, depositing or burning leaves, trash, lawn clippings, seeds, grass or other
material in the streets, alleys or gutters;
S) Erecting, painting or placing of unauthorized traffic signs or advertising signs in streets or
alleys or on sidewalks;
T) The deposit of snow or ice, removed from private property, onto a public street, alley or
sidewalk; or
U) All other conditions, acts or things which are liable to cause injury to persons or property.
Prior Code, § 4- 2- 3) Penalty, see § 10. 99
95. 04 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING LAKE WATERS.
No person shall commit or maintain a public nuisance in or upon the waters of any lake or other
body of water and no person shall let, permit or enable any other person to use any boat, dock, craft or
structure, or portion thereof, knowing that it is intended to be used for committing or maintaining a
public nuisance.
Prior Code, § 4- 2-4) ( Ord. 9, passed 5- 1- 1961) Penalty, see § 10. 99
Page 3 of 8
95. 05 PUBLIC NOISE NUISANCES.
A) MPCA Regulations adopted. Noise standards of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency,
Minnesota Rules, Parts 7030.0010 to 7030.0080, together with all future amendments or modifications
thereto, are hereby adopted and made a part of this part as if fully set forth herein. No person shall
operate or cause or permit to be operated any source of noise in a manner as to create a noise level
exceeding the limit set forth therein.
B) Generalprohibition. No person shall make or cause to be made any noise that unreasonably
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety or welfare of any
persons, or precludes their enjoyment of property, or affects their property' s value. This general
prohibition includes, but is not limited to the following:
1) Operation of a motor vehicle in violation of the motor vehicle noise limits of the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency;
2) The sounding of any horn or audible signaling device, except as a warning of danger;
3) The discharge of the exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat,
motor vehicle or snowmobile except through a muffler or other device that effectively prevents loud or
explosive noises there from;
4) The use of any vehicle so out of repair or so loaded as to create loud and unnecessary
grating, grinding, rattling or other noises;
5) Loud and excessive noise caused by loading, unloading or unpacking of any vehicle;
6) Use of operation of any radio, phonograph, paging system, musical instrument, machine
or other device for the production or reproduction of sound in a loudly audible manner as to disturb the
peace, quiet and comfort of any person nearby. The operation of any device between the hours of
10: 00 p.m. and 7: 00 a.m. in a manner as to be plainly audible at the property line of the structure or
building in which it is located, in the hallway or apartment adjacent, or at a distance of 50 feet of the
source if located outside a structure or building shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this part;
7) When a police officer determines that a gathering is creating a noise disturbance so that it
disturbs the peace, quiet or repose of another person, the officer may order all persons present, other
than the owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance is occurring, to disperse immediately.
No person shall refuse to leave after being ordered by a police officer to do so. Every owner or tenant
of the premises who has knowledge of the disturbance shall make every reasonable effort to see that the
disturbance is stopped;
8) The operation of any loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other device for the production or
reproduction of sound on a street or other public place for the purpose of commercial advertising or
attracting the attention of the public to any commercial establishment or vehicle;
9) The creation of excessive noise on a street, alley, or public grounds adjacent to any
school, church or hospital when the noise unreasonably interferes with the workings of the institution,
or unduly annoys its occupants or residents; and
10) The collection or removal of garbage or refuse in any residential district, or construction
activity involving the use of any kind of electric, diesel or gas-powered machine or other power
equipment, except between the hours of 7: 00 a.m. and 7: 00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours
of 9: 00 a.m. and 7: 00 p.m. on any Saturday or holiday, and between the hours of 9: 00 a.m. and 5: 00
p.m. on any Sunday. The City Engineer has the authority to grant contractors an extension to 10: 00
p.m. on any day. An extension beyond 10: 00 p.m. may be granted for an extenuating circumstance.
C) Enforcement. When it has been determined that a noise is in violation of this section, the
Code Enforcement Officer, Zoning Officer or officer of the Police Department ( or Police Department
designee) shall be authorized at his or her discretion to give notice of the violation either by verbal
warning, written notice and/ or citation. The notice shall be given to the owner or occupant of the
premise where the noise originates and shall order the person to correct or remove each specified
violation within a reasonable time as it prescribed in the notice. The failure to remove or correct any
violation within the time so prescribed constitutes a violation of this section.
Prior Code, § 4- 2- 5) ( Ord. 449, passed 3- 3- 1997; Ord. 514, passed 12- 6- 1999; Ord. 714, passed 1- 22-
13; Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015) Penalty, see § 10. 99
Statutory reference:
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, see M.S. § 169.693
Sounding ofany horn or audible signaling device, except as a warning ofdanger, see M.S.
169.68
95.06 PUBLIC LIGHT NUISANCES.
The following regulations shall apply to the use of exterior lights and light control devices.
A) All exterior lighting shall be so designed and arranged so as to not direct any illumination
upon or into any contiguous residential properties.
B) No exterior lighting shall be arranged and designed so as to create direct viewing angles of the
illumination source by pedestrian or vehicular traffic in public right-of-way.
C) Lenses, deflectors, shields, louvers and prismatic control devices shall be used so as to
eliminate nuisances and hazardous lighting.
D) Reflected glare from exterior lighting or from high temperature processes such as combustion
or welding shall not be directed into any adjoining property. Reflected glare or spill light may not
exceed five-tenths footcandles as measured on the property line when abutting residential zones and
one footcandle measured on the property line when the line abuts a commercial or industrial zone.
Prior Code, § 4- 2- 6)( Ord. 714, passed 1- 22- 13) Penalty, see § 10. 99
95.07 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING WELFARE AND VISUAL ENVIRONMENT.
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public welfare and visual
environment:
Page 5 of 8
A) Outdoor storage ofjunk automobiles.
1) Definition. For the purpose of this section, JUNKAUTOMOBILES shall include any
motor vehicle or part of a motor vehicle which is stored in the open, that is either:
a) Unusable or inoperable because of lack of or defects in component parts;
b) Unusable or inoperable because of damage from collision, deterioration, alteration or
other factors;
c) Beyond repair and, therefore, not intended for future use as a motor vehicle; or
d) Being retained on the property for possible use for salvageable parts.
2) Exceptions. A vehicle stored or parked on private property of the owner for the purposes
of making repairs shall not be considered a junk automobile, provided that at all times the vehicle is
stored so at least one half of the total number of wheels of the vehicle are in contact with the ground
and only one vehicle is stored or parked at any one time for a period not to exceed 14 days.
B) The outdoor storage of discarded or disused machinery, wrecked or inoperable recreational
vehicles, whether motorized or non- motorized;
C) The outdoor storage or accumulation ofjunk, trash, rubbish or refuse of any kind. JUNK
includes, but is not limited to parts of machines or motor vehicles, unused stoves or other household
appliances, remnants of building materials, decayed, weather or broken construction material no longer
suitable for sale, metal or other materials whether or not the same could be put to reasonable use;
D) The existence of any structure or part of any structure which because of fire, wind or other
natural disaster or physical deterioration is not longer habitable as a dwelling or use for any other
purpose for which it may have been intended; and
E) Any other materials or equipment which may cause blight or an unsightly neighborhood
condition.
Prior Code, § 4- 2-7)( Ord. 714, passed 1- 22- 13; Ord. 747, passed 04- 20- 2015) Penalty, see § 10. 99
95. 08 ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES.
This section shall apply to the abatement of all public nuisances as defined, except that the city
may use any other abatement procedure provided by law.
A) Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator and/ or Building Official or
their designee to enforce particular provisions of this chapter.
B) Inspections. The Zoning Administrator or Chief Building Official shall cause to be inspected
pursuant to § 10.20 all public and private places within the city which might contain a public nuisance
as defined in this section as often as practical to determine whether the public nuisances exist.
C) Entry on public andprivate places. If a property owner refuses right of entry, the Zoning
Administrator, Building Official, or their designee, shall obtain a search warrant or other appropriate
court order. In cases of" emergency," defined as conditions or circumstances that pose a threat of harm
to persons or property to the extent that abatement is immediately necessary, the court action shall not
be required.
D) Order to abate.
1) Upon a determination by the Zoning Administrator, Building Official, or other agent
designated by the city that a public nuisance exists on any public or private property within the city, the
Zoning Administrator or Building Official, or designated agent shall order the public nuisance to be
abated in a manner consistent with this code. The affected property owner shall be notified in person
or by certified mail that the nuisance must be abated within a reasonable time, not more than 30 days
from the date of the service of the notice.
2) If the premises are not occupied and the address of the owner is unknown, service on the
owner may be had by posting a copy of the notice on the premises. The order shall state the specific
nature of the violation and the requirements for compliance. The order shall inform the property owner
that the property owner may, within 30 days of the date of the order, request a hearing before the
Planning Commission and shall set forth the procedure by which the hearing may be requested. The
order shall further state that failure to abate the nuisance or request a hearing within the applicable time
period will result in issuance of a citation, or other abatement procedure whereby cost of the abatement
shall be assessed against the property. Upon expiration of the time required by the notice, the Zoning
Administrator or Building Official may abate or cause to abate the nuisance, unless a request for
hearing has been timely filed.
E) Court order. If the Council determines it is in the best interests of the city to immediately
abate the nuisance at the city' s expense, the Council shall by motion direct city staff to obtain an
appropriate court order approving entry onto the property and directing the abatement of the nuisance.
The city may ask the court to approve the city' s cost of abatement and order that the cost be spread on
the property benefitted as a special assessment and certified to the County Auditor for collection.
F) Application and notification. Any property owner who feels aggrieved by any order of the
Zoning Administrator, Building Official or other agent designated by the city issued pursuant to this
chapter may request a hearing before the Planning Commission. The request shall be filed in writing
with the City Clerk within 30 days after the date of the service of the notice by the Zoning
Administrator, Building Official, or other city agent. A notice of the time, place and purpose of the
hearing shall be published in the city' s official newspaper at least ten days prior to the date of the
hearing. A copy of the notice shall be mailed at least ten days before the day of the hearing to the
applicant and to each owner of property abutting the subject property.
G) Hearing procedure. Both the property owner and representatives for the city may appear at
the hearing and may call the witnesses and present the evidence as deemed to be relevant. Within ten
days after the hearing, the Commission shall affirm, repeal or modify the order of the Zoning
Administrator or Building Official. The Commission order shall be accompanied by written findings
of fact. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Commission may appeal that decision to
the City Council by filing notice of the appeal with the City Clerk. At its next available regular
Page 7 of 8
meeting following the filing of a notice of appeal, the Council shall review the decision and findings of
fact of the Planning Commission and shall affirm, repeal or modify that decision.
H) Record ofcosts. The Zoning Administrator or Building Official shall keep a record of the
costs of abatement and shall report to the City Clerk all work done for which assessments are to be
made, stating and certifying the description of the land, lots or parcels involved and the amount
assessable to each.
I) Assessment procedure. On or before September 1 of each year, the City Clerk shall list the
total unpaid charges for each abatement against each separate lot or parcel to which they are
attributable under this chapter. The Council may then spread the charges, or any portion thereof,
against the property involved as a special assessment for certification to the County Auditor for
collection beginning the following year, along with current taxes. The assessment shall be payable in
no more than ten equal annual installments pursuant to M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended from time
to time.
J) Interference prohibited. It is a misdemeanor for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with
the Zoning Administrator or Building Official, or their agents while they are engaged in the
performance of duty set forth in this chapter.
Prior Code, § 4- 2- 8) Penalty, see § 10. 99
CHAPTER 96: PARKS
Section
96. 01 Definitions
96.02 Regulations; uses prohibited
96. 03 Hours of use
96. 01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks, but including motorized bicycles, mini-bikes, all terrain vehicles and
snowmobiles.
NUDE. Showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a
fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a full covering of any portion
thereof below the top of the nipple.
PARK. A park, playground, beach or other area within the city, owned, leased or used, wholly or in
part, by the city for park and recreational purposes or which are designated by the City Council as parks.
Prior Code, § 7- 4- 1) ( Ord. 212, passed 11- 14- 1985)
96.02 REGULATIONS; USES PROHIBITED.
A) No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle in any park except on roads or designated
parking areas or other areas as the city shall designate, and no person shall operate a motor vehicle
within a park at a speed in excess of ten mph.
B) No person shall park or stop any motor vehicle at any place in a park except in designated
parking areas.
C) No person shall light a fire in any park except in places or receptacles provided for those
purposes. All fires must be extinguished before leaving the site.
D) No person shall litter park grounds with waste material of any form.
E) No person shall bathe, swim or wade in any lake, pond or watercourse within a park except in
designated swimming or wading areas. All persons will comply with the posted rules in swimming
areas.
F) No person shall, in any manner, attach or affix any handbill or poster to any property or object
within any park.
Page 1 of 3
G) No person shall write upon, deface, break, destroy, injure, remove or carry away any tree, plant,
flower, shrub, rock, soil, sand, fence, bench, or any other structure or property within any park area.
H) No person shall discharge or display any firearms, air guns, shot guns, rifles, pistols, revolvers,
air rifles, or BB guns. The use of slingshots, bows and arrows, except in designated areas, is prohibited.
Hunting or trapping is prohibited.
I) No person shall disturb or interfere with any birds or animals kept or found therein.
J) No person shall play football, baseball or other games except in designated areas provided
therefore.
K) No person shall be permitted to sell any article, including food or drink, unless he or she shall
have a permit, lease or concession granted by the City Council.
L) No person shall bring a dog into a park unless the dog is leashed or inside a motor vehicle.
Dog owners or handlers shall remove any excreta dropped by their animals.
M) No person shall ride a horse or other animal, except on designated trails or paths, or allow any
animal to go unattended or without physical restraint.
N) No person shall construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether
permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon or across any
parklands except on special written permission from the City Administrator.
0) All persons shall cooperate in maintaining all buildings, washrooms and restrooms in a neat
and sanitary condition.
P) No person shall throw, cast or discharge any stone or other missile carelessly or heedlessly in
disregard of the rights and safety of others, or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any
person or property.
Q) No person shall play hockey except in designated areas. No hockey sticks or pucks shall be
permitted in general skating areas.
R) No person shall appear nude, semi-nude, commit any nuisance or use threatening, abusive,
insulting, obscene or indecent language or act in any indecent, lascivious or improper manner or do any
act which constitutes a breach of the public peace.
S) No person shall operate a mini-bike, motorbike, snowmobile or any motorized recreational
vehicle in parks other than at sites designated by the City Council.
T) No person shall display or consume intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt liquor on or within 30
feet of any roadway or parking lot within a park.
U) Glass beverage containers are not allowed in any park.
V) It shall be unlawful for any person to bring beer into a park in kegs, barrels, or other bulls tap
quantities, except with a rental agreement for the Aspen Room at the McColl Pond Environmental
Learning Center, or if allowed by a license that has been issued by the City.
W) No person shall operate a remote- controlled airplane or boat in a city park, except at sites
designated by the City Council, and except that operators must yield to team sports or other authorized
park activity. The devices shall be operated in a manner so as to not endanger or be likely to endanger
any person or property.
Prior Code, § 7- 4- 2) ( Ord. 212, passed 11- 14- 1985; Ord. 220, passed 5- 22- 1986; Ord. 288, passed 9-
28- 1989; Ord. 377, passed 5- 12- 1994, Ord. 703, passed 8- 6- 2012; Ord. 772, passed 7- 18- 2016)
Penalty, see § 10. 99
96.03 HOURS OF USE.
A) Hours of use. Parks shall be opened at 7: 00 a.m. and closed at 10: 00 p.m. No one other than
city employees shall be in any park during the hours when the park is closed unless the person shall
have first received written permission from the City Administrator to remain therein after that time.
B) Removal of motor vehicles. The operator and/ or owner of a motor vehicle shall not leave a
vehicle, or permit a vehicle to be left, in any park during the hours the park is closed, unless the person
shall have written permission from the City Administrator or his or her designee to have the vehicle
therein. Savage police officers are authorized either to direct the operator or owner to remove any
vehicle or to have the vehicle removed at the owner' s expense.
Prior Code, § 7- 4- 3) ( Ord. 212, passed 11- 14- 1985) Penalty, see § 10. 99
Page 3 of 3
CHAPTER97: PUBLICHEALTHANDSAFETY
Section
97.01 Assessablecurrentservices
97.02 Snow, ice, dirtandrubbish
97.03 Maintenanceofvegetation
97.04 Removalofhealthandsafetyhazardsonprivateproperty
97.05 Installationandrepairofwaterservicelines
97.06 Repairofsidewalks
97.07 Streetlightingsystem
97.08 Otherservices
97.09 Costsofcurrentservices
97.10 Dustcoating
97.11 Maintenanceofcul-de-sacislands
97.12 Mowingofboulevard
97.13 PublicEasements
97.01 ASSESSABLECURRENTSERVICES.
ThetermCURRENTSERVICEasusedinthischaptermeansoneormoreofthefollowing:
snow, iceorrubbishremovalfromsidewalks; grassorweedeliminationfromboulevardsorfrom
privateproperty; removaloreliminationofpublichealthorsafetyhazardsfromprivateproperty;
installationorrepairofwaterservicelines; streetsprinkling, streetflushing, lightstreetoilingor
otherdusttreatmentofstreets; repairofsidewalks; trimmingandcareoftreesandremovalof
unsoundandinsect-infestedtreesfromthepublicstreetsorprivateproperty; andtheoperationof
astreetlightingsystem.
PriorCode, § 4-1-1)
97.02 SNOW, ICE, DIRTANDRUBBISH.
A) Dutyofownerandoccupant. Theownerandtheoccupantofanypropertyadjacenttoa
publicsidewalkshallkeepthewalksafeforpedestrians. Noowneroroccupantshallallowsnow,
ice, dirtorrubbishtoremainonthewalklongerthan24hoursafteritsdepositthereon.
B) Removalbythecity; recordofcosts. ThePublicWorksSuperintendentmayremove
fromallpublicsidewalksallsnow, ice, dirtandrubbishassoonaspossiblebeginning24hours
afteranymatterhasbeendepositedthereonorafterthesnowhasceasedtofall. ThePublic
WorksSuperintendentshallkeeparecord
showingthecostoftheremovaladjacenttoeachseparatelotandparcelandshalldeliverthe
informationtotheCityClerk.
PriorCode, § 4-1-2)(Ord. 759, passed10-05-2015) Penalty, see § 10.99
Page1of7
97.03 MAINTENANCEOFVEGETATION.
A) Definitions. Forthepurposesofthischapter, thefollowingdefinitionsshallapplyunless
thecontextclearlyindicatesorrequiresadifferentmeaning.
GARDEN. Acultivatedareadedicatedtogrowingvegetables, fruits, flowers,
ornamentalgrasses, groundcovers, shrubsandsimilarplantsthatwereplantedinawelldefined
location.
HERBACEOUSVEGETATION. Includesbutnotlimitedtograsses, weedsand
non-woodyplants.
NATIVEPLANTLANDSCAPEAREA. Anareawherenativeplantsarebeingorhave
beenplantedinadesignatedarea. ANATIVEPLANTLANDSCAPEAREAdoesnotinclude
gardens.
NATIVEPLANTS. Thosegrasses (includingprairiegrasses), sedges (solid,
triangular-stemmedplantsresemblinggrasses), forbs (floweringbroadleafplants), treesand
shrubsthatareplantspeciesnativetoornaturalizedtothestate, excludingprohibitedexotic
speciesasdefinedbyM.S. Chapter84D, asitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime. NATIVE
PLANTSdonotincludeweeds.
NATURALAREA. Anaturalareathatwaspurposelylefttogrowinanaturalstateand
canmaintainitselfinastableconditionwithouthumaninterventionandcontainstrees, shrubs
andnativeplants, excludingweedsandturfgrassareas.
ORNAMENTALGRASSES. Grassesthatarenotindigenoustothestate, thatare
intendedtoaddbeautytoagardenornaturalarea. ORNAMENTALGRASSESdonotinclude
turfgrassesorweeds.
TURFGRASS. Commerciallyavailableculturedturfgrassvarieties, includingbluegrass,
fescueandryegrassblends, commonlyusedinregularlycutlawnareas.
WEEDS.
NoxiousweedsasdefinedanddesignatedpursuanttotheMinnesotaNoxiousWeed
Law,M .S. §§1 8.76through18.88,a stheymaybeamendedfromtimetotime; oranyvolunteer
plants, suchasbutnotlimitedtogarlicmustard (AlliariaPetiolata), spottedknapweed (Centaurea
Maculosa) orburdock (ArctiumMinus). Thecityweedinspectorshallmaintainacurrentlistof
weeds/volunteerplantsthatareprohibited.
B) Heightallowance. Anowneroroccupantofanylotsorparceloflandinthecityshall
notallowanyherbaceousvegetationgrowinguponthelotorparcelorlandorgrowinguponcity
right-of-waywhichabutsthelotorparcelofland, includingtheareabetweenanysidewalkor
trailandthecurbofthestreettogrowtoaheightgreaterthanteninchesortoallowthe
vegetationtogotoseed.
C) Exceptions. Thefollowingprovisionsshallnotapplytodivision (B) above.
1) Tovegetationthatislocated:
a) Onslopesequaltoorgreaterthanthreefeethorizontaltoonefootvertical;
b) Innaturalareas;
c) Inascenicorconservationeasement;
d) Inagarden;
e) Inundisturbed/undevelopedfloodplainareasdesignatedontheofficialzoning
map; or
f) Withinastormdrainagepondorditchwhichstoresorconveysstormwater.
2) Tonativeplantlandscapeareasprovidedthat:
a) 1. Theyaresetbacknotlessthanfivefeetfromthesideand/orrearlotslines
toprovideatransitionzone.
2. Nosetbackisrequiredonthesideorrearlotlinesif:
a. Thereisafullyopaquefenceatleastfivefeetinheightinstalled
betweenthenativeplantsandthesideorrearlotlines; or
b. Thenativeplantsabutaneighboringnativelandscapearea.
b) Turfgrassiseliminatedandthenativeplants, treesandshrubsareplanted
throughtransplantingorseedbyhumanormechanicalmeans. Soilerosionshouldbecontrolled
whilethegroundisbareofplantgrowththatissufficienttoinhibiterosionandisthesole
responsibilityoftheowneroroccupant; or
c) WrittenauthorizationfromtheParksandNaturalResourcesSuperintendentor
his/herdesigneeisobtainedforworkwithinconservationorsceniceasementareas,
right-of-ways (nottoexceed30inchesinheight), includingplanting, mowingorcutting.
D) Setbacks. Thesetbackarearequiredbydivision (C) aboveshallbecomposedof
regularlymowedturfgrass, gardenbeds, trees, shrubs, mulch, woodchips, rocksand/orgravel.
Page3of7
E) Visualsightlines. Thenativeplantlandscapearea, gardenornaturalareashallnot
obscure, blockorimpedevisualsightlines; regulatory, warningorstreetidentificationsigns; or
streetlightilluminationrequiredtoensurethesafeandefficientcirculationofvehiclesand
pedestriansonstreets, intersections, trails, pathwaysandsidewalks.
F) Cityresponsibility. Thecitywillnotberesponsiblefordamagetoturfgrassand/orany
landscapedareasresultingfrompublicworksimprovementsorsnowremovalactivitieswithin
rights-of-waysordrainageandutilityeasements.
G) Noticeandassessment.
1) Notice. Onceafailuretocomplywiththeheight, setback, maintenance, weedand
annualcuttingrequirementsasrequiredbythissectionisidentified, noticeofthefailureshallbe
givenbythecitytotheaffectedpropertyowner. Thenoticeshallstateanddescribetheproperty
affected; allowsevendaysforthepropertyownertocausethevegetationtobecut, removed
and/ortreatedforweeds; thatifthevegetationisnotcut, removedand/ortreatedforweeds, the
citywillactasitdeemsfittobringthepropertyintocompliancewiththissection, andthecosts
willbeassessedagainstthepropertyfromwhichthevegetationhasbeenremovedand/ortreated
pursuanttoandinaccordancewithM.S. §4 29.101, asitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime,o r
anysimilarprovisionhereafterenacted.
2) Assessments. Inallcasesinwhichvegetationiscut, removedand/ortreatedfor
weedsorcausedtobebythecity, thecostsshallbeassessedagainstthepropertyfromwhichthe
vegetationiscut, removedand/ortreatedforweedspursuanttoandinaccordancewithM.S.
429.101, asitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime, oranysimilarprovisionhereafterenacted.
Theassessmentsshallbepaidwithinterestandwithinaperiodnottoexceedoneyearfromthe
dateofassessment. Thecitywillnotberesponsiblefordamagestoturfgrassand/orlandscaped
areasresultingfromenforcementofthischapter.
3) Citationissuance. Whenaccesstoaffectedpropertieswhereacodeviolationis
identifiedhasbeendeniedorisrestricted, acitationmaybeissuedfortheviolationperthecity
code.
PriorCode, § 4-1-3) ( Ord. 615-06, passed11-20-2006; Ord. 788, passed06-05-2017) Penalty,
see § 10.99
97.04 REMOVALOFHEALTHANDSAFETYHAZARDSONPRIVATE
PROPERTY.
Whenthecityremovesoreliminatespublichealthorsafetyhazardsfromprivateproperty
undercityordinance, theadministrativeofficerresponsiblefordoingtheworkshallkeepa
recordofthecostsoftheremovaloreliminationagainsteachparcelofpropertyaffectedand
annuallydelivertheinformationtotheCityClerk.
PriorCode, § 4-1-4)
97.05 INSTALLATIONANDREPAIROFWATERSERVICELINES.
Wheneverthecityinstallsorrepairswaterservicelinesservingprivatepropertyunder
Chapter51ofthiscode, theUtilityServicesSuperintendentorotherdesignatedofficialshall
keeparecordofthetotalcostoftheinstallationorrepairagainstthepropertyanddeliverthe
informationtotheCityClerkannuallybyAugust15astoeachparcelofpropertyonwhichthe
costhasnotbeenpaid.
PriorCode, § 4-1-5)(Ord. 759, passed10-05-2015)
97.06 REPAIROFSIDEWALKS.
A) Dutyofowner. Theownerofanypropertywithinthecityabuttingapublicsidewalk
shallkeepthesidewalkinrepairandsafeforpedestrians. Repairsshallbemadeinaccordance
withthestandardspecificationsapprovedbytheCouncilandonfileintheofficeoftheCity
Administrator.
B) Inspections, noticeofrepair. ThePublicWorksSuperintendentorotherdesignated
officialshallmakeinspectionsasarenecessarytodeterminethatpublicsidewalkswithinthecity
arekeptinrepairandsafeforpedestrianorvehicles. Iftheofficialfindsthatanysidewalk
abuttingonprivatepropertyisunsafeandinneedofrepairs, theofficialshallcauseanoticetobe
servedbyregisteredorcertifiedmailorbypersonalserviceupontherecordownerofthe
property, andtheoccupant, iftheownerdoesnotresidewithinthecityorcannotbefound
therein, orderingtheownertohavethesidewalkrepairedandmadesafewithinthreeweeksand
statingthatiftheownerfailstodoso, thePublicWorksSuperintendentorotherdesignated
officialwilldosoonbehalfofthecity, thattheexpensethereofmustbepaidbytheowner, and
thatifunpaid, itwillbemadeaspecialassessmentagainstthepropertyconcerned.
C) Repairbycity; recordofcosts. Ifthesidewalkisnotrepairedwithinthreeweeksafter
receiptofthenotice, thePublicWorksSuperintendentorotherdesignatedofficialshallreport
thefactstotheCouncilandtheCouncilshallbyresolutionorderthePublicWorks
Superintendentorotherdesignatedofficialtorepairthesidewalkandmakeitsafeororderthe
workdonebycontractinaccordancewithlaw. ThePublicWorksSuperintendentshallkeepa
recordofthetotalcostofrepairattributabletoeachlotorparcelofpropertyandreportthe
informationtotheCityAdministrator.
PriorCode, § 4-1-6)(Ord. 759, passed10-05-2015) Penalty, see § 10.99
97.07 STREETLIGHTINGSYSTEM.
TheCityClerkmaykeeparecordofthecostofoperationofthestreetlightingsystemfor
the12monthsprecedingSeptember1ofeachyearandtheportionofthecostproperty
attributableduringthatperiodtoeachlotandparcelofpropertyabuttingonthestreetoralleyin
whichthesystemislocated. Allcostsmaybecollectedinthemannerprovidedbythissection.
PriorCode, § 4-1-8)
Page5of7
97.08 OTHERSERVICES.
Anassessmentmaybeleviedforanyandallotherservicesthecityoritsdulyauthorized
representativeislegallyentitledtorenderandforwhichpaymenthasnotbeenreceivedfromthe
benefittedpropertyowner. ThemiscellaneouschargesmaybeassessedonlyaftertheCity
Council, afterhavingreviewedthefactorsrelatingthereto, hascalledapublichearingandthe
publichearinghasbeendulyheld.
PriorCode, § 4-1-9)
97.09 COSTSOFCURRENTSERVICES.
A) Liabilityofowner. Theownerofpropertyonwhichacurrentservicehasbeen
performedshallbepersonallyliabilityforthecostoftheservice. Assoonastheservicehas
beencompletedandthecostdetermined, theCityAdministratororotherdesignatedofficialshall
prepareabillandmailittotheownerandthereupontheamountshallbeimmediatelydueand
payableattheofficeoftheCityAdministrator.
B) Specialassessments. OnorbeforeSeptember1ofeachyear, theCityAdministrator
shalllistthetotalunpaidchargesforeachtypeofcurrentserviceagainsteachseparatelotor
parceltowhichtheyareattributableunderthissection. TheCouncilmaythenspreadthe
chargesagainstthepropertybenefittedasaspecialassessmentunderM.S. §4 29.101, asitmay
beamendedfromtimetotime, andotherpertinentstatuesforcertificationtotheCountyAuditor
andcollectionalongwithcurrenttaxesthefollowingyearorinannualinstallments, not
exceedingten, astheCouncilmaydetermineineachcase.
PriorCode, § 4-1-10) (Ord. 540, passed1-7-2002) Penalty, see § 10.99
97.10 DUSTCOATING.
A) Petitionforimprovement. Thecityshallapplydustcontrolmaterialsuponrequest
submittedontheapprovedrequestformfromthepropertyownersabuttinggravelstreets. The
materialsshallbeappliedonlyafterthepropertyownerhaspaidinadvancetothecitythecost
determinedforthedustcontrolapplication.
B) Determinationofcostandmaterials. ThecostshallbedeterminedbythePublicWorks
Departmentbasedupontheexpensesincurredformaterials, laborandequipmentatthe
appropriateratesestablishedbythecity. Thetypeofdustcontrolmaterialusedshallbeatthe
discretionofthePublicWorksDepartment.
C) Timerequirement. AlldustcontrolrequestsshallberequiredpriortoMay1ofeach
year, withfullpaymentrequiredbyMay15ofthatyear. Thedustcontrolapplicationshallbe
scheduledduringthelasthalfofMayorthefirsthalfofJune (firstapplication) andthemonthof
August (secondapplication).
D) Publicsafetyhazard. TheCityCouncilmayordertheapplicationofdustcontrol
materialsonthosestreetsdeemedappropriateduetopublicsafetyhazard. Thecitywillfollow
MinnesotaStateStatuterequirementsforpublicimprovementsandassessmentofcostsinthose
appropriateinstances.
PriorCode, § 4-1-11) (Ord. 322, passed5-9-1991) Penalty, see § 10.99
97.11 MAINTENANCEOFCUL-DE-SACISLANDS.
Ifcul-de-sacislandsarenotproperlymaintained, asrequiredby § 151.11(B)(14), theCity
Councilshallbeauthorizedtoordertheimprovementandtoassessthecostthereofagainst
abuttinglots. Theassessmentmaybeleviedonlyafterapublichearinghasbeendulycalledand
conducted.
PriorCode, § 4-1-12)
97.12 MOWINGOFBOULEVARD.
A) Boulevard. Thatportionofastreetnotoccupiedbythetraveledportionofthestreetor
asidewalk.
B) Maintenanceofboulevards. Everyownerofpropertyadjoininganypublicstreetor
alleyshallcausethegrassorweedstobecutormowedfromthelotlineadjoiningsuchstreetor
alleytothecenterofsuchstreetoralley. Thestandardscontainedin §9 7.03shallapplytograss
andweedslocatedontheboulevard.
Ord. 655, passed8-03-2009)
97.13 PUBLICEASEMENTS.
A) Easement. AnyeasementgrantedtotheCityforanypublicpurpose.
B) Alleasementsshallbekeptfreeofstructures, landscapingandimprovementsthat
interferewiththeoperation, maintenance, repairand/orintendeduseoftheeasement.
Ord. 655, passed8-03-2009)
Page7of7
CHAPTER 98: PYROTECHNICS
Section
98. 01 Adoption of state law
98. 02 Permit required
98. 03 Definition
98. 04 Permit application
98. 05 Permit period and permit fee
98. 06 Revocation of permit
98. 07 Terms and conditions for issuance of a permit
98. 08 Discharge rules and regulations
98. 09 Public display
98. 01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.
The provisions of M.S. §§ 624.20 through 624.25, as they may be amended from time to
time, are inclusive and are adopted by reference. Section 150. 003 of this code shall apply to any
and all usage herein described.
Prior Code, § 8- 5- 1) ( Ord. 544, passed 6- 24- 2002; Ord. 716, passed 5- 20- 2013)
98. 02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person without having secured a permit from the city shall do any of the following:
A) Manufacture, store or sell consumer pyrotechnics; or
B) Make a public display of pyrotechnics.
Prior Code, § 8- 5- 2) ( Ord. 544, passed 6- 24-2002; Ord. 716, passed 5- 20- 2013) Penalty, see §
10. 99
98. 03 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning. CONSUMER PYROTECHNICS. Wire or wood
sparklers of not more than 100 grams of mixture per item; other sparking items, which are
non-explosive and non-aerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical mixture per tube; or a total
of 200 grams or less for multiple tubes, snakes and glow worms, smoke devices or trick
noisemakers, which include paper streamers, party poppers, string poppers, snappers and drop
pops, each consisting of not more than 2, 500 grams of explosive mixture (reference M.S.
624.21, as it may be amended from time to time, and the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code, Article
32).
Page 1 of 4
Prior Code, § 8- 5- 3) ( Ord. 544, passed 6- 24- 2002)
98. 04 PERMIT APPLICATION.
An application for a permit for the manufacture, storage and sale of consumer fireworks shall
be made to the Fire Marshal, who shall grant or deny issuance. A determination made by the Fire
Marshal that the location where consumer fireworks are to be stored or sold is not hazardous to
property, or endangers any person, and the persons in charge of selling or storing the consumer
fireworks are competent and trained to handle the consumer fireworks, must be made prior to
processing the application. A letter shall accompany the application for a permit from the owner
of the property on which the sale is to take place. The letter shall grant permission to the
applicant for use of the property. The application shall include an 11 by 17 inch floor plan
designating the area for manufacturing, storage or display, along with a list documenting the
name, weight, and quantity of consumer fireworks within the building and be accompanied by
material safety data sheets. Applications must be made a minimum of 15 days prior to operating.
Any permit granted hereunder shall be non-transferable.
Prior Code, § 8- 5- 4) ( Ord. 544, passed 6- 24-2002; Ord. 716, passed 5- 20- 2013) Penalty, see §
10. 99
98. 05 PERMIT PERIOD AND PERMIT FEE.
Permits are issued for a calendar year. Permit fees shall not be prorated. The fee for the
permit shall be set by ordinance.
Prior Code, § 8- 5- 5) ( Ord. 544, passed 6- 24- 2002; Ord. 575, passed 5- 17- 2004; Ord. 716,
passed 5- 20- 2013)
98. 06 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
Following written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, the Fire Marshal, City
Administrator, or appointed designee may revoke a permit for violation of this chapter or state
law concerning the sale, use or possession of fireworks. If a permit is revoked, neither the
applicant nor the permit premise may obtain a permit for a period of 12 months. If a permit is
revoked, the permit holder may within ten days appeal the decision to the City Council.
Prior Code, § 8- 5- 6) ( Ord. 544, passed 6- 24- 2002; Ord. 716, passed 5- 20- 2013)
98.07 TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF A PERMIT.
A permit for manufacturing, storage or retail sale of consumer fireworks shall be issued only
upon the following terms and conditions.
A) Neither the applicant nor the responsible party for the permit shall have been convicted
of a felony, or a fire/fireworks related misdemeanor within three years of the date of filing the
Page 2 of 4
application. A criminal background check will be conducted on the permit holder.
B) Transient sales of consumer fireworks will be prohibited except as permitted under Title
11, Chapter 112, Section 112.25 — 112.33 Temporary Seasonal Outdoor.
C) No manufacturing, sales, or storage for commercial use shall occur on residentially
zoned property or properties used for educational purposes or assemblies.
D) No facility to be occupied for the use of manufacturing fireworks shall be located closer
than 500 feet to any existing school, church, daycare facility or residential area. The distance
shall be measured from the nearest property line of the manufacturing facility to the nearest
property line of the above- mentioned areas.
E) Consumer firework manufacturing storage or sales areas shall provide approved " no
smoking" signs in red letters not less than two inches in height on a white background. All signs
shall be maintained in legible condition.
F) Smoking and the discharge of consumer fireworks shall be prohibited within 100 feet of
any building in which fireworks are manufactured, stored or sold.
G) Each location that manufacturers, sells or displays fireworks shall have a minimum of
two types of extinguishments, adequate for the amount of fireworks on hand.
H) The premises must be in compliance with the State Building Code and State Fire Code.
There shall be at least two exits from all buildings from which fireworks are manufactured,
stored or sold.
I) In buildings without an approved automatic sprinkler system, retail consumer fireworks
indoor sale displays shall be limited to 50 pounds net pyrotechnic composition or 200 pounds
gross weight, if the pyrotechnic composition weight is not known.
J) Buildings protected throughout by an approved automatic sprinkler system shall be
limited to 100 pounds net or 400 pounds gross weight if the pyrotechnic composition weight is
not known.
K) All facilities that obtain a permit shall post, in a conspicuous location, a list of all
consumer fireworks displayed and stored on the property. The list shall document the name,
weight and quantity of fireworks and be accompanied by the material safety data sheets.
L) Upon request, samples of the fireworks shall be made available to the Fire Chief for
testing purposes.
M) Manufacturing, warehouse buildings, or retail in excess of the quantities listed above for
retail consumer fireworks shall be classified as an H (hazard) occupancy along with explosives
and aerosols.
Page 3 of 4
N) Photo identification must be checked with each sale. Purchasers must be 18 years of
age or older.
0) The sale of consumer fireworks must be allowed by the Zoning Code and must comply
with all zoning requirements including signs.
P) The premises are subject to inspections pursuant to § 10.20 by city employees including
the Fire Marshal, Building Official and police officers during normal business hours.
Prior Code, § 8- 5- 7 ( Ord. 544, passed 6- 24- 2002; Ord. 689, passed 10- 17- 2011) Penalty, see §
10. 99
98. 08 DISCHARGE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
A) It is unlawful to use, fire, or discharge consumer fireworks along the route of and during
any parade or at any public assembly or in any business- zoning district.
B) It is unlawful at any time to throw or toss consumer fireworks at any person, animal, or
vehicle or any other thing and/or object.
C) Consumer fireworks can only be discharged where there is an acceptable means of
extinguishments ( water source and/ or fire extinguisher).
D) The Fire Chief may ban firework displays and use of consumer fireworks if a drought or
conditions warrant.
E) Juveniles may not possess consumer fireworks unless under the direct supervision of a
responsible adult.
Prior Code, § 8- 5- 8) ( Ord. 544, passed 6- 24- 2002) Penalty, see § 10. 99
98.09 PUBLIC DISPLAY.
The public display of fireworks shall require a permit issued by the Fire Marshal in
accordance with M.S. § 624.22, as it may be amended from time to time.
Prior Code, § 8- 5- 9) ( Ord. 544, passed 6- 24- 2002)
Page 4 of 4
CHAPTER 99: REGULATION OF ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
99. 01 Scope and purpose
99.02 Definitions
99. 03 Best Practice Alarm Registration
99.04 Duties of the Alarm User
99. 05 Duties of the Alarm Company
99.06 Prohibited Acts
99.07 User Fees and Other Violations
99. 08 Payment of Fees
99.09 Alarm User Awareness Class and Training Video
99. 10 Appeals
99. 11 Confidentiality
99. 12 Administrative Rules
99. 13 Government Immunity
99. 14 Severability
99. 01 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
The City finds that excessive false alarms unduly burden the Savage Police Department' s
limited law enforcement resources, the purpose of this Chapter is to establish reasonable
expectations of the alarm users and to ensure that alarm users are held responsible for their use of
alarm systems.
This Chapter provides regulation for the use of burglary alarms; establishes service users'
fees; and establishes a system of administration. The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the law
enforcement services of the city from misuse of alarm systems and to provide for the maximum
possible service to alarm system users.
Prior Code, § 5- 3- 1) ( Ord. 232, passed 12- 11- 1986; Ord. 726, passed 11- 18- 2013)
99. 02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Alarm Administrator means a person or persons designated by the City to administer,
control and review false alarm reduction efforts and administer the provisions of this Chapter.
Alarm Company means a person subject to licensing requirements as a provider of services
and goods related to alarm systems and/ or engaged in selling, leasing, installing, servicing or
monitoring alarm systems.
Pagel of 8
Alarm Signal means a detectable signal; audible or visual, generated by an alarm system, to
which law enforcement personnel are requested to respond.
Alarm System means any single device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the
occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or other activity requiring immediate attention and
to which law enforcement personnel are requested to respond. This does not include motor
vehicle or boat alarms, domestic violence alarms, or alarms designed to elicit a medical response.
Alarm User means any person corporation, partnership, proprietorship, governmental or
educational entity or any other entity owning, leasing or operating an alarm system, or on whose
premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises.
Alarm User Awareness Class means a class conducted for the purpose of educating alarm
users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm systems and the problems
created by false alarms.
Automatic Dial Protection Device means an automatic dialing device or an automatic
telephone dialing alarm system and shall include any system which, upon being activated,
automatically initiates to the Scott County Dispatch Center, a recorded message or code signal
indicating a need for law enforcement response.
Best Practice Alarm Registration means an alarm registration process for businesses and
homeowners which provides the City with pertinent information regarding the operation of an
alarm system within the City.
Cancellation means the process where response is terminated when the alarm company
designated by the alarm user) notifies the Scott County Dispatch Center that there is not an
existing situation at the alarm site requiring law enforcement unit response after an alarm
dispatch request. If cancellation occurs prior to police arriving at the scene, this is not a false
alarm for the purpose of civil penalty, and no penalty will be assessed.
City means the City of Savage or its agent.
Enhanced Call Verification (ECV) is a monitoring procedure requiring that a minimum of
two calls be made to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid prior to making an
Alarm Dispatch Request, EXCEPT in the case of a panic or robbery-in-progress alarm, or in
cases where a crime-in-progress has been verified by video and/ or audible means. The two calls
must be made to different phone numbers where a responsible person can typically be reached.
False Alarm means the activation of an alarm system to summon law enforcement personnel
through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of
the alarm user, his/ her employees or agents, unless law enforcement response is cancelled by the
alarm user' s alarm company before law enforcement personnel arrive at the alarm location.
Page 2 of 8
An alarm is false within the meaning of this Chapter when, upon inspection by law
enforcement personnel, evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry, robbery, or other such
crime was committed or attempted in or on the premises which would have activated a properly
functioning alarm system. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a false alarm shall not include an
alarm which can reasonably be determined to have been caused or activated by unusually violent
conditions of nature nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject
to control by the alarm user.
Law Enforcement Personnel means City of Savage Police and other City personnel or
contractors duly authorized to respond to public safety situations.
Local Alarm means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible
from the exterior of a structure and is not monitored by a remote monitoring facility, whether
installed by an alarm company or user.
Person means any natural individual, group, organization, corporation, partnership, or
similar association.
Premises means the property and building on which an alarm system is maintained.
Registration Year means the 12- month calendar year beginning January 1st
and ending
December 31st
Runaway Alarm means an alarm system that produces repeated alarm signals that do not
appear to be caused by human action. The Savage Police Department may in their discretion
discontinue law enforcement responses to an alarm signal that appears to be a runaway alarm.
Scott County Dispatch Center The facility in Scott County used to receive emergency
requests for service and general information from the public to be dispatched to respective law
enforcement units.
SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01 means the American National Standard Institute( ANSI)
approved Security Industry Association (SIA) CP- 01 Control Panel Standard, which may be
updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control
panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce false alarms. Control panels
built and tested to this standard by a nationally recognized testing organization, will be marked to
state: " Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP- 01 Control Panel Standard Features for
False Alarm Reduction".
Prior Code, § 5- 3- 2) ( Ord. 232, passed 12- 11- 1986; Ord. 726, passed 11- 18- 2013)
99. 03 BEST PRACTICE ALARM REGISTRATION
A) Registration required. No person shall install or maintain an alarm system without first
submitting the City of Savage Alarm Registration Form.
Page 3 of 8
B) Transfer ofpossession. When the possession of the premises at which an alarm system is
maintained is transferred, the alarm user obtaining possession of the property shall file an Alarm
Registration Form within 30 days of obtaining possession of the premises. Alarm registrations
are not transferable.
C) Reporting updated information. Whenever the information provided on the alarm
registration changes, the alarm user shall provide correct information to the City within 30 days
of the change. In addition, each year after the initial alarm registration the alarm user will receive
from the city a form requesting updated information. The user shall complete and return this
form to the City whether or not any of the information changed. Failure to comply will constitute
a violation of this Chapter and may result in a civil penalty.
D) Multiple alarm systems. If an alarm user has two or more alarm systems protecting two
or more separate structures having different addresses and/ or tenants, a separate registration shall
be required for each structure and/ or tenant.
E) Training Video. All alarm users shall view the training video prior to completing the
Alarm Registration form. The training video is available on-line or at the Police Department.
Prior Code, § 5- 3- 2) ( Ord. 232, passed 12- 11- 1986; Ord. 726, passed 11- 18- 2013)
99. 04 DUTIES OF THE ALARM USER
All alarm users shall:
A) Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will reduce or eliminate
false alarms.
B) Provide a minimum of two different phone numbers to the alarm company for Enhanced
Call Verification (ECV).
C) Respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system' s location within thirty
30) minutes when notified by the Scott County Dispatch Center and/ or the Savage Police
Department to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system.
D) Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that
the alarm system was intended to report.
E) Submit a new registration form to the City of Savage within 30 days when there is a
change in address or ownership of a premises.
Prior Code, § 5- 3- 2) ( Ord. 232, passed 12- 11- 1986; Ord. 726, passed 11- 18- 2013)
99. 05 DUTIES OF THE ALARM COMPANY
All alarm companies engaged in business in the City shall:
Page 4 of 8
A) Obtain and maintain the required state license( s).
B) Provide name, address, and telephone number of the registered alarm user or a designee,
who can be called in an emergency, 24 hours a day and who will be able to respond to an alarm
call, when notified, within 30 minutes.
C) Provide the most current contact information for the alarm user.
D) Ninety ( 90) days after enactment of this Ordinance, on all new and upgraded
installations, use only alarm control panels which meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP- 01.
E) Prior to activation of the alarm system, provide instructions explaining the proper
operation of the alarm system to the alarm user.
F) Provide written information to the alarm user of how to obtain service from the alarm
company relating to the alarm system.
G) Use Enhanced Call Verification (ECV) to determine whether an alarm signal is valid
before requesting dispatch. ECV shall require, at a minimum that a second call be made to a
different number, if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify
themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid, EXCEPT in the case of a
panic or crime- in-progress alarm, or in cases where a crime-in—progress has been verified by
video and/ or audible means.
H) Provide alarm user contact information to the Scott County Dispatch Center to facilitate
dispatch and/ or cancellations.
I) Communicate any available information about the alarm to Scott County Dispatch.
J) Communicate a cancellation to the Scott County Dispatch Center as soon as possible
following a determination that response is unnecessary.
Prior Code, § 5- 3- 2) ( Ord. 232, passed 12- 11- 1986; Ord. 726, passed 11- 18- 2013)
99.06 PROHIBITED ACTS
A) It shall be unlawful to activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning law
enforcement personnel when no burglary, robbery, or other crime dangerous to life or property is
being committed or attempted on the premises, or otherwise to cause a false alarm.
B) It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an audible alarm system which can sound
continually for more than 15 minutes.
C) It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an automatic dial protection device that
reports, or causes to be reported, any recorded message to the Scott County Dispatch Center.
Page 5 of 8
Prior Code, § 5- 3- 2) ( Ord. 232, passed 12- 11- 1986; Ord. 726, passed 11- 18- 2013)
99.07 USER FEES AND OTHER VIOLATIONS
A) User Fees. An alarm system which reports a false alarm( s) to the city and which has
received notice of the violations will cause the alarm user to be charged an emergency services
user fee. The number of allowable false alarms and amount of the fee for each successive false
alarm shall be established and, from time to time amended, by ordinance or resolution adopted
by the City Council.
B) Other Violations. Violations of this Chapter, other than false alarms, shall be enforced
through the assessment of civil penalties in the amount of$ 100. 00 per violation.
C) Civil non-criminal violation. A violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
a civil violation and shall not constitute a misdemeanor or infraction.
Prior Code, § 5- 3- 2) ( Ord. 232, passed 12- 11- 1986; Ord. 726, passed 11- 18- 2013)
99.08 PAYMENT OF FEES
A) Emergency services user fees and civil penalties shall be paid to the City Clerk within
thirty (30) days from the date of the invoice by the City to the alarm user. Failure to pay the
penalty within thirty (30) days from the date of the invoice will cause the alarm user to be
considered delinquent and subject to a late payment penalty in the amount of 10% of the
invoiced penalty.
B) All invoiced penalties which are unpaid and delinquent shall be forwarded to the City
Clerk who shall prepare a roll each year of the unpaid, delinquent amounts against the respective
properties described in the alarm user' s registration, which roll shall be delivered to the City
Council for certification to the County Auditor on or before October 15 of each year. Prior to
delivery of the roll to the City Council, the City Clerk shall give written notice to the property
owner on or before September 15th, of the City' s intention to certify the charges to the auditor.
Prior Code, § 5- 3- 2) ( Ord. 232, passed 12- 11- 1986; Ord. 726, passed 11- 18- 2013)
99. 09 ALARM USER AWARENESS CLASS AND TRAINING VIDEO
A) The City may create and implement an Alarm User Awareness Class and/ or Training
Video and may request the assistance of alarm companies to assist in developing and
implementing the class or training video. The class or video shall inform alarm users of the
problems created by false alarms and instruct alarm users how to help reduce false alarms. The
City may grant the option of attending a class in lieu of paying one assessed fine, not to exceed
100.
Prior Code, § 5- 3- 2) ( Ord. 232, passed 12- 11- 1986; Ord. 726, passed 11- 18- 2013)
Page 6 of 8
99. 10 APPEALS
A) Appeals process. Those who are assessed user fees, civil penalties or other penalties
under this Chapter, may make a written appeal to the Chief of Police or designee within 10 days
of the date of notification of the penalties. The Chief of Police or designee, shall review the
appeal and make a written determination. The person or entity who appealed to the Chief of
Police or designee may appeal his/ her written decision to the City Administrator within 10 days
of the date of the written determination. The City Administrator' s decision shall be final. Any
failure to appeal within the time periods set forth shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest
the penalties.
B) Appeal standard. The Chief of Police or designee shall review an appeal using a
preponderance of the evidence standard. Notwithstanding a determination that the preponderance
of the evidence supports the penalties, the Chief of Police or designee shall have the discretion to
dismiss or reduce penalties.
Prior Code, § 5- 3- 2) ( Ord. 232, passed 12- 11- 1986; Ord. 726, passed 11- 18- 2013)
99. 11 CONFIDENTIALITY
A) All data gathered in relation to the Best Practices Alarm Registration pursuant to this
Chapter is determined to be Security Information data pursuant to Minn. Stat. 13. 37 and shall be
nonpublic data. All other data gathered pursuant to this Chapter shall be classified pursuant to
Minn. Stat. Chap. 13.
B) Subject to the status of the nonpublic data, the Chief of Police may develop and maintain
statistics for the purpose of ongoing alarm system evaluations.
Prior Code, § 5- 3- 2) ( Ord. 232, passed 12- 11- 1986; Ord. 726, passed 11- 18- 2013)
99. 12 ADMINISTRATIVE RULES
A) The Chief of Police or designee shall promulgate rules as may be necessary for the
implementation of this Chapter and the administration thereof.
Prior Code, § 5- 3- 2) ( Ord. 232, passed 12- 11- 1986; Ord. 726, passed 11- 18- 2013)
99. 13 GOVERNMENT IMMUNITY
A) Alarm registration is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or obligation,
either express or implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting
from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as
provided by law is retained. By completing the Alarm Registration Form, the alarm user
acknowledges that the law enforcement response may be influenced by factors such as: the
availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency
Page 7 of 8
conditions, staffing levels and prior response history.
Prior Code, § 5- 3- 2) ( Ord. 232, passed 12- 11- 1986; Ord. 726, passed 11- 18- 2013)
99. 14 SEVERABILITY
A) The provisions of this Chapter are severable. If a court determines that a word, phrase,
clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection, section, or other provision is invalid or that the
application of any part of the provision to any person or circumstance is invalid, the remaining
provisions and the application of those provisions to other persons or circumstances are not
affected by that decision.
Prior Code, § 5- 3- 8) ( Ord. 232, passed 12- 11- 1986; Ord. 726, passed 11- 18- 2013) Penalty, see
10. 99
Page 8 of 8
CHAPTER 100: RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
Section
100.01 Findings, purposeandintent
100.02 Electiontomanagethepublicrights-of-way
100.03 Definitions
100.04 Administration
100.05 Registrationandright-of-wayoccupancy
100.06 Registrationinformation
100.07 Reportingobligations
100.08 Right-of-waypermitrequirement
100.09 Right-of-waypermitapplications
100.10 Issuanceofright-of-waypermits; conditions
100.11 Right-of-waypermitfees
100.12 Right-of-waypatchingandrestoration
100.13 Jointapplications
100.14 Supplementaryapplications
100.15 Otherobligations
100.16 Denialofright-of-waypermit
100.17 Installationrequirements
100.18 Inspection
100.19 Workdonewithoutapermit
100.20 Supplementarynotification
100.21 Revocationofpermits
100.22 Mappingdata
100.23 Locationandrelocationoffacilities
100.24 Pre-excavationfacilitieslocation
100.25 Damagetootherfacilities
100.26 Right-of-wayvacation
100.27 Indemnificationandliability
100.28 Abandonedandunusablefacilities
100.29 Appeal
100.30 Severability
100.31 Smallwirelessfacilities
100.32 Right-of-waymanagementcosts
100.01 FINDINGS, PURPOSEANDINTENT.
Toprovideforthehealth, safetyandwelfareofitscitizens, andtoensuretheintegrityofits
streetsandtheappropriateuseoftherights-ofway, thecitystrivestokeepitsrights-of-wayina
stateofgoodrepairandfreefromunnecessaryencumbrances.
Page1of25
A) Intent. Thecityherebyenactsthischapterofthiscoderelatingtoright-of-waypermits,
smallwirelessfacilitypermits, andadministration. Thischapterimposesreasonableregulationon
theplacementandmaintenanceoffacilitiesandequipmentcurrentlywithinitsrights-of-wayorto
beplacedthereinatsomefuturetime. Itisintendedtocomplementtheregulatoryrolesofstate
andfederalagencies. Underthischapter, personsexcavatingandobstructingtherights-of-way
willbearfinancialresponsibilityfortheirwork. Finally, thischapterprovidesforrecoveryof
out-of-pocketandprojectedcostsfrompersonsusingthepublicrights-of-way.
B) Statestatuterelationship. ThischaptershallbeinterpretedconsistentlywithMinnesota
Statutes (“M.S.”) §§2 37.16,2 37.162, 237.163, 237.79,2 37.81and238.086 (the “Statutes”), as
theymaybeamendedfromtimetotime, andtheotherlawsgoverningapplicablerightsofthe
cityandusersoftheright-of-way. Thischaptershallalsobeinterpretedconsistentwith
MinnesotaRules7819.0050to7819.9950wherepossible. Totheextentanyprovisionofthis
chaptercannotbeinterpretedconsistentlywiththeMinnesotaRules, thatinterpretationmost
consistentwiththeStatutesandotherapplicablestatutoryandcaselawisintended. Thischapter
shallnotbeinterpretedtolimittheregulatoryandpolicepowersofthecitytoadoptandenforce
generalordinancesnecessarytoprotectthehealth, safetyandwelfareofthepublic.
100.02 ELECTIONTOMANAGETHEPUBLICRIGHTS-OF-WAY.
Pursuanttotheauthoritygrantedtothecityunderstateandfederalstatutory, administrative
andcommonlaw,t hecityherebyelectspursuantM.S. §2 37.163, Subd. 2(b),a sitmaybe
amendedfromtimetotime, tomanagerights-of-waywithinitsjurisdiction.
100.03 DEFINITIONS.
A) Definitions. Thefollowingdefinitionsapplyinthischapterofthiscode. References
hereafterto “sections” areunlessotherwisespecifiedreferencestosectionsinthischapter.
Definedtermsremaindefinedtermswhetherornotcapitalized.
ABANDONEDFACILITY. Afacilitynolongerinserviceorphysicallydisconnected
fromaportionoftheoperatingfacility, orfromanyotherfacility, thatisinuseorstillcarries
service. Afacilityisnotabandonedunlessdeclaredsobytheright-of-wayuser.
APPLICANT. Anypersonrequestingpermissiontoexcavateorobstructapublic
right-of-wayortoplaceanewwirelesssupportstructureorcollocatesmallwirelessfacilitieson
wirelesssupportstructuresinthepublicright-of-way.
CITY. TheCityofSavage, Minnesota. Forpurposesofsection § 100.27, CITYmeans
itselectedofficials, officers, employeesandagents.
COLLOCATEORCOLLOCATION. Toinstall, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replaceasmallwirelessfacilityon, under, within, oradjacenttoanexistingwirelesssupport
structurethatisownedprivatelyorbythecity.
COMMISSION. TheMinnesotaPublicUtilitiesCommission.
Page2of25
CONGESTEDRIGHT-OF-WAY. Acrowdedconditioninthesubsurfaceofthepublic
right-of-waythatoccurswhenthemaximumlateralspacingbetweenexistingunderground
facilitiesdoesnotallowforconstructionofnewundergroundfacilitieswithoutusinghand
diggingtoexposetheexistinglateralfacilitiesinconformancewithM.S. §2 16D.04,S ubd. 3,a s
itmaybeamendedfromtimetotime, overacontinuouslengthinexcessof500feet.
CONSTRUCTIONPERFORMANCEBOND. Anyofthefollowingformsofsecurity
providedatpermittee’soption:
a) Individualprojectbond;
b) Cashdeposit;
c) SecurityofaformlistedorapprovedunderM.S. §1 5.73,S ubd. 3,a sitmaybe
amendedfromtimetotime;
d) Letterofcredit, inaformacceptabletothecity;
e) Self-insurance, inaformacceptabletothecity; and
f) Ablanketbondforprojectswithinthecity, orotherformofconstructionbond,
foratimespecifiedandinaformacceptabletothecity.
DEGRADATION. Adecreaseintheusefullifeoftheright-of-waycausedby
excavationinordisturbanceoftheright-of-way, resultingintheneedtoreconstructthe
right-of-wayearlierthanwouldberequirediftheexcavationordisturbancedidnotoccur.
DEGRADATIONCOST. Thecosttoachievealevelofrestorationasdeterminedbythe
cityatthetimetheright-of-waypermitisissued, nottoexceedthemaximumrestorationshown
inplates1to13, setforthinMinnesotaRulesParts7819.9900to7819.9950.
DEGRADATIONFEE. Theestimatedfeeestablishedatthetimeofpermittingbythe
citytorecovercostsassociatedwiththedecreaseintheusefullifeoftheright-of-waycausedby
theexcavation, andwhichequalsthedegradationcost.
DEPARTMENT. TheDepartmentofPublicWorksofthecity.
DEPARTMENTINSPECTOR. Anypersonauthorizedbythecitytocarryout
inspectionsrelatedtotheprovisionsofthischapter.
DELAYPENALTY. Thepenaltyimposedasaresultofunreasonabledelaysin
right-of-wayexcavation, obstruction, patchingorrestorationasestablishedbyaright-of-way
permit.
EMERGENCY. Aconditionthat:
Page3of25
a) Posesadangertolifeorhealth, orofasignificantlossofproperty; or
b) Requiresimmediaterepairorreplacementoffacilitiesinordertorestore
servicetoacustomer.
EQUIPMENT. Anytangibleassetusedtoinstall, repairormaintainfacilitiesinany
right-of-way.
EXCAVATE. Todigintoorinanywayremoveorphysicallydisturborpenetrateany
partofaright-of-way.
EXCAVATIONPERMIT. Thepermit, whichpursuanttothischapter, mustbeobtained
beforeapersonmayexcavateinaright-of-way. AnEXCAVATIONPERMITallowstheholder
toexcavatethatpartoftheright-of-waydescribedinthepermit.
FACILITYORFACILITIES. Anytangibleasset(s) intheright-of-wayrequiredto
provideutilityservice, includingwirelessservice.
FIVE-YEARPROJECTPLAN. Aplanpreparedbythecitythatshowsprojects
adoptedbythecityforconstructionwithinthenextfiveyears.
HIGHDENSITYCORRIDOR. Adesignatedportionofthepublicright-of-waywithin
whichtelecommunicationsright-of-wayusershavingmultipleandcompetingfacilitiesmaybe
requiredtobuildandinstallfacilitiesinacommonconduitsystemorothercommonstructure.
HOLE. Anexcavationinthepavement, withtheexcavationhavingalengthlessthan
thewidthofthepavement.
LOCALREPRESENTATIVE. Alocalpersonorpersons, ordesigneeofthepersonor
persons, authorizedbyaregistranttoacceptserviceandtomakedecisionsforthatregistrant
regardingallmatterswithinthescopeofthischapter.
MANAGEMENTCOSTS OR RIGHT-OF-WAYMANAGEMENTCOSTS. (a) the
actualcoststheCity incursinmanagingitspublicrights-of-way, including suchcosts, if
incurred, asthoseassociatedwithregisteringapplicants; issuing, processing, andverifyingrightof-
wayorsmallwirelessfacilitypermitapplications; inspectingjobsitesandrestorationprojects;
maintaining, supporting, protecting, ormovinguserequipmentduringpublicright-of-waywork;
determiningtheadequacyofright-of-wayrestoration; restoringworkinadequatelyperformed
afterprovidingnoticeandtheopportunitytocorrectthework; andrevokingright-of-wayor
smallwirelessfacilitypermits.
b) Managementcostsdonotinclude:
1) paymentbyatelecommunicationsright-of-wayuserfortheuseofthepublic
right-of-way;
Page4of25
2) unreasonablefeesofathird-partycontractorusedbytheCity aspartof
managingitspublicrights-of-way, includingbutnotlimitedtoanythird-party
contractorfeetiedtoorbaseduponcustomercounts, accesslines, revenue
generatedbythetelecommunicationsright-of-wayuser, orrevenuegeneratedfor
alocalgovernmentunit; or
3) thefeesandcostoflitigationrelatingtotheinterpretationofthisSectionorof
MinnesotaStatutesSections237.162or237.163, ortheCity’sfeesandcosts
relatedtoappealstakenpursuanttosection237.163, subdivision5.
MICROWIRELESSFACILITY. Asmallwirelessfacilitythatisnolargerthan24
incheslong, 15incheswide, and12incheshigh, andwhoseexteriorantenna, ifany, isnolonger
than11inches.
OBSTRUCT. Toplaceanytangibleobjectinaright-of-waysoastohinderfreeand
openpassageoverthatoranypartoftheright-of-way.
OBSTRUCTIONPERMIT. Thepermitwhich, pursuanttothischapter, mustbe
obtainedbeforeapersonmayobstructaright-of-way, allowingtheholdertohinderfreeand
openpassageoverthespecifiedportionofthatright-of-way, forthedurationspecifiedtherein.
PATCHorPATCHING.
a) Amethodofpavementreplacementthatistemporaryinnature.
b) APATCHconsistsof:
1. Thecompactionofthesubbaseandaggregatebase; and
2. Theplacement, inkind, oftheexistingpavementforaminimumoftwo
feetbeyondtheedgesoftheexcavationinalldirections.
c) APATCHisconsideredfullrestorationonlywhenthepavementisincludedin
thecity’sfive-yearprojectplan.
PAVEMENT. Anytypeofimprovedsurfacethatiswithinthepublicright-of-wayand
thatispavedorotherwiseconstructedwithbituminous, concrete, aggregateorgravel.
PERMIT. Aright-of-waypermitorsmallwirelessfacilitypermit.
PERMITTEE. Anypersontowhomaright-of-waypermitorsmallwirelessfacility
permithasbeengrantedbythecityunderthischapter.
PERSON. Anindividualorentitysubjecttothelawsandrulesofthisstate, however
organized, whetherpublicorprivate, whetherdomesticorforeign, whetherforprofitor
Page5of25
nonprofit, andwhethernatural, corporateorpolitical.
PROBATION. Thestatusofapersonthathasnotcompliedwiththeconditionsofthis
chapter.
PROBATIONARYPERIOD. Oneyearfromthedatethatapersonhasbeennotifiedin
writingthattheyhavebeenputonprobation.
PUBLICRIGHT-OF-WAYORRIGHT-OF-WAY. Theareaon, below, orabovea
publicroadway, highway, street, cartway, bicyclelaneandpublicsidewalkinwhichthecityhas
aninterest, includingotherdedicatedrights-of-wayfortravelpurposesandutilityeasementsof
thecity. ARIGHT-OF-WAYdoesnotincludetheairwavesabovearight-of-waywithregardto
cellularorothernonwiretelecommunicationsorbroadcastservice.
PUBLICUTILITYSTRUCTURE. Autilitypoleandanystructureorpolesupporting
wiresforcommunicationortransmissionofdataorroadwaylighting.
REGISTRANT. Anypersonwho:
a) Hasorseekstohaveitsequipmentorfacilitieslocatedinanyright-of-way; or
b) Inanywayoccupiesoruses, orseekstooccupyoruse, theright-of-wayor
placeitsfacilitiesorequipmentintheright-of-way.
RESTOREORRESTORATION. Theprocessbywhichanexcavatedright-of-wayand
surroundingarea, includingpavementandfoundation, isreturnedtothesameconditionandlife
expectancythatexistedbeforeexcavation.
RESTORATIONCOST. Theamountofmoneypaidtothecitybyapermitteeto
achievethelevelofrestorationaccordingtoplatesoneto13ofMinnesotaPublicUtilities
CommissionRules.
RIGHT-OF-WAYPERMIT. Eithertheexcavationpermitortheobstructionpermit, or
both, dependingonthecontext, requiredbythischapter.
RIGHT-OF-WAYUSER.
a) Atelecommunicationsright-of-wayuserasdefinedbyM.S. §2 37.162,S ubd.
4, asitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime; or
b) Apersonowningorcontrollingafacilityintheright-of-waythatisusedor
intendedtobeusedforprovidingutilityservice, andwhohasarightunderlaw, franchiseor
ordinancetousethepublicright-of-way.
SERVICEORUTILITYSERVICE.
Page6of25
a) ThoseservicesprovidedbyapublicutilityasdefinedinM.S. Chapter
216B.02, Subds. 4and6, astheymaybeamendedfromtimetotime;
b) Servicesofatelecommunicationsright-of-wayuserincludingtransportingof
voiceordatainformation;
c) ServicesofacablecommunicationssystemsasdefinedinM.S. Chapter238,
asitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime;
d) Naturalgasorelectricenergyortelecommunicationsservicesprovidedbythe
city;
e) ServicesprovidedbyacooperativeelectricassociationorganizedunderM.S.
Chapter308A, asitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime; and
f) Water, sewer, steam, coolingorheatingservices.
SMALLWIRELESSFACILITY.
a) Awirelessfacilitythatmeetsbothofthefollowingqualifications:
1. Eachantennaislocatedinsideanenclosureofnomorethansixcubicfeet
involumeor, inthecaseofanantennathathasexposedelements, theantennaandallitsexposed
elementscouldfitwithinanenclosureofnomorethansixcubicfeet; and
2. Allotherwirelessequipmentassociatedwiththesmallwirelessfacility,
excludingelectricmeters, concealmentelements, telecommunicationsdemarcationboxes,
batterybackuppowersystems, groundingequipment, powertransferswitches, cutoffswitches,
cable, conduit, verticalcablerunsfortheconnectionofpowerandotherservices, andany
equipmentconcealedfrompublicviewwithinorbehindanexistingstructureorconcealment, is
inaggregatenomorethan28cubicfeetinvolume; or
b) Amicrowirelessfacility.
SMALLWIRELESSFACILITYPERMIT. Apermittoplaceanewwirelesssupport
structureinthepublicright-of-wayorcollocatesmallwirelessfacilitiesonwirelesssupport
structuresinthepublicright-of-way.
SUPPLEMENTARYAPPLICATION. Anapplicationmadetoexcavateorobstruct
moreoftheright-of-waythanallowedin, ortoextend, apermitthathadalreadybeenissued.
TEMPORARYSURFACE. Thecompactionofsubbaseandaggregatebaseand
replacement, inkind, oftheexistingpavementonlytotheedgesoftheexcavation. Itis
temporaryinnatureexceptwhenthereplacementisofpavementincludedinthecity’stwo-year
plan, inwhichcaseitisconsideredfullrestoration.
Page7of25
TRENCH. Anexcavationinthepavement, withtheexcavationhavingalengthequal
toorgreaterthanthewidthofthepavement.
TELECOMMUNICATIONRIGHT-OF-WAYUSER.
a) Apersonowningorcontrollingafacilityintheright-of-way, orseekingtoownor
controlafacilityintheright-of-way, thatisusedorisintendedtobeusedforprovidingwireless
service, ortransportingtelecommunicationorothervoiceordatainformation.
b) AcablecommunicationsystemdefinedandregulatedunderM.S. Chapter238, asit
maybeamendedfromtimetotime, andtelecommunicationactivitiesrelatedtoprovidingnatural
gasorelectricenergyservices, apublicutilityasdefinedinM.S. §2 16B.02,a sitmaybe
amendedfromtimetotime, amunicipality, amunicipalgasorpoweragencyorganizedunder
M.S. Chapters453and453A, astheymaybeamendedfromtimetotime, oracooperative
electricassociationorganizedunderM.S. Chapter308A, asitmaybeamendedfromtimeto
time, arenottelecommunicationsright-of-wayusersforpurposesofthischapter, excepttothe
extenttheseentitiesareofferingwirelessservices.
TWO-YEARPROJECTPLAN. Aplanpreparedbythecitythatshowsprojects
adoptedbythecityforconstructionwithinthenexttwoyears.
UTILITYPOLE. Apolethatisusedinwholeorinparttofacilitate
telecommunicationsorelectricservice.
WIRELESSFACILITY.
a) Equipmentatafixedlocationthatenablestheprovisionofwirelessservices
betweenuserequipmentandawirelessservicenetwork, including:
1. Equipmentassociatedwithwirelessservice;
2. Aradiotransceiver, antenna, coaxialorfiber-opticcable, regularandbackup
powersupplies, andcomparableequipment, regardlessoftechnicalconfiguration; and
3. Asmallwirelessfacility.
b) WIRELESSFACILITYdoesnotinclude:
1. Wirelesssupportstructures;
2. Wirelinebackhaulfacilities; or
3. Coaxialorfiber-opticcables (i) betweenutilitypolesorwirelesssupport
structures, or (ii) thatarenototherwiseimmediatelyadjacenttoordirectlyassociatedwitha
specificantenna.
WIRELESSSERVICE. Anyserviceusinglicensedorunlicensedwirelessspectrum,
includingtheuseofWi-Fi, whetheratafixedlocationorbymeansofamobiledevice, thatis
providedusingwirelessfacilities. Wirelessservicedoesnotincludeservicesregulatedunder
TitleVIoftheCommunicationsActof1934, asamended, includingcableserviceunderUnited
Page8of25
StatesCode, title47, section522, clause (6).
WIRELESSSUPPORTSTRUCTURE. Aneworexistingstructureinapublicrightof-
waydesignedtosupportorcapableofsupportingsmallwirelessfacilities, asreasonably
determinedbytheCity.
WIRELINEBACKHAULFACILITY. Afacilityusedtotransportcommunications
databywirefromawirelessfacilitytoacommunicationsnetwork.
100.04 ADMINISTRATION.
A) TheCityEngineeristheprincipalcityofficialresponsiblefortheadministrationofthe
rights-of-way, right-of-waypermits, smallwirelessfacilitypermits, andtheordinancesrelated
thereto.
B) TheCityEngineermaydelegateanyorallofthedutieshereunder.
100.05 REGISTRATIONANDRIGHT-OF-WAYOCCUPANCY.
A) Registration. Eachpersonwhooccupies, uses, orseekstooccupyoruse, the
right-of-wayorplaceanyequipmentorfacilitiesinorontheright-of-way, includingpersons
withinstallationandmaintenanceresponsibilitiesbylease, subleaseorassignment, mustregister
withthecity. Registrationwillconsistofprovidingapplicationinformationandpayinga
registrationfee.
B) Registrationpriortowork. Nopersonmayconstruct, install, repair, remove, orrelocate
anyfacilities, orperformanyotherworkon, oruseanyfacilitiesoranypartthereofin, any
right-of-waywithoutfirstbeingregisteredwiththecity.
C) Exceptions. Nothinghereinshallbeconstruedtorepealoramendtheprovisionsofa
cityordinancepermittingpersonstoplantormaintainboulevardplantingsorgardensinthearea
oftheright-of-waybetweentheirpropertyandthestreetcurb. Personsplantingormaintaining
boulevardplantingsorgardensshallnotbedeemedtouseoroccupytheright-of-wayandshall
notberequiredtoobtainanypermitsorsatisfyanyotherrequirementsforplantingor
maintainingtheboulevardplantingsorgardensunderthischapter. However, nothingherein
relievesapersonfromcomplyingwiththeprovisionsofM.S. Chapter216D, asitmaybe
amendedfromtimetotime, theGopherStateOneCallLaw.
100.06 REGISTRATIONINFORMATION.
A) Informationrequired. Theinformationprovidedtothecityatthetimeofregistration
shallinclude, butnotbelimitedto:
1) Eachregistrant’sname, GopherStateOneCallLawregistrationcertificatenumber,
address, e-mailaddress, andtelephoneandfacsimilenumbers;
Page9of25
2) Thename, address, e-mailaddress, andtelephoneandfacsimilenumbersofalocal
representative. Thelocalrepresentativeordesigneeshallbeavailableatalltimes. Current
informationregardinghowtocontactthelocalrepresentativeinanemergencyshallbeprovided
atthetimeofregistration;
3) Acertificateofinsuranceorself-insurance:
a) Verifyingthataninsurancepolicyhasbeenissuedtotheregistrantbyan
insurancecompanylicensedtodobusinessinthestate, oraformofself-insuranceacceptableto
thecity;
b) Verifyingthattheregistrantisinsuredagainstclaimsforpersonalinjury,
includingdeath, aswellasclaimsforpropertydamagearisingoutofthe:
1. Useandoccupancyoftheright-of-waybytheregistrant, itsofficers,
agents, employeesandpermittees; and
2. Placementanduseoffacilitiesandequipmentintheright-of-waybythe
registrant, itsofficers, agents, employeesandpermittees, including, butnotlimitedto, protection
againstliabilityarisingfromcompletedoperations, damageofundergroundfacilitiesand
collapseofproperty;
c) Namingthecityasanadditionalinsuredastowhomthecoveragesrequired
hereinareinforceandapplicableandforwhomdefensewillbeprovidedastoallcoverages;
d) Requiringthatthecitybenotified30daysinadvanceofcancellationofthe
policyormaterialmodificationofacoverageterm; and
e) Indicatingcomprehensiveliabilitycoverage, automobileliabilitycoverage,
workerscompensationandumbrellacoverageestablishedbythecityinamountssufficientto
protectthecityandthepublicandtocarryoutthepurposesandpoliciesofthischapter.
4) Thecitymayrequireacopyoftheactualinsurancepolicies;
5) Ifthepersonisacorporation, acopyofthecertificateisrequiredtobefiledunder
applicablestatelaw, asrecordedandcertifiedtobytheSecretaryofState; and
6) Acopyoftheperson’sordergrantingacertificateofauthorityfromtheMinnesota
PublicUtilitiesCommissionorotherapplicablestateorfederalagency, wherethepersonis
lawfullyrequiredtohavethecertificatefromthecommissionorotherstateorfederalagency.
B) Noticeofchanges. Theregistrantshallkeepalloftheinformationlistedabovecurrent
atalltimesbyprovidingtothecityinformationastochangeswithin15daysfollowingthedate
onwhichtheregistranthasknowledgeofanychange.
100.07 REPORTINGOBLIGATIONS.
Page10of25
A) Eachregistrantthatmaintainsorplanstomaintainundergroundfacilitiesintheright-ofwayshall,
atthetimeofregistrationandbyDecember1ofeachyear, fileaconstructionand
majormaintenanceplanforundergroundfacilitieswiththecity. Theplanshallbesubmitted
usingaformatdesignatedbythecityandshallcontaintheinformationdeterminedbythecityto
benecessarytofacilitatethecoordinationandreductioninthefrequencyofexcavationsand
obstructionsofrights-of-way. Theplanshallinclude, butnotbelimitedto, thefollowing
information:
1) Thelocationsandtheestimatedbeginningandendingdatesofallprojectstobe
commencedduringthenextcalendaryear (inthissection, a “next-yearproject”); and
2) Totheextentknown, thetentativelocationsandestimatedbeginningandending
datesforallprojectscontemplatedforthefiveyearsfollowingthenextcalendaryear (inthis
section, a “five-yearproject”).
B) Theterm “project” inthissectionshallincludebothnext-yearprojectsandfive-year
projects.
C) ByJanuary1ofeachyearthecitywillhaveavailableforinspectioninthecity’soffice
acompositelistofallprojectsofwhichthecityhasbeeninformedoftheannualplans. All
registrantsareresponsibleforkeepingthemselvesinformedofthecurrentstatusofthislist.
D) Thereafter, byFebruary1, eachregistrantmaychangeanyprojectinitslistofnext-year
projects, andmustnotifythecityandallotherregistrantsofallthechangesinthelist.
Notwithstandingtheforegoing, aregistrantmayatanytimejoininanext-yearprojectofanother
registrantlistedbytheotherregistrant.
E) Additionalnext-yearprojects. Notwithstandingtheforegoing, thecitywillnotdenyan
applicationforaright-of-waypermitforfailuretoincludeaprojectinaplansubmittedtothe
cityiftheregistranthasusedcommerciallyreasonableeffortstoanticipateandplanforthe
project.
100.08 RIGHT-OF-WAYPERMITREQUIREMENT.
A) Permitrequired. Exceptasotherwiseprovidedinthiscode, nopersonmayobstructor
excavateanyright-of-waywithoutfirsthavingobtainedtheappropriateright-of-waypermitfrom
thecitytodoso.
1) Excavationpermit. Anexcavationpermitisrequiredbyaregistranttoexcavate
thatpartoftheright-of-waydescribedintheright-of-waypermitandtohinderfreeandopen
passageoverthespecifiedportionoftheright-of-waybyplacingfacilitiesdescribedtherein, to
theextentandforthedurationspecifiedtherein.
2) Obstructionpermit. Anobstructionpermitisrequiredbyaregistranttohinderfree
andopenpassageoverthespecifiedportionofright-of-waybyplacingequipmentdescribed
Page11of25
thereinontheright-of-way, totheextentandforthedurationspecifiedtherein. Anobstruction
permitisnotrequiredifapersonalreadypossessesavalidexcavationpermitforthesame
project.
B) Permitextensions. Nopersonmayexcavateorobstructtheright-of-waybeyondthe
dateordatesspecifiedintheright-of-waypermitunless:
1) Thepersonmakesasupplementaryapplicationforanotherright-of-waypermit
beforetheexpirationoftheinitialpermit; and
2) Anewright-of-waypermitorpermitextensionisgranted.
C) Delaypenalty. InaccordancewithMinnesotaRules7819.1000, Subd. 3and
notwithstandingsubdivision (B) ofthissection, thecityshallestablishandimposeadelay
penaltyforunreasonabledelaysinright-of-wayexcavation, obstruction, patching, orrestoration.
ThedelaypenaltyshallbeestablishedfromtimetotimebyCityCouncilresolution.
D) Permitdisplay. Right-of-waypermitsissuedunderthischaptershallbeconspicuously
displayedorotherwiseavailableatalltimesattheindicatedworksiteandshallbeavailablefor
inspectionbythecity.
100.09 RIGHT-OF-WAYPERMITAPPLICATIONS.
Applicationforaright-of-waypermitshallbemadetothecity. Right-of-waypermit
applicationsshallcontainandwillbeconsideredcompleteonlyuponcompliancewiththe
requirementsofthefollowingprovisions:
A) Registrationwiththecitypursuanttothissection;
B) Submissionofacompletedright-of-waypermitapplicationform, includingallrequired
attachments, andscaleddrawingsshowingthelocationandareaoftheproposedprojectandthe
locationofallknownexistingandproposedfacilities;
C) Paymentofmoneyduethecityfor:
1) Right-of-waypermitfees, estimatedrestorationcostsandothermanagementcosts;
2) Priorobstructionsorexcavations;
3) Anyundisputedloss, damage, orexpensesufferedbythecitybecauseof
applicant’spriorexcavationsorobstructionsoftherights-of-wayoranyemergencyactionstaken
bythecity; and
4) Franchisefeesorothercharges, ifapplicable.
D) Paymentofdisputedamountsduethecitybypostingsecurityordepositinginan
Page12of25
escrowaccountanamountequaltoatleast110% oftheamountowing; and
E) Postinganadditionalorlargerconstructionperformancebondforadditionalfacilities
whenapplicantrequestsanexcavationpermittoinstalladditionalfacilitiesandthecitydeems
theexistingconstructionperformancebondinadequateunderapplicablestandards.
100.10 ISSUANCEOFRIGHT-OF-WAYPERMITS; CONDITIONS.
A) Permitissuance. Iftheapplicanthassatisfiedtherequirementsofthischapter, thecity
shallissuearight-of-waypermit.
B) Conditions. Thecitymayimposereasonableconditionsupontheissuanceoftherightof-
waypermitandtheperformanceoftheapplicantthereundertoprotectthehealth, safetyand
welfareorwhennecessarytoprotecttheright-of-wayanditscurrentuse.
100.11 RIGHT-OF-WAYPERMITFEES.
A) Excavationpermitfee. Thecityshallestablishanexcavationpermitfeeinanamount
sufficienttorecoverthefollowingcosts:
1) Thecity’smanagementcosts; and
2) Degradationcosts, ifapplicable.
B) Obstructionpermitfee. Thecityshallestablishtheobstructionpermitfeeandshallbein
anamountsufficienttorecoverthecity’smanagementcosts.
C) Paymentofpermitfees. Noexcavationpermitorobstructionpermitshallbeissued
withoutpaymentofexcavationorobstructionpermitfees. Thecitymayallowapplicanttopay
thefeeswithin30daysofbilling.
D) Non-refundablepermitfees. Non-refundableright-of-waypermitfeesthatwerepaid
foraright-of-waypermitthatthecityhasrevokedforabreachasstatedin §1 00.21arenot
refundable.
E) Applicationtofranchises. Unlessotherwiseagreedtoinafranchise, managementcosts
maybechargedseparatelyfromandinadditiontothefranchisefeesimposedonaright-of-way
userinthefranchise.
100.12 RIGHT-OF-WAYPATCHINGANDRESTORATION.
A) Timing. Theworktobedoneundertheexcavationpermitandthepatchingand
restorationoftheright-of-wayasrequiredhereinshallbecompletedwithinthedatesspecifiedin
thepermit, increasedbyasmanydaysasworkcouldnotbedonebecauseofcircumstances
beyondthecontrolofthepermitteeorwhenworkwasprohibitedasunseasonalorunreasonable
under § 100.16.
Page13of25
B) Patchandrestorationpermitteeshallpatchitsownwork. Thecitymaychooseeither
tohavethepermitteerestoretheright-of-wayortorestoretheright-of-wayitself.
1) Cityrestoration. Ifthecityrestorestheright-of-way, permitteeshallpaythecosts
thereofwithin30daysofbilling. If, followingtherestoration, thepavementsettlesdueto
permittee’simproperbackfilling, thepermitteeshallpaytothecity, within30daysofbilling, all
costsassociatedwithcorrectingthedefectivework.
2) Permitteerestoration. Ifthepermitteerestorestheright-of-wayitself, itshallatthe
timeofapplicationforanexcavationpermitpostaconstructionperformancebondinaccordance
withtheprovisionsofMinnesotaRulesPart7819.3000.
3) Degradationfeeinlieuofrestoration. Inlieuofright-of-wayrestoration, a
right-of-wayusermayelecttopayadegradationfee. However, theright-of-wayusershall
remainresponsibleforpatchingandthedegradationfeeshallnotincludethecosttoaccomplish
theseresponsibilities.
C) Standards. Thepermitteeshallperformexcavation, backfilling, patchingandrestoration
accordingtothestandardsandwiththematerialsspecifiedbythecityandshallcomplywith
MinnesotaRulesPart7819.1100.
D) Dutytocorrectdefects. Thepermitteeshallcorrectdefectsinpatchingorrestoration
performedbypermitteeoritsagents. Permittee, uponnotificationfromthecity, shallcorrectall
restorationworktotheextentnecessary, usingthemethodrequiredbythecity. Theworkshall
becompletedwithinfivecalendardaysofthereceiptofthenoticefromthecity, notincluding
daysduringwhichworkcannotbedonebecauseofcircumstancesconstitutingforcemajeureor
dayswhenworkisprohibitedasunseasonalorunreasonableunder § 100.15.
E) Failuretorestore. Ifthepermitteefailstorestoretheright-of-wayinthemannerandto
theconditionrequiredbythecity, orfailstosatisfactorilyandtimelycompleteallrestoration
requiredbythecity, thecityatitsoptionmaydothework. Inthateventthepermitteeshallpay
tothecity, within30daysofbilling, thecostofrestoringtheright-of-way. Ifpermitteefailsto
payasrequired, thecitymayexerciseitsrightsundertheconstructionperformancebond.
100.13 JOINTAPPLICATIONS.
A) Jointapplication. Registrantsmayjointlyapplyforright-of-waypermitstoexcavateor
obstructtheright-of-wayatthesameplaceandtime.
B) Sharedfees. Registrantswhoapplyforright-of-waypermitsforthesameobstructionor
excavation, whichthecitydoesnotperform, mayshareinthepaymentoftheobstructionor
excavationpermitfee. Inordertoobtainajointright-of-waypermit, registrantsmustagree
amongthemselvesastotheportioneachwillpayandindicatethesameontheirapplications.
C) Withcityprojects. Registrantswhojoininascheduledobstructionorexcavation
Page14of25
performedbythecity, whetherornotitisajointapplicationbytwoormoreregistrantsora
singleapplication, arenotrequiredtopaytheexcavationorobstructionanddegradationportions
oftheright-of-waypermitfee, butshallstillobtainaright-of-waypermitfromthecity.
100.14 SUPPLEMENTARYAPPLICATIONS.
A) Limitationonarea. Aright-of-waypermitisvalidonlyfortheareaoftheright-of-way
specifiedinthepermit. Nopermitteemaydoanyworkoutsidetheareaspecifiedintheright-ofwaypermit,
exceptasprovidedherein. Anypermitteewhichdeterminesthatanareagreaterthan
thatspecifiedintheright-of-waypermitmustbeobstructedorexcavatedshall, beforeworkingin
thatgreaterarea:
1) Makeapplicationtothecityforaright-of-waypermitextensionandpayany
additionalfeesrequiredthereby; and
2) Begrantedanewright-of-waypermitorright-of-waypermitextension.
B) Limitationondates. Aright-of-waypermitisvalidonlyforthedatesspecifiedinthe
permit. Nopermitteemaybeginitsworkbeforetheright-of-waypermitstartdateor, exceptas
providedherein, continueworkingaftertheenddate. Ifapermitteedoesnotfinishtheworkby
theright-of-waypermitenddate, itmustapplyforanewright-of-waypermitfortheadditional
timeitneeds, andreceivethenewright-of-waypermitoranextensionoftheoldright-of-way
permitbeforeworkingaftertheenddateofthepreviousright-of-waypermit. This
supplementaryapplicationmustbesubmittedbeforetheright-of-waypermitenddate.
100.15 OTHEROBLIGATIONS.
A) Compliancewithotherlaws. Obtainingaright-of-waypermitorsmallwirelessfacility
permitdoesnotrelievepermitteeofitsdutytoobtainallothernecessarypermits, licensesand
authorityandtopayallfeesrequiredbythecityorotherapplicablerule, laworregulation. A
permitteeshallcomplywithallrequirementsoflocal, stateandfederallaws, includingM.S. §§
216D.01through216D.09 (GopherStateOneCallExcavationNoticeSystem), asitmaybe
amendedfromtimetotime. Apermitteeshallperformallworkinconformancewithall
applicablecodesandestablishedrulesandregulations, andisresponsibleforallworkdoneinthe
right-of-waypursuanttoitspermit, regardlessofwhodoesthework.
B) Prohibitedwork. Exceptinanemergency, andwiththeapprovalofthecity, no
right-of-wayobstructionorexcavationmaybedonewhenseasonallyprohibitedorwhen
conditionsareunreasonableforthework.
C) Interferencewithright-of-way. Apermitteeshallnotsoobstructaright-of-waythatthe
naturalfreeandclearpassageofwaterthroughtheguttersorotherwaterwaysshallbeinterfered
with. Privatevehiclesofthosedoingworkintheright-of-waymaynotbeparkedwithinornext
toapermitarea, unlessparkedinconformancewithcityparkingregulations. Theloadingor
unloadingoftrucksmustbedonesolelywithinthedefinedpermitareaunlessspecifically
authorizedbythepermit.
Page15of25
100.16 DENIALOFRIGHT-OF-WAYPERMIT.
Thecitymaydenyaright-of-waypermitforfailuretomeettherequirementsandconditions
ofthischapterorifthecitydeterminesthatthedenialisnecessarytoprotectthehealth, safety
andwelfareorwhennecessarytoprotecttheright-of-wayanditscurrentuse.
100.17 INSTALLATIONREQUIREMENTS.
Theexcavation, backfilling, patchingandrestoration, andallotherworkperformedinthe
right-of-wayshallbedoneinconformancewithMinnesotaRulesParts7819.1100and
7819.5000andotherapplicablelocalrequirementsinsofarastheyarenotinconsistentwiththe
requirementsofM.S. §§2 37.162and237.163,a stheymaybeamendedfromtimetotime.
100.18 INSPECTION.
A) Noticeofcompletion. Whentheworkunderanypermithereunderiscompleted, the
permitteeshallfurnishacompletioncertificateinaccordanceMinnesotaRulesPart7819.1300.
B) Siteinspection. Permitteeshallmakethework-siteavailabletothecityandtoallothers
asauthorizedbylawforinspectionatallreasonabletimesduringtheexecutionofandupon
completionofthework.
C) Authority.
1) Atthetimeofinspection, thecitymayordertheimmediatecessationofanywork,
whichposesaseriousthreattothelife, health, safetyorwellbeingofthepublic.
2) Thecitymayissueanordertothepermitteeforanyworkthatdoesnotconformto
thetermsofthepermitorotherapplicablestandards, conditions, orcodes. Theordershallstate
thatfailuretocorrecttheviolationwillbecauseforrevocationofthepermit. Withintendays
afterissuanceoftheorder, thepermitteeshallpresentprooftothecitythattheviolationhasbeen
corrected. Iftheproofhasnotbeenpresentedwithintherequiredtime, thecitymayrevokethe
permitpursuantto §1 00.21.
100.19 WORKDONEWITHOUTAPERMIT.
A) Emergencysituations.
1) Eachregistrantshallimmediatelynotifythecityofanyeventregardingits
facilities, whichitconsiderstobeanemergency. Theregistrantmayproceedtotakewhatever
actionsarenecessarytorespondtotheemergency. Withintwobusinessdaysafterthe
occurrenceoftheemergency, theregistrantshallapplyforthenecessarypermits, paythefees
associatedtherewithandfulfilltherestoftherequirementsnecessarytobringitselfinto
compliancewiththischapterfortheactionsittookinresponsetotheemergency.
Page16of25
2) Ifthecitybecomesawareofanemergencyregardingaregistrant’sfacilities, thecity
willattempttocontactthelocalrepresentativeofeachregistrantaffected, orpotentiallyaffected,
bytheemergency. Inanyevent, thecitymaytakewhateveractionitdeemsnecessarytorespond
totheemergency, thecostofwhichshallbebornebytheregistrantwhosefacilitiesoccasioned
theemergency.
B) Non-emergencysituations. Exceptinanemergency, anypersonwho, withoutfirst
havingobtainedthenecessaryright-of-waypermit, obstructsorexcavatesaright-of-waymust
subsequentlyobtainaright-of-waypermit, andasapenaltypaydoublethenormalfeeforthe
permit, paydoublealltheotherfeesrequiredbythiscode, depositwiththecitythefees
necessarytocorrectanydamagetotheright-of-way, andcomplywithalloftherequirementsof
thischapter.
100.20 SUPPLEMENTARYNOTIFICATION.
Iftheobstructionorexcavationoftheright-of-waybeginslaterorendssoonerthanthedate
givenontheright-of-waypermit, permitteeshallnotifythecityoftheaccurateinformationas
soonasthisinformationisknown.
100.21 REVOCATIONOFPERMITS.
A) Substantialbreach. Thecityreservesitsright, asprovidedherein, torevokeanypermit,
withoutafeerefund, ifthereisasubstantialbreachofthetermsandconditionsofanystatute,
ordinance, ruleorregulation, oranymaterialconditionofthepermit. Asubstantialbreachby
permitteeshallinclude, butshallnotbelimitedto, thefollowing:
1) Theviolationofanymaterialprovisionofthepermit;
2) Anevasionorattempttoevadeanymaterialprovisionofthepermit, orthe
perpetrationorattempttoperpetrateanyfraudordeceituponthecityoritscitizens;
3) Anymaterialmisrepresentationoffactintheapplicationforapermit;
4) Thefailuretocompletetheworkinatimelymannerunlessapermitextensionis
obtainedorunlessthefailuretocompleteworkisduetoreasonsbeyondthepermittee’scontrol;
or
5) Thefailuretocorrect, inatimelymanner, workthatdoesnotconformtoa
conditionindicatedonanorderissuedpursuantto §1 00.18.
B) Writtennoticeofbreach. Ifthecitydeterminesthatthepermitteehascommitteda
substantialbreachofatermorconditionofanystatute, ordinance, rule, regulationorany
conditionofthepermitthecityshallmakeawrittendemanduponthepermitteetoremedythe
violation. Thedemandshallstatethatcontinuedviolationsmaybecauseforrevocationofthe
permit. Asubstantialbreach, asstatedabove, willallowthecity, atitsdiscretion, toplace
additionalorrevisedconditionsonthepermittomitigateandremedythebreach.
Page17of25
C) Responsetonoticeofbreach. Within24hoursofreceivingnotificationofthebreach,
permitteeshallprovidethecitywithaplan, acceptabletothecity, thatwillcurethebreach.
Permittee’sfailuretosocontactthecity, orpermittee’sfailuretotimelysubmitanacceptable
plan, orpermittee’sfailuretoreasonablyimplementtheapprovedplan, shallbecausefor
immediaterevocationofthepermit. Further, permittee’sfailuretosocontactthecity, or
permittee’sfailuretosubmitanacceptableplan, orpermittee’sfailuretoreasonablyimplement
theapprovedplan, shallautomaticallyplacethepermitteeonprobationforonefullyear.
D) Causeforprobation. Fromtimetotime, thecitymayestablishalistofconditionsof
thepermit, whichifbreachedwillautomaticallyplacethepermitteeonprobationforonefull
year, suchas, butnotlimitedto, workingoutoftheallottedtimeperiodorworkingon
right-of-waygrosslyoutsideofthepermitauthorization.
E) Automaticrevocation. Ifapermittee, whileonprobation, commitsabreachasoutlined
above, permittee’spermitwillautomaticallyberevokedandpermitteewillnotbeallowed
furtherpermitsforonefullyear, exceptforemergencyrepairs.
F) Reimbursementofcitycosts. Ifapermitisrevoked, thepermitteeshallalsoreimburse
thecityforthecity’sreasonablecosts, includingrestorationcostsandthecostsofcollectionand
reasonableattorneys’ feesincurredinconnectionwiththerevocation.
100.22 MAPPINGDATA.
Eachregistrantandright-of-waypermitteeshallprovidemappinginformationrequiredby
thecityinaccordancewithMinnesotaRulesParts7819.4000and7819.4100.
100.23 LOCATIONANDRELOCATIONOFFACILITIES.
A) Placementandlocation. Placement, locationandrelocationoffacilitiesmustcomply
withtheAct, withotherapplicablelaw, andwithMinnesotaRulesParts7819.3100, 7819.5000
and7819.5100, totheextenttherulesdonotlimitauthorityotherwiseavailabletocities.
B) Corridors. Thecitymayassignspecificareawithintheright-of-way, oranyparticular
segmentthereofasmaybenecessary, foreachtypeoffacilitiesthatisor, pursuanttocurrent
technology, thecityexpectswillsomedaybelocatedwithintheright-of-way. Allexcavation,
obstruction, orotherpermitsissuedbythecityinvolvingtheinstallationorreplacementof
facilitiesshalldesignatethepropercorridorforthefacilitiesatissue.
C) Facilitiesatvariance. Anyregistrantwhohasfacilitiesintheright-of-wayinaposition
atvariancewiththecorridorsestablishedbythecityshall, nolaterthanatthetimeofthenext
reconstructionorexcavationoftheareawherethefacilitiesarelocated, movethefacilitiestothe
assignedpositionwithintheright-of-way, unlessthisrequirementiswaivedbythecityforgood
causeshown, uponconsiderationoffactorssuchastheremainingeconomiclifeofthefacilities,
publicsafety, customerserviceneedsandhardshiptotheregistrant.
Page18of25
D) Nuisance. Oneyearafterthepassageofthischapter, anyfacilitiesfoundina
right-of-waythathavenotbeenregisteredshallbedeemedtobeanuisance. Thecitymay
exerciseanyremediesorrightsithasatlaworinequity, including, butnotlimitedto, abatingthe
nuisanceortakingpossessionofthefacilitiesandrestoringtheright-of-waytoauseable
condition.
E) Limitationofspace. Toprotecthealth, safetyandwelfareorwhennecessarytoprotect
theright-of-wayanditscurrentuse, thecityshallhavethepowertoprohibitorlimitthe
placementofneworadditionalfacilitieswithintheright-of-way. Inmakingthedecisions, the
cityshallstrivetotheextentpossibletoaccommodateallexistingandpotentialusersofthe
right-of-way, butshallbeguidedprimarilybyconsiderationsofthepublicinterest, thepublic’s
needsfortheparticularutilityservice, theconditionoftheright-of-way, thetimeofyearwith
respecttoessentialutilities, theprotectionofexistingfacilitiesintheright-of-way, andfuture
cityplansforpublicimprovementsanddevelopmentprojectswhichhavebeendeterminedtobe
inthepublicinterest.
100.24 PRE-EXCAVATIONFACILITIESLOCATION.
InadditiontocomplyingwiththerequirementsofM.S. §§2 16D.01through216D.09 (the
GopherStateOneCallExcavationNoticeSystem), asitmayamendedfromtimetotime, before
thestartdateofanyright-of-wayexcavation, eachregistrantwhohasfacilitiesorequipmentin
theareatobeexcavatedshallmarkthehorizontalandverticalplacementofallthefacilities.
Anyregistrantwhosefacilitiesarelessthan20inchesbelowaconcreteorasphaltsurfaceshall
notifyandworkcloselywiththeexcavationcontractortoestablishtheexactlocationofits
facilitiesandthebestprocedureforexcavation.
100.25 DAMAGETOOTHERFACILITIES.
Whenthecitydoesworkintheright-of-wayandfindsitnecessarytomaintain, support, or
movearegistrant’sfacilitiestoprotectit, thecityshallnotifythelocalrepresentativeasearlyas
isreasonablypossible. Thecostsassociatedtherewithwillbebilledtothatregistrantandmust
bepaidwithin30daysfromthedateofbilling. Eachregistrantshallberesponsibleforthecost
ofrepairinganyfacilitiesintheright-of-waywhichitoritsfacilitiesdamages. Eachregistrant
shallberesponsibleforthecostofrepairinganydamagetothefacilitiesofanotherregistrant
causedduringthecity’sresponsetoanemergencyoccasionedbythatregistrant’sfacilities.
100.26 RIGHT-OF-WAYVACATION.
Ifthecityvacatesaright-of-waywhichcontainsthefacilitiesofaregistrant, theregistrant’s
rightsinthevacatedright-of-wayaregovernedbyMinnesotaRulesPart7819.3200.
100.27 INDEMNIFICATIONANDLIABILITY.
Byregisteringwiththecity, orbyacceptingapermitunderthischapter, aregistrantor
permitteeagreestodefendandindemnifythecityinaccordancewiththeprovisionsof
MinnesotaRulesPart7819.1250.
Page19of25
100.28 ABANDONEDANDUNUSABLEFACILITIES.
A) Discontinuedoperations. Aregistrantwhohasdeterminedtodiscontinueallora
portionofitsoperationsinthecitymustprovideinformationsatisfactorytothecitythatthe
registrant’sobligationsforitsfacilitiesintheright-of-wayunderthischapterhavebeenlawfully
assumedbyanotherregistrant.
B) Removal. Anyregistrantwhohasabandonedfacilitiesinanyright-of-wayshallremove
theabandonedfacilitiesfromthatright-of-wayifrequiredinconjunctionwithotherright-of-way
repair, excavation, orconstruction, unlessthisrequirementiswaivedbythecity.
100.29 APPEAL.
A) Aright-of-wayuserorpotentialright-of-wayuserthathasbeendeniedaright-of-way
permit, hashadaright-of-waypermitrevoked, orbelievesthatthefeesimposedbytheCityin
connectionwiththeright-of-waypermitdonotcomplywiththerequirementsofM.S. §2 37.163,
subd. 6, mayhavethedenial, revocation, orfeeimpositionreviewed, uponwrittenrequest, by
theCityCouncil. TheCityCouncilshallactonatimelywrittenrequestatitsnextregularly
scheduledmeeting. AdecisionbytheCityCouncilaffirmingthedenial, revocation, orfee
impositionshallbeinwritingandsupportedbywrittenfindingsestablishingthereasonableness
ofthedecision.
B) Atelecommunicationsright-of-wayuserthathasbeendeniedasmallwirelessfacility
permit, hashadasmallwirelessfacilitypermitrevoked, orbelievesthatthefeesimposedbythe
Cityinconnectionwiththesmallwirelessfacilitypermitdonotcomplywiththerequirementsof
M.S. §2 37.163,s ubd. 6,m ayappealthedenial, revocation, orfeeimpositiontotheCity
Administrator. SuchappealshallbetakenbyfilingwiththeCityClerkwithinten (10) daysafter
thedenial, revocation, orfeeimposition, awrittenstatementrequestingahearingbeforetheCity
Administratorandsettingforthfullythegroundsfortheappeal. Ahearingshallbeheldwithin
fifteen (15) daysofreceiptoftherequest. NoticeofthehearingshallbegivenbytheCityClerk
inwriting, settingforththetimeandplaceofhearing. Suchnoticeshallbemailed, postage
prepaid, totheapplicantorpermitholderathis/her/itslastknownaddressatleastfive (5) days
priortothedatesetforhearing.
100.30 SEVERABILITY.
Ifanyportionofthischapterisforanyreasonheldinvalidbyanycourtofcompetent
jurisdiction, theportionshallbedeemedaseparate, distinctandindependentprovisionandthe
holdingshallnotaffectthevalidityoftheremainingportionsthereof. Nothinginthischapter
precludesthecityfromrequiringafranchiseagreementwiththeapplicant, asallowedbylaw, in
additiontorequirementssetforthherein.
100.31 SMALLWIRELESSFACILITIES.
A) PurposeandFindings. Thecitydesireshighqualitywirelessservicestoaccommodate
Page20of25
theneedsofresidentsandbusinesses. Atthesametime, thecitystrivestominimizethenegative
impactsthatsmallwirelessfacilitiescancreate. Thesenegativeimpactsinclude, butarenot
limitedto, interferencewithright-of-wayusersightlines, impactstoright-of-wayuser
circulation, incompatibleaestheticswiththesurroundingarea, fallzonerisk, clearzonerisk,
creatingnavigationobstacles, interferencewithfuturetravelwayexpansionplans, interference
withthedeliveryofotherutilityservices, interferencewithstormwatermanagementfacilities,
andincreasednoisepollution.
Tominimizethesenegativeimpacts, anypersondesiringtoplaceanewwirelesssupport
structureintheright-of-wayorcollocatesmallwirelessfacilitiesonexistingprivately-owned
wirelesssupportstructuresintheright-of-wayshallfirstobtainasmallwirelessfacilitypermit
fromthecity. Anypersondesiringtocollocatesmallwirelessfacilitiesonexistingwireless
supportstructuresownedorcontrolledbythecityshallfirstenterintoastandardsmallwireless
facilitycollocationagreement. ThepurposeoftheserequirementsistocomplywithMinnesota
StatutesSections237.162and237.163whileatthesametimeprotectingthepublichealth,
safety, andwelfare.
Thecitywillconsiderimpactstothepublichealth, safetyandwelfarewhenreviewinga
smallwirelesspermitapplicationandarequesttoenterintoasmallwirelessfacilitycollocation
agreement. Thepublichealth, safetyandwelfarecanbebestaccommodatedbylocatingsmall
wirelessfacilitiesinthefollowingorder, whichaffordsthegreatestprotectionofthepublic:
1) Locateoutsideoftheright-of-way.
2) Locateintheright-of-wayonoradjacenttoarterialorcollectorstreets.
3) Collocateonexistingwirelesssupportstructureswithintheright-of-way.
4) Locateonanewwirelesssupportstructurewithintheright-of-waythatreplacesan
existingwirelesssupportstructureofthesameheight.
5) Locateonanewwirelesssupportstructurewithintheright-of-waythatreplacesan
existingwirelesssupportstructurewhoseheightislessthanorequalto50feet.
6) Locateonanewwirelesssupportstructurewithintheright-of-waywhoseheightis
similartonearbystructures.
7) Locateonanewwirelesssupportstructurewithintheright-of-waywhoseheightis
lessthanorequalto50feet.
Thecitywillalsoconsiderfactorssuchasaestheticcompatibilityofthesmallwireless
facilitywithsurroundingstructures, abilitytoeliminate, underground, orscreenground-mounted
equipment, dangerswithinthesmallwirelessfacilityfallzone, distanceofthesmallwireless
facilityfromroads, sidewalks, trailsandbicyclelanes, andfutureroadway, pedestrian, bicycle,
water, wastewater, andstormwaterimprovementplansforthesitebeforeissuingsmallwireless
facilitypermitorenteringintoastandardsmallwirelessfacilitycollocationagreement.
Page21of25
B) SmallWirelessFacilityPermit. Nopersonmayplaceanewwirelesssupportstructure
withintheright-of-wayorcollocateasmallwirelessfacilityonanexistingprivately-owned
wirelesssupportstructureintheright-of-waywithoutfirstobtainingasmallwirelessfacility
permitfromthecity.
1) PermitApplicationandFee. Awrittenapplicationforasmallwirelessfacility
permitshallbesubmittedtothecityonaformprovidedbythecity. Theapplicantshallpayan
applicationfeeinanamountestablishedbythecity. Theapplicationwillbeprocessedin
accordancewiththerequirementsofM.S. §2 37.163, subd. 3c(b)a nd (c).
2) ConsolidatedPermitApplication. Anapplicantmayfileaconsolidatedpermit
applicationtocollocateuptofifteen (15) smallwirelessfacilities, providedthatthesmall
wirelessfacilitiesintheapplication:
a) arelocatedwithinatwo-mileradius;
b) consistofsubstantiallysimilarequipment; and
c) aretobeplacedonsimilartypesofwirelesssupportstructures.
3) PermissionfromOwner. Iftheapplicantseekstocollocateasmallwirelessfacility
onanexistingwirelesssupportstructure, theapplicantshall, atthetimeofapplication, provide
thecitywithproofthatithasobtainedthenecessaryauthorityfromtheownerofthewireless
supportstructuretocollocatethesmallwirelessfacilityonthestructure.
4) IssuanceofPermitandConditions. Uponthecity’sdeterminationthattheapplicant
hassatisfiedtherequirementsofthissection, thecityshallissuethesmallwirelessfacility
permit. Thecitymayconditionpermitapprovaloncompliancewiththefollowing:
a) generallyapplicableandreasonablehealth, safety, andwelfareregulations
consistentwiththecity’sauthoritytomanageitspublicright-of-way;
b) reasonableaccommodationsfordecorativewirelesssupportstructuresorsigns;
c) anyreasonablerestocking, replacement, orrelocationrequirementswhena
newwirelesssupportstructureisplacedintheright-of-way.
Inrenderingadecisiononaconsolidatedpermitapplication, thecitymayapprovea
permitforsomesmallwirelessfacilitiesanddenyapermitforothers, butmaynotusedenialof
oneormorepermitsasabasistodenyallthesmallwirelessfacilitiesintheconsolidated
application.
5) PermitDenial. Thecitymaydenyasmallwirelessfacilitypermitifitreasonably
determinesthattheapplicanthasnotsatisfiedtherequirementsofthissectionorthatapprovalof
thepermitwouldbecontrarytogenerallyapplicableandreasonablehealth, safety, andwelfare
regulations. Thecityshallnotifytheapplicantinwritingwithinthree (3) businessdaysofits
decisiontodenythepermit. Upondenial, theapplicantmaycurethedeficienciesidentifiedby
Page22of25
thecityandresubmititsapplication. Iftheapplicantresubmitstheapplicationwithinthirty (30)
daysofreceivingwrittennoticeofthedenial, noadditionalapplication, filingorprocessingfee
shallberequired. Thecityshallapproveordenytherevisedapplicationwithinthirty (30) days
aftertherevisedapplicationissubmitted.
6) Term. Thetermofasmallwirelessfacilitypermitshallbeequaltothelengthof
timethatthesmallwirelessfacilityisinuse, unlessearlierrevokedunderthischapter.
7) ObstructionorExcavation. Asmallwirelessfacilitypermitholderwhose
approvedworkintheright-of-wayinvolvesobstructionorexcavationoftheright-of-wayshall
alsoobtainaright-of-waypermitfromthecity.
8) RequirementsforNewWirelessSupportStructures. Newwirelesssupport
structuresthatcomplywiththefollowingrequirementsmaybeplacedintheright-of-wayafter
theissuanceofasmallwirelessfacilitypermit:
a) Anewwirelesssupportstructureshallnotexceedfifty (50) feetaboveground
level, subjecttotherequirementsofCityCodeChapter152, andshallbeseparatedfromother
wirelesssupportstructuresbyaminimumofsixhundred (600) feet.
b) Notwithstandingsubsection (a), anewwirelesssupportstructurethatreplaces
anexistingwirelesssupportstructurethatishigherthan50feetabovegroundlevelmaybe
placedattheheightoftheexistingwirelesssupportstructure, subjecttotherequirementsofCity
CodeChapter152.
c) Thediameterofanewwirelesssupportstructurethatreplacesanexisting
wirelesssupportstructureshallnotexceedthediameteroftheexistingwirelesssupportstructure
bymorethanfiftypercent (50%).
d) Wirelessfacilitiesconstructedintheright-of-wayafterMay31, 2017shallnot
extendmorethanten (10) feetaboveanexistingwirelesssupportstructureinplaceasofMay31,
2017.
9) RequirementsforSmallWirelessFacilities. Asmallwirelessfacilitythatcomplies
withthefollowingrequirementsmaybelocatedonanewwirelesssupportstructurewithinthe
right-of-wayorcollocatedonanexistingprivately-ownedwirelesssupportstructurewithinthe
right-of-wayafterissuanceofasmallwirelessfacilitypermit:
a) Thesmallwirelessfacilityshallhavelimitedexposedcablingandmounting
hardware. Itshallalsomatchthewirelesssupportstructureitisattachedtoincolorand, asclose
aspracticable, inmaterialanddesign.
b) Thesmallwirelessfacilityshallnotinterferewithpublicsafetywireless
telecommunications.
c) Smallwirelessfacilitiesintheright-of-wayshallberemovedandrelocatedat
Page23of25
thecity’srequestandatnocosttothecitywhenthecitydeterminesthatremovalandrelocation
isnecessarytopreventinterferencewith: (1) presentorfuturecityuseoftheright-of-wayfora
publicproject; (2) thepublichealth, safety, orwelfare; or (3) thesafetyandconvenienceof
travelovertheright-of-way.
d) Asmallwirelessfacilityattachedtoanexistingwirelesssupportstructureshall
notblocklightemanatingfromthewirelesssupportstructureandshallnototherwiseinterfere
withtheoriginaluseofthewirelesssupportstructure.
e) Ground-mountedequipmentassociatedwiththesmallwirelessfacilityis
prohibitedunlesstheapplicantcanshowthatground-mountedequipmentisnecessaryfor
operationofthesmallwirelessfacility. Ifground-mountedequipmentisnecessary, itshallmeet
thefollowingstandards:
1. Ground-mountedequipmentshallbeplacedbelowgradeunlessnot
technicallyfeasible;
2. Ground-mountedequipmentshallnotdisrupttrafficorpedestrian
circulationandshallnotinterferewithvehicleandpedestrianintersectionsightlines;
3. Ground-mountedequipmentshallnotcreateasafetyhazard;
4. Ifplacedabovegrade, ground-mountedequipmentshallbeseparatedfrom
thenearestground-mountedequipmentonthesameblockfacebyaminimumof330feetunless
theequipmentisplacedunderground, orunlesswaivedbythecity; and
5. Ifplacedabovegrade, ground-mountedequipmentshallbelimitedtothree
3) feetinheightandtwenty-eight (28) cubicfeetincumulativesize.
10) Exemptions. Nosmallwirelessfacilitypermitisrequiredtoconductthe
followingactivitiesintheright-of-way:
a) routinemaintenanceofasmallwirelessfacility;
b) replacementofasmallwirelessfacilitythatissubstantiallysimilarorsmaller
insize, weight, height, andwindorstructuralloadingthanthesmallwirelessfacilitybeing
replaced; or
c) installation, placement, maintenance, operation, orreplacementofmicro
wirelessfacilitiesthataresuspendedoncablesstrungbetweenexistingutilitypolesin
compliancewithnationalsafetycodes.
Ifanyoftheaboveactivitieswillobstructtheright-of-way, thesmallwireless
facilitypermitholdershallprovidenotificationtothecityatleastten (10) daysinadvanceof
suchactivity.
Page24of25
C) CollocationofCity-OwnedWirelessSupportStructure. Nopersonmaycollocatea
smallwirelessfacilityonanexistingwirelesssupportstructureownedorcontrolledbythecity
withoutfirstenteringintoaStandardSmallWirelessFacilityCollocationAgreementwiththe
city.
D) NewStructures. Theerectioninthepublicright-of-wayofanewpublicutilitystructure
tosupportwirelessfacilitiesotherthansmallwirelessfacilitiesisprohibited, exceptwherethe
citydeterminesthereisaneedforadditionalroadwaylighting, emergencywarningsiren, or
otherinfrastructurethatmustbesupportedbyapublicutilitystructure. Anynewstructure
erectedtosupportwirelessfacilitiesotherthansmallwirelessfacilitiesallowedbythecityunder
thisparagraphandanyassociatedorattachedequipmentmustcomplywiththerequirementsof
thissection.
E) OtherWirelessFacilities. Atelecommunicationsright-of-wayuserwhodesirestoplace
anewpublicutilitystructureorwirelessfacilitiesotherthansmallwirelessfacilitiesintherightof-
wayshallenterintoalicenseagreementwiththecityforuseofspacethatsetsforthsuch
termsandconditionsasthecitydeemsappropriateandshallobtainanynecessaryright-of-way
permit.
100.32RIGHT-OF-WAYMANAGEMENTCOSTS.
InadditiontothepermitfeesoutlinedinthisChapter, thecityreservestherighttocharge
right-of-wayusersforitsright-of-waymanagementcoststotheextentthatsuchchargesare
allowedunderstatelaw. Telecommunicationsright-of-wayusersshallberesponsiblefor
paymentofrealorpropertytaxesattributabletotheirequipmentinthepublicright-of-way.
PriorCode, § 7-7-30) (Ord. 526, passed2-5-2001; Ord. 796, passed5-7-2018)
Page25of25
CHAPTER 101: STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS
Section
Excavations
101. 01 Excavation rules and regulations; compliance
101. 02 Permit requirements
101. 03 General excavation regulations
101. 04 Backfill specifications
Driveway Construction
101. 15 Permit requirements
101. 16 Construction requirements
Street Names and Numbers
101. 30 Street names required
101. 31 General name designations
101. 32 Name changes
Buildings, Structures or Encroachments in Right-of-Way
101. 50 License required
101. 51 Application
101. 52 Application fee
101. 53 License agreement
101. 54 Agreement to be recorded
101. 55 Standard of issuance
101. 56 Investigation
101. 57 Denial Procedures
EXCA NATIONS
101. 01 EXCAVATION RULES AND REGULATIONS; COMPLIANCE.
A) The City Engineer and/ or the Public Works Superintendent shall prepare the rules and
regulations with respect to excavations as they find necessary to protect the public from injury,
prevent damage to public or private property and minimize interference with the public use of
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public grounds.
B) Any person making an excavation covered by this subchapter shall comply with the
Page 1 of 9
rules and regulations.
Prior Code, § 7- 1A- 1)( Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015) Penalty, see § 10. 99
101. 02 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
A) Permit required,fee. No person, except an authorized city employee or a contractor
performing work under a contract with the city, shall make an excavation in a street, alley,
sidewalk or public ground without first having secured a permit therefore from the City Clerk.
The fee for the permit shall be established by ordinance. This fee shall not apply for an
excavation made pursuant to a permit for sewer or water service construction.
B) Preparation ofapplication andpermit. The City Clerk shall prepare the necessary
application forms and permits required under division (A) above. After submittal, the application
shall be reviewed by all appropriate members of the city staff before the permit is granted by the
City Clerk.
C) Restoration and insurance required.
1) Restoration. Any permittee, except a public utility corporation or a bonded
plumber, shall file with the City Clerk a cash deposit or letter of credit in an amount, as
determined by the Public Works Superintendent and/ or the City Engineer, sufficient to restore the
site to conditions existing prior to the excavation. When the Public Works Superintendent and/ or
City Engineer has determined that the complete and proper restoration has taken place, the
deposit or letter of credit shall be returned to the permittee.
2) Insurance. Any permittee, except a public utility corporation, shall furnish proof
that the permittee has in existence an insurance policy protecting him or her from liability to the
public, including the city, to an amount equal to the maximum claim the city might be required to
pay under M.S. Chapter 466, as it may be amended from time to time.
Prior Code, § 7- 1A- 2)( Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015) Penalty, see § 10. 99
101. 03 GENERAL EXCAVATION REGULATIONS.
A) Street openings shall be made in a manner that will cause the least inconvenience to the
public.
B) Provision shall be made for the passage of water along the gutters and at least one-half
of the traveled portion of the street shall be left open and in good condition for the safe passage
of vehicles.
C) Excavations shall be guarded by proper advance warning signs and flags, flares and/ or
proper barricades, which must be placed in accordance with standards of the city, and in
compliance with the Minnesota DOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. These
protective devices shall be maintained until the excavated area has been fully restored to the
Page 2 of 9
previous condition. In the event that the required protective devices are not provided and
maintained, the city shall order the proper protective devices with all incurred costs to be paid by
the permittee.
D) Pipes or mains exposed to freezing temperatures shall be protected so as to prevent
freezing. Any person responsible for exposing a city main or pipe so that it might be damaged
by freezing shall be liable to the city for all damages caused by the freezing and all damages
sustained by others by the freezing for which the city may be liable.
E) No openings shall be made prior to contacting Gopher State One Call Law to determine
if underground utilities ( gas, telephone, cable, power and the like) are present, and in accordance
with M.S. § 2161), as it may be amended from time to time.
Prior Code, § 7- 1A- 3) Penalty, see § 10. 99
101. 04 BACKFILL SPECIFICATIONS.
Procedural, material and compaction requirements relating to the backfill of all street
excavations shall be those contained within the current Standard Specifications and Detail
Plates, City ofSavage, Minnesota, and all subsequent amendments thereto, as adopted by the
City Council, or as required by the Public Works Superintendent and/ or the City Engineer.
Prior Code, § 7- 1A- 4)( Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015) Penalty, see § 10. 99
DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION
101. 15 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
A) Permit required,fee. No person, except an authorized city employee or a contractor
performing work under a signed contract with the city, shall open or cut a curb or public
sidewalk for the purpose of making a private access or connection to a public street or alley
without first having secured a permit from the City Clerk. The fee for the permit shall be
established by ordinance.
B) Application for permit, review. All the permits shall be granted pursuant to application
available at City Hall, and the application shall be properly and completely filled in prior to
submittal. After submittal, the application shall be reviewed and approved by the Public Works
Superintendent and/ or the City Engineer before the permit is granted by the City Clerk.
C) Deposit required. Before any permit is granted, the applicant shall deposit cash or a
bank letter of credit payable to the city in an amount to be determined by the Public Works
Superintendent and/ or the City Engineer, which amount shall be sufficient to repair and restore
any public property including street surfacing, curb and gutter, public sidewalk and/ or boulevard
area which may be damaged by the authorized construction.
Prior Code, § 7- 113- 1) ( Ord. 162, passed 12- 23- 1982; Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015) Penalty,
Page 3 of 9
see § 10. 99
101. 16 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
A) No work shall be started until the application is approved and the permit issued.
B) Open excavations on a traveled roadway or walkway shall be denoted by proper
advance warning signs and guarded by flags, flares and/ or proper barricades, which must be
placed in accordance with standards of the city and Minnesota DOT Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices. These protective devices shall be maintained until the excavated area has been
fully restored to the previous condition. In the event that the required protective devices are not
provided and maintained, the city shall order the proper protective devices with all costs to be
paid by the permittee.
C) No foreign material such as dirt, gravel, or bituminous material shall be left or deposited
on the roadway, walkway or boulevard during or after the construction of the driveway.
D) The permittee shall notify the Public Works Superintendent and/ or the City Engineer
that the site is ready for an interim inspection ( after old curbing and materials contained within a
previous driveway have been removed, after base materials have been applied and the site has
been graded in readiness for hard surfacing). The actual driveway construction shall not proceed
until after the interim inspection has been completed.
E) After driveway construction is complete, the permittee shall notify the Public Works
Superintendent and/or the City Engineer that the site is ready for final inspection.
F) No changes or alterations in the existing drainage, curb and gutter or sidewalk shall be
made at any time without written permission from the city.
G) Requirements relating to restoration of curb and gutter or sidewalk previously in place
shall be those contained within the Standard Specifications and Detail Plates, City ofSavage,
Minnesota, and all subsequent amendments thereto, as adopted by the City Council, or as
required by the Public Works Superintendent and/ or City Engineer.
H) All driveways constructed under this subchapter shall conform to the other requirements
relating to width, setback from property line, surfacing and minimum spacing contained within
Chapter 152.
Prior Code, § 7- 113- 2)( Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015) Penalty, see § 10. 99
Page 4 of 9
STREETNAMES AND NUMBERS
101. 30 STREET NAMES REQUIRED.
No plat shall be accepted by the city until the names on the streets in the plat shall have been
approved by the City Council.
Prior Code, § 7- 1 C- 1)
101. 31 GENERAL NAME DESIGNATIONS.
There is hereby set up, decreed and established the following designation and names of the
streets and public ways in the city:
A) ( 1) All streets, roads and public ways shall be assumed to run in one of the four
directions and shall be designated as follows:
a) Avenues. Streets, roads or public ways, which run in a north to south direction;
b) Streets. Streets, roads and public ways, which run in an east to west direction;
c) Roads. Streets, roads and public ways, which run in a northwest to southeast
direction; and
d) Boulevards. Streets, roads and public ways, which run in a southwest to
northeast direction.
2) Any street, road or public way within the city which does not run in one of the four
directions as hereinbefore set forth, shall have its direction approximated so that it fits into one of
the four categories in this section, except for the following: a court or circle, the name of which
shall be related to the base street from which it extends; a lane, which shall be a short street
whose name shall be related to the base street from which it extends and returns; half blocks or
short blocks, which shall be designated " Lanes" or" Ways;" meandering major routes, which
shall be designated " Drives;" and meandering minor routes, which shall be designated " Trails."
B) The City Council may adopt policy and amendments thereto, relating to the naming of
streets, subdivisions, parks and other public properties. The policy shall be based upon the
requirement that all street names and numbers within the city shall conform, whenever possible,
to the metropolitan grid system.
Prior Code, § 7- 1C- 2) Penalty, see § 10. 99
Page 5 of 9
101. 32 NAME CHANGES.
The name of any street, road or public way within the city may be changed from its present
name to a newly- adopted name by resolution of the City Council. All affected property owners
shall first be given written notification of the time and place of the City Council meeting in
which a proposed name change shall be considered.
Prior Code, § 7- 1C- 3) ( Ord. 264, passed 3- 10- 1988)
BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES OR ENCROACHMENTS IN RIGHT-OF-WAY
101. 50 LICENSE REQUIRED.
It is unlawful for any person, as owner, lessee, occupant or other person in control of any
real property within the city, to install, place, build, erect, maintain, occupy or use upon any
property any building, structure or physical encroachment which, in whole or in part, is installed,
placed, built, erected, maintained, occupied or used on any portion of the right-of-way of any
public street or alley ( hereinafter referred to as " right-of-way"), whether such right- of-way exists
by reason of statutory or common law dedication or easement, without first having obtained a
written license therefor pursuant to the provisions of this section.
Ord. 655, passed 8- 03- 2009) Penalty, see § 10. 99
101. 51 APPLICATION.
A) Application for the license required by the provisions of this section shall be made on a
form provided by the city and shall require:
1) The name and address of the applicant;
2) The interest of the applicant in the real property upon which the building, structure
or encroachment to be licensed is or is proposed to be located;
3) The names and addresses of all record fee owners of such real property if not the
applicant;
4) The names and addresses of all parties other than the applicant and the record fee
owners having any interest in the property;
5) The legal description and street address of the property;
6) A description of the size and character of the building, structure or encroachment to
be licensed;
7) A legal description of the area of the right- of-way upon which the building,
Page 6 of 9
structure or encroachment is or is proposed to be located;
8) A statement that the applicant shall and agrees to indemnify the city from all claims
and demands which may arise as a result of the installation, placement, building, erection,
maintenance, occupation or use of the building, structure or encroachment upon such
right-of-way;
9) The name and address of the applicant' s insurer providing the insurance coverage
required herein;
10) A description of the facts requiring the issuance of the license for which application
is made;
11) A statement that the applicant understands and agrees that, if the license for which
application is made is granted, the license shall be revocable, and that the applicant shall not
acquire any vested rights thereunder; and
12) The submission by the applicant of a certificate of survey, prepared by a surveyor
licensed in the state showing the real property, the encroachment and such other information as
required by the City Engineer.
B) The application shall be submitted to the City Clerk, for the consideration of the City
Administrator.
Ord. 655, passed 8- 03- 2009; Ord. 669, passed 6- 21- 10; Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015)
101. 52 APPLICATION FEE.
Each application for a license required by the provisions of this section shall be
accompanied by an application fee in an amount established by an ordinance adopted by the City
Council, which fee shall be retained by the city whether or not a license is issued.
Ord. 655, passed 8- 03- 2009)
101. 53 LICENSE AGREEMENT.
Each license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be embodied in a written
license agreement between the city and the applicant and all record owners of such real property,
which license agreement shall include the following:
A) Purpose. A statement of the purpose for which the licensee may occupy or use the
right-of-way.
B) Term. A statement of the term of the license to be determined by the City
Administrator.
C) Limitation ofencroachment. A statement that the licensee shall not further encroach
upon any right-of-way, except pursuant to a license issued by the city pursuant to the provisions
Page 7 of 9
of this subchapter.
D) Removal. A statement that if the city needs to work in the right- of-way in the area of the
encroachment, the owner will remove all or such portion of the encroachment as required by the
city and further that the cost to remove and or replace the encroachment shall be paid by the
owner.
E) No interference with intended use. The encroachment shall not interfere with the
intended use of the right-of-way.
F) City engineering standards. All work performed in the right-of-way pursuant to the
license shall be performed in accordance with the city' s engineering standards in effect at the
time of the application for the license.
G) Indemnification. A statement that the license shall indemnify and save harmless the city
from any and all claims and demands which may arise as a result of the installation, placement,
building, erection, maintenance, occupation or use of such building, structure or encroachment
upon such right-of-way.
H) Maintenance. A statement that the occupation or use licensed shall be maintained by the
licensee in a clean, neat, orderly and safe manner.
I) Insurance. A statement that the licensee shall, at all times during the duration of the
license, maintain public liability insurance, naming the city as an additional insured party, in the
amounts of at least the maximum amounts of tort liability of the city pursuant to statute, with
respect to the occupation and use of such right- of-way by the licensee, which insurance shall be
evidenced by a policy providing, in part, that such insurance shall not be canceled or terminated
by any party, except upon ten days' prior written notice to the City Clerk.
J) No vested right created. A statement that the issuance of the license shall not constitute
or be construed as creating or establishing any vested right of the licensee or in to such
right-of-way, and that the license shall be revocable by the City Administrator.
Ord. 655, passed 8- 03- 2009; Ord. 669, passed 6- 21- 10)
101. 54 AGREEMENT TO BE RECORDED.
Each license agreement required by the provisions of§ 101. 53 shall either be recorded in the
office of the appropriate County Recorder or filed with the appropriate Registrar of Titles, so as
to place all successors and assigns of the licensee on notice of the provisions of such agreement.
Ord. 655, passed 8- 03- 2009)
Page 8 of 9
101. 55 STANDARD OF ISSUANCE.
No license shall be granted pursuant to the provisions of this section unless and until the
City Administrator shall determine that granting of the application will not endanger the public
or interfere with the use of the public of the road or alley located within such right- of-way.
Ord. 655, passed 8- 03- 2009; Ord. 669, passed 6- 21- 10)
101. 56 INVESTIGATION.
The City Administrator may, prior to the issuance of any license pursuant to this section,
refer such application to the Public Works Department for the purpose of obtaining the
recommendation of the Department with respect to such application.
Ord. 655, passed 8- 03- 2009; Ord. 669, passed 6- 21- 10)
101. 57 DENIAL PROCEDURES.
If the City Administrator denies an application submitted under Section 101. 51, the City
Clerk shall send notice of such denial to the applicant at the address included in the application.
The notice shall set forth the reason for denial and shall inform the applicant of the applicant' s
right to request appeal of the denial within 10 days after the date notice was mailed to the
applicant. If the applicant requests an appeal, the appeal shall be scheduled for the next regularly
scheduled City Council meeting for consideration by the City Council. If the City Clerk does not
receive an applicant' s request for appeal within said 10- day period, the applicant' s right to
appeal shall be deemed waived.
Ord. 655, passed 8- 03- 2009; Ord. 669, passed 6- 21- 10)
Page 9 of 9
CHAPTER102: URBANFORESTANDSHADETREEMANAGEMENT
Section
102.01 Purpose
102.02 Intent
102.03 Definitions
102.04 Entryonprivatepropertyandinterferencewithinspection
102.05 Treepreservationpermitrequired
102.06 Conditionsofpermit
102.07 Allowabletreeremoval
102.08 Treereplacementformula/criteria
102.09 Security
102.10 Publicplanting
102.11 Declarationofpolicy
102.12 Nuisancedeclared
102.13 Abatementrequired
102.14 Treeinspector
102.15 Interferenceprohibited
102.16 Diagnosis
102.17 Procedureforabatementandremoval
102.18 Oakwiltprevention
102.19 EmeraldAshBorerpreventionandmanagementstrategy
102.20 Transportationprohibited
102.21 Violations
102.22 Treecontractorregistration
102.23 Naturalareasmanagement
102.01 PURPOSE.
Itisthepurposeofthischaptertopromotespeciesdiversity, tominimizeerosioncausedby
constructionactivities, toallowforthedevelopmentofwoodedareasinamannerthatbest
mitigatestheremovalanddestructionoftrees, toprovidetherebyincentiveforcreativelanduse
andsitedesign, toprovidefortheadministrationandenforcementoftheregulationsand, in
general, topromoteandprotectthepublichealth, safetyandwelfare.
PriorCode, § 4-3-1) ( Ord. 583-2004, passed9-27-2004; Ord. 717, passed5-20-2013)
102.02 INTENT.
Inordertoprotectandpreservethenaturalenvironmentandbeautyofthecityisintended
thatregulationscontainedhereinshallapplytoalllandalterationsdefinedby § 102.03, including
butnotlimitedtolandalterationsdefinedby § 102.03, includingbutnotlimitedtoland
subdivision, buildingpermits, excavation, clearing, gradinganddrainage, erosioncontrol,
Page1of17
constructionofroadwaysorpublicutilities.
PriorCode, § 4-3-2) ( Ord. 583-2004, passed9-27-2004; Ord. 717, passed5-20-2013)
102.03 DEFINITIONS.
Forthepurposeofthischapter, thefollowingdefinitionsshallapplyunlessthecontext
clearlyindicatesorrequiresadifferentmeaning.
APPLICANT. Thepersonwhoisapplyingforatreepreservationpermit.
BUILDINGPARAMETER. Thefootprintofthebuildingplusadistancenottoexceed20
feetineachdirectionthereof. Theareaofdisturbanceoneithersideofadriveway, whenadded
together, shallnotexceed20feet.
CALIPERINCHES. Thelengthofastraightlinemeasuredthroughthetreesixinchesabove
therootball, uptoandincludingfour-inchcalipersize.
CANOPY. Thehorizontalextensionofatree’sbranchesinalldirectionsfromitstrunk.
CITYFORESTER. TheParks & NaturalResourcesSuperintendentand/orhis/her
designatedrepresentative.
COUNCIL. TheCityCounciloritsdesignee.
CRITICALROOTZONE (CRZ). Theareanearthetreesthatmustbeprotectedandavoided
duringconstruction. TheCRITICALROOTZONEisdeterminedbyprojectingthetreedripline
downwardfromtheoutermostedgeofthecanopytotheground.
DIAMETERATBREASTHEIGHT/D.B.H. Thewidthofatreetrunkmeasuredfourand
one-halffeetabovetheground.
DRIPLINE. Animaginaryverticallinethatextendsfromtheoutermostbranchesofatree’s
canopytotheground.
LANDDISTURBINGORDEVELOPMENTACTIVITIES. Anychangeofthelandsurface
includingremovingvegetativecover, excavating, filling, gradingandtheconstructionofany
structure.
LAND/PARCELOFLAND. Anentirelot, asdefinedbytheZoningCode, onorwithinthe
boundariesofwhichlandalterationhasoccurredoristooccur.
LOSTSIGNIFICANTTREE. Asignificanthealthytreelostasaresultof:
1) Gradechangeoflandalteration, whethertemporaryorpermanent, greaterthansix
inches, measuredvertically, affecting30% (asmeasuredonahorizontalplane) ormoreofthe
Page2of17
tree’srootzone;
2) Utilityconstruction (i.e. sewer, water, storm, sewer, gaselectric, telephone, cable
TVandtrenching) resultinginthecuttingof30% ormoreofthetree’srootwithinthecritical
rootzone;
3) Mechanicalinjurytothetrunkofasignificanttreecausinglossofmorethan20%
ofthebark; or
4) Compactionof90% ofproctor (moisturedensitytest) toadepthofsixinchesor
more, of60% ormoreofthesurfaceofthesoilwithinasignificanttree’scriticalrootzone.
NATURALAREAS. Publicpropertycontainingrepresentativenaturalresources, typically
notactivelymanagedforgeneralrecreationalopportunitiesbythepublic.
SIGNIFICANTTREE. Anyhealthydeciduoustree (exceptRussianolive, cottonwood
exceptionforseedlessvarieties), boxelder, mulberry, elm, andash) measuringsixinchesin
d.b.h. orgreater, oraconiferoustreemeasuringfourinchesind.b.h. orgreater.
SPECIMENTREE. Aparticularlyimpressiveorunusualexampleofaspeciesduetoits
size, shape, ageoranyothertraitthatepitomizesthecharacterofthespecies.
TREEINSPECTOR. Thecitytreeinspectorand/orthetreeinspector’sdesigned
representatives.
TREEINVENTORY. Aninventoryofallsignificanttreesandwoodedlotsinanareaof
development, toincludespecimentrees.
TREETRUNK. Thestemportionofatreefromthegroundtothefirstbranchthereof.
TREESANDSHRUBS. Allvegetation, deciduousorconiferous (exceptturfgrassand
flowers) greaterthan24inchesinheight.
PriorCode, § 4-3-3) ( Ord. 583-2004, passed9-27-2004; Ord. 670, passed6-21-10; Ord. 717,
passed5-20-2013)
102.04 ENTRYONPRIVATEPROPERTYANDINTERFERENCEWITH
INSPECTION.
Theforesterand/ortheforester’sagentmayenteruponprivatepremisespursuantto §1 0.20
forthepurposeofcarryingoutthedutiesassignedbythischapter. Nopersonshallunreasonably
interferewiththecityforesterortheforester’sagentswhileengagedintheexecutionor
enforcementofthischapter.
PriorCode, § 4-3-4) ( Ord. 583-2004, passed9-27-2004; Ord. 717, passed5-20-2013) Penalty,
see § 10.99
Page3of17
102.05 TREEPRESERVATIONPERMITREQUIRED.
Itisunlawfulforanypersontoengagedirectlyorindirectlyinlanddisturbingor
developmentactivitiesasdefinedby § 102.03, unlessthepersonshallfirstapplytoandobtain
fromthecityforester, inthemannerhereinprovided, atreepreservationpermit. Thetree
preservationpermitapplicationshallbeobtainedalongwithanapplicationforapreliminaryplat,
excavationpermit, gradingpermitforanyactivitywhichresultsinlanddisturbingor
developmentactivitiesdefinedby § 102.03.
A) Conceptplanrequired. Thetreepreservationpermitshallincludeaconceptplanor
sketchillustratingthegeneralsitelayout, includingstreets, pondingandbuildingsites. In
consideringtreepreservation, thefollowingconceptsshallbeadheredto:
1) Identifyforeststandsandspecimentrees (determinedthroughrequiredtree
inventory) thataremostworthyofpreservation;
2) Locateroads, buildingfootprints, parkingareas, stormwaterbasinsandutilitiesso
astominimizetheirimpactonsignificanttrees;
3) Preservetreesingrovesorclustersrecognizingthatsurvivabilityisgreaterfor
groupsoftreesthanindividuals;
4) Manipulateproposedgradingandthelimitsofdisturbancebychangingthe
elevation/locationofbuildingpads, parkinglotsandstreets, andconsidertheuseofretaining
wallstoreducetheimpactoftrees; and
5) Reviewallconstructionfactorsthatinfluencetreesurvivability.
B) Formofapplication. Applicationforatreepreservationpermitshallbemadeinwriting
tothecityforesteronaformprovidedbythecity. Theapplicationshallsetforththelocation
andplanfortheproposedlanddisturbingordevelopmentactivities, including:
1) Thenameandaddressofthepersonapplyingforthepermit;
2) Thename(s) andaddress(es) oftheowner(s) ofthelandsubjecttotheland
disturbingordevelopmentactivities;
3) Theestimatedperiodoftimewithinwhichthelandalterationswillbeconducted;
4) Acertificateofsurveyofthelandonwhichtheproposedlanddisturbingor
developmentactivitiesistooccurshowingthefollowing:
a) Thelocation, sizeandelevationofbuildingpads;
b) Thelocationoftheexistingsignificanttreestobesavedandthelocationof
Page4of17
protectivetreefencingatthecriticalrootzoneofthetrees;
c) Thelocationofreplacementtrees; and
d) Drainagepatterns.
5) Astatementrelatingtotheproposeduseofthelandincludingthetypeofbuilding
orstructurethereonorcontemplatedtobebuiltthereon;
6) (a) Atreeinventory, certifiedbyaCertifiedArborist, Minnesotaregisteredland
surveyor, civilengineer, landscapearchitectorforesterdepicting:
b) Thesize, species, conditionandlocationonthelandofallsignificanttreesand
designatedspecimentrees. Forestmensurationmethodsmaybeusedtocalculatetotaldiameter
inchesofatreewhenithasbeendetermined (throughthereviewoftheplatmapandother
documents) thatareaswithinthesubjectparcelofland, butoutsideoflandtobealtered/graded
willnotbeencroachedupon. Thedeterminationmustbeconfirmedbythecityforester. The
areaswillberequiredtocomplywithallotherrequirementsofthisdocumentincluding
protectivefencingprocedures;
7) Atreeinventorypreservationplan, whichcoincideswithnecessaryengineering
documentssuchastopography, wetlandinformationandgradingplansandincludes:
a) Alistofallsignificanttreeswillbelostduetotheproposedlanddisturbingor
developmentactivities; and
b) Thenumber, type, sizeandlocationoftreesrequiredtobereplacedpursuantto
thischapter.
8) Designatedsiteformaterialstorage, debrisdisposal, vehicleparking, burnlocation
andredi-mixtruckwashout; and
9) Ifrequestedbythecity, large-scaleplans, includingspecificstructuretypes, tree
locationsandelevationsthatmayberequiredtoadequatelydeterminetreeimpacts.
C) Fees. Feesforatreepreservationpermitshallbeestablishedbyordinance.
D) Issuanceofpermit.
1) Theapplicationforatreepreservationpermitshallberequiredalongwith
applicationforpreliminaryplat. Approvalshallbegivenbaseduponthefollowing:
a) Approvalbythecityforesterthattheapplicantisincompliancewith §§ 102.06
and102.07;
b) Paymentoftheapplicationfee;
Page5of17
c) Provisionofthesecurityasrequiredby § 102.09; and
d) Substantiallikelihoodthattheapplicantwillbeabletocomplywiththerules
andregulationsofthischapter.
2) Thepermit, whenissued, shallclearlydescribe:
a) Thetimeperiodwithinwhichthelanddisturbingordevelopmentactivitiesare
tobecompleted;
b) Thetypeandlocationoflostsignificanttrees;
c) Thetypeoflocationofanytreessaved;
d) Thetypeandfuturelocationofreplacementtrees;
e) Locationandtypeofprotectivedevicestobeusedduringconstruction
activitiestoprotecttreesdesignatedforpreservation; and
f) Designatedsitedescribedbydivision (B)(4) above. Anychangesand/or
conditionsdeterminedthroughthereviewprocessand/orsiteanalysis.
PriorCode, § 4-3-5) ( Ord. 583-2004, passed9-27-2004; Ord. 717, passed5-20-2013) Penalty,
see § 10.99
102.06 CONDITIONSOFPERMIT.
Theissuanceofatreepreservationpermitshallbesubjecttoandconditionedupon
compliancebytheapplicantwiththefollowing.
A) Preconstructionmeeting. Apreconstructionmeetingonsitewiththecityforester,
whichentailsapresentationofproposedroadalignments, protectivemeasurestoequipment
operators, constructionsupervisorsandadevelopmentrepresentative.
B) Safeguardingandinspections.
1) Safeguardingsavedtrees. Thepermitshalldelineatethelocationof (existing)
significanttreesthataretobesavedandprotectivetreefencing (atthecriticalrootzoneoftrees)
thathavebeen/willbeinstalled. Noencroachmentortrenchingshalloccurwithintheprotected
zoneofthetreestobesaved. Theinstallationoftreeprotectionfencingmayberequiredpriorto
siteclearingandgrading.
2) Inspections. Theforestershallinspectpursuantto §1 0.20thesiteoftheland
disturbingordevelopmentactivitiespriortothebuildingoftheprojectandperiodically
throughoutthedevelopmentprocesstoinsurethatprotectivefencingofsignificanttrees (tobe
Page6of17
saved) isinplace. Ifthebarkareaoranybranchofasignificanttree (tobesaved) becomes
damagedduringMayorJune, apruningpaintmustbeappliedimmediately.
C) Treeprotection. Treeprotectiondevicesorfencingshallbemaintainedandrepairedby
thedeveloperorcontractorforthedurationofconstructionandonceapprovedbythecity
forester, mustnotbealteredwithoutpriorapprovalbythecityforester.
PriorCode, § 4-3-6) ( Ord. 583-2004, passed9-27-2004; Ord. 717, passed5-20-2013) Penalty,
see § 10.99
102.07 ALLOWABLETREEREMOVABLE.
Significanttreesthatarelostand/orremovedbeyondtheallowableamountasdefinedinthis
sectionshallbereplacedinaccordancewiththetreereplacementformulain §1 02.08.
A) Initialsitedevelopment. Forinitialsitedevelopment, upto25% ofsignificanttreeswill
beallowedtoberemovedforthefollowingactivitiesonly:
1) Sitegrading, nottoexceedbeyondroadright-of-way;
2) Utilitiesinstallations, includingsanitaryandstormsewer, water, naturalgas,
electricserviceandcabletelevision;
3) Constructionofstreets, trailsandsidewalks; and
4) Construction/gradingordrainagewaysandstormdetentionareas.
B) Buildingdevelopment.
1) Singleunitresidential. Onindividuallots, upto25% ofsignificanttreesare
allowedtoberemovedwithoutreplacement.
2) Multi-unitresidential, commercialandindustrial. Upto50% ofthesignificant
treesonthelandtobedevelopedwillbeallowedtoberemovedfordevelopmentactivitiesto
includeinitialsitedevelopmentandtheconstructionofbuildingsandparkingareas.
3) Specialreview. Aspecialreviewshallbemadebyapplicantandstaffwhena
specimentreeislocatedwithinthebuildingperimeter. Buildersanddevelopersshallusebest
faitheffortstopositionbuilding(s) atalocationthatbestminimizesremovalofsignificanttrees.
C) Collectorroadwaydevelopment. Whencollectororarterialroadwaysarededicatedto
publicuseaspartofaproposeddevelopment, necessarytreeremovalwillbeallowedwithinthe
right-of-way, providingconditionssetfortharecompliedwithforactivitiesoutlinedindivisions
A)(1) through (4) above. Thegoverningunitresponsibleforconstructingacollectororarterial
roadwayshallberesponsiblefortheprovisionsofthissection.
Page7of17
1) Treereplacement. Notlessthan25% ofthetotaldiameterinchesofsignificant
treesremovedwithintheright-of-wayshallbereplacedinaccordancewithCategoriesA, B, orC
ofthetreereplacementformula.
2) Grading/landscapeplanrequired. Alandscapeplanshallbesubmittedalongwith
thegradingplan, theapprovalordenialofwhichshallbegivenwithin15workingdaysofcity
receipt. Theplanshallinclude:
a) Futureorexistinglocationsofallutilities (includingpolesandground
transformers);
b) Futurelocationsoftrees, shrubberyorapprovedvegetation (toincludeprairie
grasses, wildflowersorspecifiedgrassmixes); and
c) Locationsofcenterislands, medians, sidewalksandtrailways.
PriorCode, § 4-3-7) ( Ord. 583-2004, passed9-27-2004; Ord. 717, passed5-20-2013) Penalty,
see § 10.99
102.08 TREEREPLACEMENTFORMULA/CRITERIA.
Theuseofnativetreespeciesfortreereplacementisencouraged; apartiallistshallbemade
availablebythecityforester. Significanttreereplacementshallbecalculatedbyconsideringthe
largestdiametertreefirstandbyproceedingdowntothesmallestdiametersignificanttree.
Whenreplacementofasignificanttreeisrequired, thedeveloperorbuildershallberesponsible
forfurnishingandinstallingthenumberandsizeofthetree(s) accordingtothefollowing.
A) Sizeofreplacementtrees.
1) CategoryA. Treesnolessthanthefollowingsizes:
a) Deciduoustrees—notlessthanfourinchesindiameter.
b) Coniferoustrees—notlessthan12feetinheight.
2) CategoryB. Treesnolessthanthefollowingsizes:
a) Deciduoustrees—notlessthantwoandone-halfinchesindiameter.
b) Coniferoustrees—notlessthansixfeetinheight.
3) CategoryC. Treesnolessthanthefollowingsizes:
a) Deciduoustrees—notlessthanoneandone-halfinchesindiameter.
b) Coniferoustrees—notlessthanfourfeetinheight.
Page8of17
B) Numberofreplacementtrees - bycategory.
Category
SizeofTreeDamagedorDestroyed
Aor Bor C
Coniferous – 4inchesto8inchesindiameter 1 2
Coniferous – 9inchesto12inchesindiameter 1 2 4
Deciduous – 6inchesto12inchesindiameter 1 2
Deciduous – 13inchesto20inchesindiameter 1 2 4
Deciduous – 21inchesto30inchesindiameter 2 4 8
Specimentrees (Deciduous) – Greaterthan30inchesin 3 6 12
diameter
C) Speciesrequirement. Wheretenormorereplacementtreesarerequired, notmorethan
30% ofthereplacementtreesshallbeofthesametypeoftreewithouttheapprovalofthecity.
D) Placementlocation. Replacementtreesshallbeplantedonthesubjectproperty, not
morethan12monthsafterthedateofpermitissuance. Ifforsomereason, allthereplacement
treescannotbeplantedonthesubjectproperty, thoseremainingtobeplantedshallbelocatedon
otherpropertyownedbythedeveloper/builderwithinthecity, oronpropertyownedbythecity.
E) Cityforesterduties.
1) Thecityforestershalldetermineplacementoftreesoncityproperty.
2) Theapplicantshallnotifythecityforesterwhenallreplacementtreeshavebeen
planted, atwhichtime, thecityforestershallinspectthesite.
3) Thedeveloper/buildermayalsohavetheoptionofmakingacashpaymentfor
replacementtrees.
4) ThevalueofreplacementtreesshallbeataratedeterminedbytheCityCouncil.
5) ThecashpaymentsshallbemadetotheTreePreservationFundandshallbeused
solelyforthepurchase, planting, replacementandmaintenanceoftreesoncity-ownedproperty.
PriorCode, § 4-3-8) ( Ord. 583-2004, passed9-27-2004; Ord. 717, passed5-20-2013) Penalty,
see § 10.99
Page9of17
102.09 SECURITY.
Securityshallbeprovidedtoguaranteecompliancewiththischapterasfollows.
A) Developerresponsibility.
1) Developersecurityshallbepartofthestandardconstructionsecurityrequiredfor
theguaranteeofstreetandutilityconstruction. Thesecurity, whichmaybeintheformofa
bond, letterofcredit, cashofescrowdeposit, orotherinstrumentapprovedbytheCityCouncil.
2) Thedevelopershallbereleasedofanyfurtherresponsibilityforlossofsignificant
trees:
a) Oneachplot, atthetimethatabuildingpermitisissued; and
b) Onthelandparcel, atthetimethatgradingiscomplete, thatreplacementtrees
areplantedandthepreservationverifiedandapprovedbythecityforester.
B) Builderresponsibility.
1) Atthetimeofbuildingpermit, thebuildershallgivethecitycashescrowinthe
amountof $500toguaranteecompliancewithtreeplantingrequirementsofthischapterand §
152.519(D) ofthiscode.
2) Thesecurityshallbereleasedbacktothebuilderuponinspectionandverification
bythecityforesterthatalloftherequirementshavebeenmet.
C) Cityisexempt. Thecityshallbeexemptfromtheprovisionsofthissection.
PriorCode, § 4-3-9) ( Ord. 583-2004, passed9-27-2004; Ord. 717, passed5-20-2013) Penalty,
see § 10.99
102.10 PUBLICPLANTING.
Thefollowingregulationsapplytotheplantingoftreesonpublicstreetsandparks.
A) Streettreesinexistingresidentialareas, whicharelocatedinthepublicright-of-way,
shallbemanagedbythecity. Treesthatdieastheresultofdisease, insects, constructionactivity
ornaturaldisastershallberemoved. Replacementtree(s) maybeplantedonprivateproperty
providedthatthepropertyowneragreestobecomeresponsibleformaintenanceofthetree(s).
B) Thecityshallberesponsiblefortheplantingandmaintenanceofpublictrees. This
includestreesinparks, boulevards, outlotsandallotherpropertiesownedbythecity.
C) Sitecriteriausedtodeterminetree-plantinglocationsshallbe: visibilityofthesite,
Page10of17
probabilityoflong-termtreesurvival, likelihoodofprivateparticipationandfinancing, overall
benefittothecommunity.
D) Publictreeplantingcanbeballand-burlap, treespade, containermethodandbare-root.
E) OnlythosespeciesrecommendedforplantingintheStateofMinnesotashallbe
selected.
F) Unlessspecificallyauthorizedbythecity, nopersonshallintentionallydamage, cut,
carve, transplant, orremoveanypublictree; attachanyrope, wirenails, advertisements, orother
contrivancetoanypublictree; allowanygaseousliquid, orsolidsubstancewhichisharmfulto
thetreestocomeincontactwiththem; orsetfireorpermitanyfiretoburnwhenthefireorthe
heatthereofwillinjureanyportionofanypublictree.
G) Itshallbeunlawfulforanycitizentoplantatreeonpublicpropertywithoutfirst
obtainingapermitfromthecity. Approval, denialorapprovalwithconditionshallbebasedona
determinationbythecityforesterthattheapplicantmeetsthefollowingcriteria.
1) Thespeciesoftree(s) isappropriateforthearea.
2) Thelocationofthetree(s) isappropriate.
3) Thenewtreelocationdoesnotcauseahazardousorunsafeconditionorconflicts
withtheplacementofpublicutilities.
PriorCode, § 4-3-10) (Ord. 583-2004, passed9-27-2004; Ord. 717, passed5-20-2013) Penalty,
see § 10.99
102.11 DECLARATIONOFPOLICY.
TheCityCouncilhasdeterminedthatthehealthoftheashandoaktreeswithinthe
municipallimitsarethreatenedbyfataldiseasessuchasEmeraldAshBorerandoakwilt. Ithas
furtherbeendeterminedthatthelossofthesetreesgrowinguponprivateandpublicproperty
wouldsubstantiallydepreciatethevalueofpropertywithinthecityandimpairthesafety, good
order, generalwelfareandconvenienceofthepublic. Itisdeclaredtobetheintentionofthe
CounciltocontrolandpreventthespreadofEmeraldAshBorerandoakwilt.
PriorCode, § 4-3-11) (Ord. 583-2004, passed9-27-2004; Ord. 717, passed5-20-2013)
102.12 NUISANCEDECLARED.
Thefollowingaredeclaredtobepublicnuisanceswheneverandwherevertheymaybe
foundwithinthecity:
A) Anylivingorstandingtreeorpartthereofinfectedtoanydegreewiththeoakwilt
fungus, CeratocystisFagacerum, oranylivingorstandingoaktreethatposesathreatof
Page11of17
transmissionoftheoakwiltfungustoothertreesofthesamespeciesthroughinterconnectedroot
systems;
B) Anytree, shrub, orotherplantingwhetherlocatedoncityownedorprivateproperty
which:
1) Harborsinsectsordiseaseswhichmaybeexpectedtoinjureorharmanytree,
shrub, orotherplants;
2) Byanyreasonoflocationorconditionconstitutesanimminentdangertothe
health, safetyorwelfareofthegeneralpublic;
3) Obstructsthefreepassageofpedestrianorvehicletraffic, orwhichobstructsan
uncontrolledorcontrolledintersectionorothervehicularsignage; or
4) Whichdangerouslyobstructstheviewinthe “visibilitytriangle” asdeterminedby
theCityEngineerorCityTreeInspector.
PriorCode, § 4-3-12) (Ord. 583-2004, passed9-27-2004; Ord. 717, passed5-20-2013) Penalty,
see § 10.99
102.13 ABATEMENTREQUIRED.
A) Itisunlawfulforanypersontopermitanypublicnuisance, hazardousordiseasedtree
asdefinedin § 102.03toremainonanypremisesownedorcontrolledbythepersonwithinthe
city.
B) Thenuisances, hazardousordiseasedtreesshallbeabatedinthemannerprescribedby
thissection.
PriorCode, § 4-3-13) (Ord. 583-2004, passed9-27-2004; Ord. 717, passed5-20-2013)
102.14 TREEINSPECTOR.
A) TheCityCouncilmay, atitsdiscretion, appointacertifiedtreeinspectorortree
inspectors, certifiedbytheMinnesotaCommissionerofAgriculture, whoshalladministerthe
oakwiltandEABcontrolprogramsforthecityinaccordancewiththeprovisionsofthischapter.
B) Thetreeinspectorisempoweredtodothefollowing:
1) Enteruponprivatepremisespursuantto §1 0.20forthepurposeofcarryingoutthe
dutiesassignedtothetreeinspectorunderthischapter;
2) Causetheimmediateabatementofallpublicnuisance(s), hazardousordiseased
tree(s), providedthatthesubjecttree(s) isdeterminedbythetreeinspectortobeanimmediate
threattoanypersonorproperty; and
Page12of17
3) Seekfromanycourtofcompetentjurisdictionanorderdirectingimmediate
abatementofanypublicnuisance, hazardousordiseasedtree.
PriorCode, § 4-3-14) (Ord. 583-2004, passed9-27-2004; Ord. 717, passed5-20-2013)
102.15 INTERFERENCEPROHIBITED.
Itisunlawfulforanypersontoprevent, delayorinterferewiththecitytreeinspectororthe
inspector’sagentswhiletheyareengagedintheperformanceofdutiesimposedbythischapter.
PriorCode, § 4-3-15) (Ord. 583-2004, passed9-27-2004; Ord. 717, passed5-20-2013) Penalty,
see § 10.99
102.16 DIAGNOSIS.
Thetreeinspectorshall, uponfindingindicationsofoakwiltorEmeraldAshBorer, take
additionalstepsfordiagnosisasmaybeappropriate, whichmayincludeanalysisoftwigsamples
fromactivelywiltingbranches, crowndiebackorDshapedexitholes, and/orotherfield
symptomsasacceptablebytheMinnesotaDepartmentofAgriculture.
PriorCode, § 4-3-16) (Ord. 583-2004, passed9-27-2004; Ord. 717, passed5-20-2013)
102.17 PROCEDUREFORABATEMENTANDREMOVAL.
Wheneveritisfoundwithreasonablecertaintythatatreeisapublicnuisance, hazardous, or
hasoakwilt, thetreeinspectorshallproceedasfollows.
A) Writtennotice. Thetreeinspectorshallcauseawrittennoticetobepersonallyservedor
sentbymailtothepersontowhomthetaxbillwassentforgeneraltaxesduringthepreceding
year.
B) Descriptioninnotice. Thenoticeshalldescribethekindoftree, shruborotherplantor
portionthereofwhichhasbeendeclaredtobeapublicnuisance, hazardousordiseased; its
locationontheproperty; thereasonfordeclaringitanuisance, hazardousordiseasedtree.
C) Noticesenttopremises. Thenoticeshalldescribethesubjectpremisesbylegal
descriptionorbystreet.
D) Noticetodescribeactions. Thenoticeshalldescribetheactionsthatthepropertyowner
shallundertaketoabatethenuisance, hazardousordiseasedtree.
E) Noticetoordereliminationofnuisance. Thenoticeshallordertheeliminationofthe
nuisance, hazardousordiseasedtreenomorethan30daysafterthenoticeisdeliveredorsentto
thepersontowhomwassentthetaxbillforgeneraltaxesfortheprecedingyear. Trees
diagnosedaspositiveforEmeraldAshBorerarenotrequiredtoberemovedasaresultofEAB
diagnosis, thoughwhendeterminedtobestructurallydefectiveand/orassuchdeclareda
Page13of17
nuisance, shallberequiredtobeabatedperCityCodeSection102.13.
TreesdiagnosedaspositiveforEmeraldAshBorer (EAB), shouldberemovedonlybetween
September1andApril30ofthefollowingyear. Duringthesummermonths, adultbeetlesare
activeandinsearchofashtreestofeedonandlayeggs.
F) Noticetoincludecopyofchapter. Thenoticeshallincludeacopyofthischapter.
G) Criteriaforabatement. Abatementproceduresshallbecarriedoutinaccordancewith
currenttechnicalandexpertopinions, suchasmaybedispensedbytheCommissionerof
Agriculture. Criteriatobefollowedinregardtoabatementrequirementsareasfollows.
1) Oaktrees. Alloaktreesdiagnosedashavingoakwiltshallbeisolatedfrom
neighboringhealthyoaktreesofthesamespecieswithin30days, bychemicalormechanical
disruptionofcommonrootsystemstopreventrootgrafttransmissionofoakwiltfungus.
2) Spreadoftreediseasesacrosspropertylines. Ifthetreeinspectorfindsthatoak
wiltthreatenstocrosspropertyboundaries, theTreeInspectormayrequirerootgraftdisruption
topreventthespreadofthediseaseinthismanner. Iftrenchingisnotpossibleduetoterrain,
location, orburiedutilities, thetreeinspectormayrequireotheracceptablemethodsofcontrol,
includingtrunkgirdlingand/orapplicationsofherbicidesand/orfungicides. Anycostincurred
bythecityforoakwiltcontrolandabatement, includingadministrativetime, shallbeassessedto
thepropertyforwhichthecontroloccurred.
H) Failuretoabate. Intheeventthenuisance, hazardousordiseasedtreeisnotabatedby
thedatespecifiedinthenotice, thetreeinspectorisauthorizedtocauseabatementofthe
nuisance, hazardousordiseasedtree. Thereasonablecostoftheabatementshallbefiledasa
specialassessmentagainstthepropertyonwhichthenuisance, hazardousordiseasedtreeis
located. Inaddition, thepropertyonwhichthenuisance, hazardousordiseasedtreeislocated
shallbesubjecttoprosecutionunderthischapteraccordingto §1 02.21.
PriorCode, § 4-3-17) (Ord. 583-2004, passed9-27-2004; Ord. 717, passed5-20-2013) Penalty,
see § 10.99
102.18 OAKWILTPREVENTION.
A) Pruning. Tocontroltheoverlandspreadofoakwilt, thepruningofoaksshallbe
avoidedduringthemostsusceptibleperiodofinfection, fromApril1throughJuly31. If
woundingisunavoidableduringthisperiod, anontoxictreewoundshallbeappliedimmediately.
B) Hazarddeclared. Topreventtheoakwiltfungusfromproducingsporesandtoprevent
theoverlandspreadofthisfungus, anydiseasedmaterialoftheredoakgroupwiltinginJulyand
Augustofoneyearshallbedeclaredbythetreeinspectortobehazardousthefollowingspring
fromApril1untilJuly31. Thefollowingshallapplytoanyhazardoustreesodeclared.
1) Anyhazardousoakwoodtobeusedasfuelwoodortobesalvagedforother
Page14of17
purposesmustbedebarkedorcoveredbyheavyplastic (fourmilorgreater) fromApril1until
July31oftheyearfollowingtheappearanceofthesymptoms. Afterthistime, thereisnodanger
ofsporeproduction, andthewooddoesnotneedtobecovered.
2) Anybranchgreaterthantwoinchesindiameteroftheredoakgroupandnottobe
salvagedshallbedisposedbyburning, chippingorremovaltoanauthorizeddumpsitepriorto
April1oftheyearfollowingtheappearanceofsymptoms. Deadstandingredoaksthathave
advancedbeyondthepotentialforsporeproductiondonotneedtoberemovedexceptwhere
theyconstituteahazardtolifeand/orproperty, asdeterminedbythetreeinspector.
3) Stumpsoftheredoakgroupremovedduetooakwiltshallbecompletelycovered,
removed, ordebarkedtothegroundlinetoeliminatesporeformationandtheoverlandspreadof
thedisease.
4) Treesofthewhiteoakgroup (whiteoak, buroak, bicoloroak) diagnosedashaving
oakwiltshouldbeisolatedbyrootgraftdisruption. Diseasedmaterialoriginatingfromthetrees
shallnotrequirespecialtreatmenttopreventoverlandspreadofthedisease. Standingtreesof
thisgroupshowingearlysymptomsofoakwiltmaybesavedbyremovingaffectedbranches.
PriorCode, § 4-3-18) (Ord. 583-2004, passed9-27-2004; Ord. 717, passed5-20-2013) Penalty,
see § 10.99
102.19 EMERALDASHBORERPREVENTION & MANAGEMENT STRATEGY.
A) Prevention. TopreventthespreadofEAB, theMinnesotaDepartmentofAgriculture
MDA) encouragespropertyownerstomonitortheirashtreesandtocontactanarboristifthey
havequestionsabouttreeswithsignsofinsectdamage. However, cuttingdownashtreesisnot
immediatelynecessaryandcouldacceleratethespreadofEABifaninfectedtreeisdisposedof
improperly.
B) InanefforttoreducepotentialEABinfections, theCityofSavagewillimplement
selectiveremovalandproperdisposalofstructurallycompromisedashtreesonpubliclandas
resourcesprovidefor.
C) IdentifyingEABInfestation. SignsofEABdamageincludediebackofleavesinthe
upperone-thirdofthetree’sbranches, heavywoodpeckeractivity, D-shapedexitholesinthe
bark, S-shapedtunnelsunderthebarkorwatershootsupthetrunk.
D) EABActivityandIdentification. Themetallic-greenadultbeetlesareactivefromMay
toSeptember. Becausetheyaresmallandwell-camouflaged, theycanbeverydifficulttospot.
Ord. 717, passed5-20-2013)
102.20 TRANSPORTPROHIBITED.
Page15of17
A) Itisunlawfulforanypersontotransportwithinthecity, anybark, intactelmwood, or
woodfromtheredoakgroupthatisdeterminedtobehazardous, withouthavingobtaineda
permitfromthecitytreeinspector. Thecitytreeinspectorshallgrantthepermitsonlywhenthe
permissiondoesnotinterferewiththeprovisionsofthischapter.
B) TreesdiagnosedasbeinginfectedwithEmeraldAshBorer (EAB) shouldberemoved
onlybetweenSeptember1andApril30ofthefollowingyear. Duringthesummermonths, adult
beetlesareactiveandinsearchofashtreestofeedonandlayeggs. Treewasteshouldbe
disposedofclosetoitsoriginregardlessofwhetherornotdiagnosisforEABispositive. Ash
woodmovedoutofaninfestedarearequiresapermitissuedbythecityTreeinspectororMN
DepartmentofAgriculturepriortomovement.
PriorCode, § 4-3-19) (Ord. 583-2004, passed9-27-2004; Ord. 717, passed5-20-2013) Penalty,
see § 10.99
102.21VIOLATIONS.
Anypersonwhoviolatesanyprovisionsofthischapterwill, uponconviction, befound
guiltyofamisdemeanor. If, astheresultoftheviolation, theinjury, mutilationordeathofa
tree, shruborotherplantlocatedoncity-ownedpropertyiscaused, thecostofrepairor
replacementofthetree, shrub, orotherplantshallbebornebythepartyinviolation. The
replacementvalueofthetree, shruborotherplantshallbedeterminedinaccordancewiththe
latestversionofValuationofLandscapeTrees, ShrubsandOtherPlants, aspublishedbythe
InternationalSocietyofArboriculture.
PriorCode, § 4-3-20) (Ord. 583-2004, passed9-27-2004; Ord. 717, passed5-20-2013) Penalty,
see § 10.99
102.22 TREECONTRACTORREGISTRATION.
Professionalcontractorshiredtoperformtreemaintenanceserviceswithinthecityshallbe
registeredwiththecity. Thisprocedureshallconsistofthefollowingsteps.
A) Application. ApplicationforregistrationshallbecompletedatCityHall.
B) Applicationform. Theapplicationshallbemadeonaformapprovedbythecitywhich
shows, amongotherthings, thenameandaddressoftheapplicant, thenumberandnamesof
employeesoftheapplicant, thenumberofvehiclesoftheapplicanttogetherwiththedescription
andlicensenumberofeachandthetypeofequipmentproposedtobeused.
C) Liabilityinsurance. Noregistrationorrenewalshallbegrantedorbeeffectiveuntilthe
applicantfileswiththeCityClerkproofofapublicliabilityinsurancepolicycoveringall
operationsoftheapplicantunderthissectionforthesumof $100,000againstliabilityforbodily
injuriestoonepersonfromanaccident; $300,000fortheinjuryoftwoormorepersons; andfor
atleast $200,000againstliabilityfordamageordestructionofproperty. Thepolicyshall
providethatitmaybecancelledbytheinsurer, exceptafter30dayswrittennoticetothecity,
andiftheinsuranceissocancelledandthelicenseeshallfailtoreplacethesamewithanother
Page16of17
policyconformingtotheprovisionsofthissection, thelicenseshallbeautomaticallysuspended
untiltheinsuranceshallhavebeenreplaced.
D) Workerscompensationinsurance. Eachlicenseapplicantshallfilewiththecitya
certificateofinsuranceofworkerscompensationwhentheinsuranceisrequiredbystatestatute.
E) Chemicaltreatmentrequirements. Applicantswhoproposetheuseofchemical
substancesinanyactivityrelatedtotreatmentordiseasecontroloftreesandshrubsshallfile
withthecityproofthattheapplicantoranemployeeoftheapplicantadministeringthetreatment
hasbeencertifiedbytheAgronomyDivisionoftheStateDepartmentofAgricultureasa
commercialpesticideapplicator.”
F) Fees. Theannualregistrationfeeshallbedeterminedbyordinance.
PriorCode, § 4-3-21) (Ord. 583-2004, passed9-27-2004; Ord. 717, passed5-20-2013)
102.23 NATURALAREASMANAGEMENT.
A) Purpose. Inthemidstofincreasingurbanizationandalesserconnectionwiththeland,
theacquisition, establishment, andmaintenanceofnaturalareaswillassurethatimportantnatural
resourcesarepreservedforfuturegenerations.
B) Prohibitions. Thefollowingpracticesareprohibitedonnaturalareasunlessotherwise
allowedherein:
1) Theplantingoftrees, shrubsorothervegetationnotpreviouslyapprovedasacity
project;
2) Theplantingofplantsnotnativetothearea; however, non-nativeplantingsmaybe
usedwhendeemednecessarybythecitytoprovidebuffer, erosioncontrolandcreatingspecial
wildlifehabitat;
3) Thestorageorremovaloffirewoodandothernaturalmaterialsincludinglawn
wasteandcompostbins; and
4) Thealterationorremovalofexistingvegetation, withoutpriorapprovalofthecity.
PriorCode, § 4-3-22) (Ord. 583-2004, passed9-27-2004; Ord. 717, passed5-20-2013)
Page17of17
CHAPTER 103 SHORT TERM RENTALS
Section
103. 01 Purpose
103. 02 Short- Term Rentals Prohibited
103. 03 Residential Rental Property
103. 04 Violation
103. 01 PURPOSE.
The City finds that short-term rentals located in residential zoning districts constitute
commercial use of residential property, conflict with the residential nature of the zoning districts,
disrupt the residential nature of neighborhoods, and have a negative impact on the livability of
residential neighborhoods. The City has received complaints from residents regarding short-term
rentals including complaints related to noise, over occupancy and illegal parking. A March 2015
report from the Los Angeles Alliance for a New Economy and an October 2014 study from the
New York Attorney General both found that short-term rentals rendered a significant number of
housing units unavailable for long term residents and raised the cost of housing. Therefore, in
order to ensure adequate housing options for residents, preserve the residential character of the
City' s residential districts, and provide for the health, safety and welfare of its residents, the City
determines that it is appropriate to limit short-term rentals to hotels, motels and similar
accommodations which are appropriately zoned and have the appropriate infrastructure and
services for short-term use.
103. 02 Short-Term Rentals Prohibited.
No parcel, as defined in City Code Section 152. 012, located in a residential zoning district
shall be rented out for a period of 15 days or less.
103. 03 Residential Rental Property.
The prohibition in Section 103. 02 applies to all properties located in residential zoning
districts regardless of the application of City Code Chapter 121.
103. 04VIOLATION
A) Separate offenses. Each day a violation of this chapter is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as under this section.
Page 1 of 2
B) Misdemeanor. Violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a
fine of up to $ 1, 000 or imprisonment for up to 90 days.
Ord. 763, passed 12- 07- 2015)
Page 2 of 2
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSE AND PERMIT PROVISIONS
Section
110. 01 Applicability of provisions
110. 02 Valid license or permit required
110. 03 Application for license or permit; issuance
110. 04 Bond and insurance requirements
110. 05 Fees
110. 06 Terms of license; nontransferability
110. 07 Duties of licensee or permittee
110. 08 Inspections and investigations
110. 01 APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
Except as otherwise provided in this code, all licenses and permits granted by the city shall
be governed by the provisions of this chapter.
Prior Code, § 3- 1- 1)
110. 02 VALID LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall conduct any activity or use any property for which a license or permit is
required by law or this code without a currently valid license or permit for the activity or use.
Prior Code, § 3- 1- 2) Penalty, see § 10. 99
110. 03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE OR PERMIT; ISSUANCE.
A) Application and Fee. Every applicant for a license shall submit an application to
the City Clerk on a form provided by the city. It shall be accompanied by payment of the
prescribed fee.
B) Issuance. If the City Clerk is satisfied that all requirements of law and this code
have been met, the City Clerk shall present the application to the Council for action, or if the
license does not require Council approval, the City Clerk shall issue the license.
Prior Code, § 3- 1- 3) ( Ord. 530, passed 4- 16- 2001; Ord. 704, passed 8- 6- 2012; Ord. 724,
passed 9- 3- 13)
110. 04 BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
A) Bond. Where a bond is required for any license or permit, the bond shall be a corporate
Page 1 of 3
surety bond executed on a form provided by the City Attorney and shall be filed with the City
Clerk. Except where otherwise provided, a bond shall be in the amount of$ 3, 000, conditioned
that the licensee or permittee shall comply with the applicable ordinances and laws pertaining to
the licensed or permitted activity and that the licensee or permittee will indemnify the city and
save it harmless from all loss or damage by reason of inadequate work performed by licensee or
permittee or by reason of accident caused by the negligence of the licensee or permittee, or the
licensee' s or permittee' s agents or employees.
B) Insurance. When a licensee or permittee is required to have in force a policy of
insurance, the policy shall be approved as to substance and form by the City Attorney. The
policy shall provide that it is noncancellable without 15 days notice to the city, and the coverage
shall be for the term of the license or permit. Satisfactory evidence of coverage by insurance
shall be filed with the City Clerk before the license or permit is issued. Each license or permit
shall terminate upon termination of the required insurance coverage.
C) Unless otherwise provided, a required policy of liability insurance shall provide for
protection in at least the following amounts: for injuries including death therefrom sustained by
any one person, $50, 000; for injuries including death resulting there from sustained by two or
more persons as the result of any one occurrence, $ 100,000; and for property damage, $ 10, 000.
Prior Code, § 3- 1- 4) Penalty, see § 10. 99
110. 05 FEES.
A) Fees established. License fees are in the amounts established in the governing sections
of this code. If the amounts are not established in this code, the City Council is hereby
authorized to establish and change the fees by ordinance.
B) Proration offees. License fees shall not be prorated unless otherwise specified by this
code, by law or by resolution of the City Council.
C) Refunds. License fees shall not be refunded in whole or in part unless otherwise
specified by this code, by law or by a decision of the City Council.
Prior Code, § 3- 1- 5) Penalty, see § 10. 99
110.06 TERMS OF LICENSE; NONTRANSFERABILITY.
A) Unless otherwise specified, a license shall be valid for a calendar year or the part of the
year for which it is issued and shall expire on the last day of February.
B) No license issued under this code may be transferred. Where a license relates to
specific premises, the license shall not be changed to another location without approval of the
Council or other licensing authority.
Prior Code, § 3- 1- 6) Penalty, see § 10. 99
Page 2 of 3
110. 07 DUTIES OF LICENSEE OR PERMITTEE.
Every licensee or permittee shall have the duties set forth in this section.
A) Inspections. The city may inspect the licensee' s or permittee' s business and examine
the licensee' s or permittee' s books and records pursuant to § 10.20.
B) Compliance with law. Licensee or permittee shall comply with laws, ordinances and
regulations applicable to the licensed business, activity or property.
C) Display of license. Licensee or permittee shall display the license or other insignia
given as evidence of the license in a conspicuous place on the premises, vehicle or device to
which the license relates. If the license is not so related, the license shall be carried on the
licensee' s person whenever carrying on the licensed activity.
D) Unlawful disposition. Licensee or permittee shall not lend or give any other person the
license or license insignia.
Prior Code, § 3- 1- 7) Penalty, see § 10. 99
110. 08 INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
Any city official or employee having a duty to perform with reference to a license under this
code and any police officer may inspect pursuant to § 10.20 or examine any licensee, licensee' s
business or premises to enforce compliance with applicable provisions of this code.
Prior Code, § 3- 1- 8)
Page 3 of 3
CHAPTER 111: LIQUORCONTROL
Section
MunicipalLiquorDispensaries
111.001 Dispensariesestablished; userequired
111.002 Locations
111.003 Employees
111.004 Prohibitedconduct
111.005 Dispensaryrevenue
IntoxicatingLiquorand3.2% MaltLiquor
111.020 Statelawadopted
111.021 Definitions
111.022 Licenserequired
111.023 Classificationsoflicenses
111.024 Requirementsforthelicensee
111.025 Requirementsforthepremise
111.026 Requirementsforcorporations, partnershipsorassociations
111.027 Licenseapplication
111.028 Fees
111.029 Investigation
111.030 Hearingrequirements
111.031 Insurancerequirements
111.032 Grantingortransferoflicense; voterequired; buildingsunderconstruction
111.033 Postinglicense
111.034 Reporttostate
111.035 Hoursofoperation
111.036 Compliancewithlaws
111.037 Responsibilitiesoflicensee; orderlyconduct
111.038 Rightofinspection
111.039 Minors
111.040 Prohibitedacts
111.041 Groundsforrevocation
111.042 Penalties
111.043 Inactivelicense
111.044 Hearingnotice
111.045 Costs
111.046 Validity
ClubLicenses
111.060 Purpose
Page1of37
111.061 Statelawadopted
111.062 Definitions
111.063 Buildingorpremiserestrictions
PrivateSet-UpLiquorLicense
111.075 Definitions
111.076 Limitationsonliquorconsumptionanddisplayandonfurnishingset-ups
111.077 Restrictionsonapprovingpermits
111.078 Requiredconditionsforfurnishingset-upsandforthedisplayorconsumptionof
liquor
111.079 Limitationswherepermitshavebeengranted
111.080 Grantingoflicense
111.081 Fee
111.082 Reportofviolations
111.083 Statestatutesincorporated
MUNICIPALLIQUORDISPENSARIES
111.001 DISPENSARIESESTABLISHED; USEREQUIRED.
Nointoxicatingliquor, intoxicatingmaltliquororwineshallbesold, orcausedtobesoldat
off-salewithintheCitybyanyperson, orbyanystoreorestablishment, orbyanyagentor
employeeofsuchperson, storeorestablishment, exceptby (1) theCityandonthepremisesin
theCityoccupiedbythemunicipalliquordispensaryfortheoff-saleofintoxicatingliquor,
intoxicatingmaltliquororwine; or (2) abrewpub, smallbrewer, ormicrodistilleryholdingan
off-salelicenseasprovidedforinsection111.023, subsections (L)(2), ( M)(2), and (N)(2). There
isherebyestablishedmunicipalliquordispensariesfortheonandoff-saleofintoxicatingliquor,
intoxicatingmaltliquororwine.
PriorCode, § 3-2-1) ( Ord. 440, passed11-18-1996; Ord. 713, passed1-22-13; Ord. 766,
passed1-19-2016)
111.002 LOCATIONS.
ThemunicipalliquordispensariesshallbelocatedatMarketplaceLiquorStore, McColl
PondEnvironmentalLearningCenter, Hy-VeeandSavageCityHall.
PriorCode, § 3-2-2) ( Ord. 440, passed11-18-1996; Ord. 713, passed1-22-13; Ord. 777, passed
11-7-2016; Ord. 782, passed3-6-2017)
111.003 EMPLOYEES.
A) Liquorstoremanager. Thedispensariesshallbeintheimmediatechargeofaliquor
storemanager(s) selectedbytheCouncilandpaidcompensationasisfixedbytheCouncil. The
Page2of37
managershallfurnishasuretybondtothecity, conditioneduponthefaithfuldischargeofthe
manager’sduties, inthesumastheCouncilspecifies. Thebondpremiumshallbepaidbythe
city. ThemanagershalloperatethedispensariesunderthedirectionoftheCityAdministrator
andshallperformthedutiesinconnectionwiththedispensariesasmaybeimposedbytheCity
AdministratorortheCityCouncil. ThemanagershallbedirectlyresponsibletotheCity
Administratorfortheconductofthedispensariesinfullcompliancewiththissubchapterand
withalllawsrelatingtothesaleofliquor, beerandwine.
B) Additionalemployees. TheCouncilshallalsoappointanyadditionalfull-time
employeesasmayberequiredforthedispensariesandshallfixtheircompensation. The
managermayhirepart-timeemployees. AtthediscretionoftheCouncil, theemployeesmaybe
requiredtofurnishsuretybondsconditionedforthefaithfuldischargeoftheirdutiesinamounts
astheCouncilmayspecify.
C) Restrictions. Nominorshallbeemployedinthedispensaries. Nooneundertheageof
21yearsshallsellalcoholicbeverages.
PriorCode, § 3-2-3) ( Ord. 440, passed11-18-1996) Penalty, see § 10.99
111.004 PROHIBITEDCONDUCT.
A) Declarationofpolicy. TheCityCouncilhasdeterminedthatthecityhascertain
obligationsanddutiestoexercisereasonablecareinmaintainingorderlypremisesforthe
protectionofpatronsintheSavagemunicipaldispensaries. Ithasfurtherdeterminedthatin
ordertoprotectthepatronsoftheSavagemunicipaldispensaries, anyindividualswhohave
demonstratedvicious, pugnaciousactsshouldbeexcludedfromthepremisesofthedispensaries
toprotectthesafety, goodorder, generalwelfareandconvenienceofthepublic.
B) Conductprohibited. WhoeverengagesinanyofthefollowinginoraroundtheSavage
municipaldispensariesknowing, orhavingreasonablegroundstoknow, thatitwill, orwilltend
toalarm, angerordisturbothers, orprovokeanassaultorbreachofthepeace, isguiltyof
disorderlyconduct, whichisamisdemeanor:
1) Engagesinoffensive, obsceneorabusivelanguage, orinboisterousandnoisy
conducttendingreasonablytoarousealarm, angerorresentmentinothers;
2) Engagesinbrawlingorfighting, orthreatenstoengageinbrawlingorfighting; or
3) Enters, duringtheperiodofhisorherexclusion, theSavagemunicipalliquor
dispensariesafterhavingbeengivennoticeofbeingexcludedtherefrom.
C) Enforcement. Wheneveranyindividualhasbeenobservedengaginginconduct, which,
inthejudgmentofthemanageroftheSavagemunicipalliquordispensariesorthemanager’s
dulyappointedagents, violatesorappearstoviolateanyprovisionofdivision (B) hereof, the
managerordulyappointedagentmayservenoticeontheindividualthattheindividualis
excludedfromthedispensariesforthetimeperiodassetforthherein, to-wit:
Page3of37
1) Forthefirstnoticeservedonanyindividual, exclusionofupto90days;
2) Forthesecondnoticeservedonanyindividual, exclusionofuptosixmonths; and
3) Forthethirdnoticeservedonanyindividual, perpetualexclusion.
D) Permanentexclusion. Iftheconduct, inthejudgmentofthemanager, isathreattothe
safetyofanyoneinthedispensary, themanagermayexcludethatpersonimmediatelyand
permanentlyfromthedispensary. TheexcludedpersonmayappealtotheCityCouncil.
PriorCode, § 3-2-4) ( Ord. 440, passed11-18-1996) Penalty, see § 10.99
111.005 DISPENSARYREVENUE.
A) LiquorDispensaryFund. AMunicipalLiquorDispensaryFundisherebycreatedin
whichallrevenuesreceivedfromtheoperationofthedispensariesshallbedeposited, orthe
revenuesshallbedepositedtoanyotherfundoraccount, whichisormaybeestablishedbythe
Councilforthepurposeofpayinginterestandprincipalonanybondsforwhichliquor
dispensaryrevenuesmaybeproperlypledgedandfromwhichallordinaryoperatingexpenses
shallbepaid. AnyamountsitmaybenecessarytoborrowfromtheGeneralFundofthecityfor
theinitialcostsofrent, fixturesandstock, orforoperatingexpensesshallbereimbursedtothat
FundoutofthefirstavailablemoniescomingintotheDispensaryFundthereafter. Surpluses
accumulatingintheDispensaryFundmaybetransferredtotheGeneralFundortoanyother
appropriatefundofthecitybyresolutionoftheCouncilandexpendedforanymunicipal
purpose.
B) Receiptsanddisbursements. Thehandlingofmunicipalliquordispensaryreceiptsand
disbursementsshallcomplywiththeprocedurebylawforthereceiptsanddisbursementsofcity
fundsgenerally.
C) Auditofaccounts. TheCouncilshallprovideassoonaspossible, followingthecloseof
eachfiscalyear, anauditoftheaccountsofthemunicipalliquordispensariesforthatfiscalyear
byaqualifiedcertifiedpublicaccountant.
PriorCode, § 3-2-5) ( Ord. 440, passed11-18-1996)
INTOXICATINGLIQUORAND3.2% MALTLIQUOR
111.020 STATELAWADOPTED.
Excepttotheextenttheprovisionsofthischapteraremorerestrictive, theprovisionsof
M.S. Chapter340A, asitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime, relatingtothedefinitionofterms,
licensing, consumption, sales, hoursofsaleandallothermatterspertainingtotheretailsale,
distributionandconsumptionofintoxicatingliquorand3.2% maltliquorareadoptedandmadea
Page4of37
partofthischapterasifsetoutinfull.
PriorCode, § 3-2-6) ( Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001)
111.021 DEFINITIONS.
Forthepurposeofthischapter, thefollowingdefinitionsshallapplyunlessthecontext
clearlyindicatesorrequiresadifferentmeaning.
3.2% MALTLIQUOR. Maltliquorcontainingnotlessthan .05% alcoholbyvolumenor
morethan3.2% alcoholbyweight.
BREWER. Apersonwhomanufacturesmaltliquorforsale.
BREWPUB. Abrewerwhoalsoholdsoneormoreretailon-salelicensesandwho
manufacturesfewerthan3,500barrelsofmaltliquorinayear, atanyonelicensedpremises, the
entireproductionofwhichissolelyforconsumptionontaponanylicensedpremisesownedby
thebrewer, orforoff-salefromthoselicensedpremisesaspermittedbyM.S. §3 40A.24,s ubd. 2.
BREWERTAPROOM. Anestablishmentlocatedonoradjacenttopremisesownedbya
brewerlicensedunderM.S. §3 40A.301, subdivision6,c lause (c), i()o,r (j)a ndthatproduces
lessthantwohundredfiftythousand (250,000) barrelsofmaltliquorannually, andwheretheonsaleandconsumptionofmaltliquorproducedbythebrewerispermittedpursuanttoM.
S.
340A.26.
COCKTAILROOM. Anestablishmentonthepremisesoforadjacenttoonedistillery
locationownedbyadistiller, andwheretheon-saleofdistilledspiritsproducedbythedistilleris
permittedpursuanttoM.S. §3 40A.22.
DISTILLEDSPIRITS. Ethylalcohol, hydratedoxideofethyl, spiritsofwine, whiskey,
rum, brandy, gin, andotherdistilledspirits, includingalldilutionsandmixturesthereof, for
nonindustrialuse.
GROWLER. Maltliquorsoldoff-salebyasmallbrewerorbrewpub, whichhasbeen
producedandpackagedbythebrewerin64-ouncecontainerscommonlyknownasgrowlersorin
750milliliterbottles.
HOTELorMOTEL. Anyestablishmenthavingaresidentproprietorormanagerwhere, in
considerationofpaymenttherefore, foodandlodgingareregularlyfurnished; whichmaintains
fortheuseofitsguestsnotlessthan25guestroomswithbeddingandotherusual, suitableand
necessaryfurnishingsineachroom; whichisprovidedwithamainentrancewithasuitable
lobby, deskandofficefortheregistrationofitsguestsonthegroundfloor; whichemploysan
adequatestafftoprovidesuitableandusualservice; andwhichmaintainsunderthesame
managementandcontrolastherestoftheestablishmentandhas, asanintegralpartthereof, a
diningroomwithappropriatefacilitiesforseatingnotlessthan30guestsatonetime, wherethe
generalpublicis, inconsiderationofpaymenttherefore, servedmealsattables.
Page5of37
INTOXICATINGLIQUOR. Ethylalcohol, distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous, and
maltbeveragescontainingmorethan3.2% ofalcoholbyweight.
MALTLIQUOR. Anybeer, aleorotherbeveragemadefrommaltbyfermentationand
containingnotlessthan .05% alcoholbyvolume.
MANUFACTURER. Everyperson, whobyanyprocessofmanufacture, fermenting,
brewing, distilling, refining, rectifying, blendingorbythecombinationofdifferentmaterials,
preparesorproducesintoxicatingliquorsforsale.
MICRODISTILLERY. Adistilleryoperatedwithinthestateproducingpremium, distilled
spiritsintotalquantitynottoexceed40,000proofgallonsinacalendaryear, whichdistilleryis
licensedunderM.S. Ch. 340A.
OFF-SALE. Thesaleofbeer, wine, distilledspirits, intoxicatingor3.2% maltliquorin
originalpackagesforconsumptionoffthepremisesonly, pursuanttostatelawandcity
ordinance.
ON-SALE. Thesaleofbeer, wine, intoxicatingor3.2% maltliquorbytheglassorbythe
drinkforconsumptiononthepremisesonly, pursuanttostatelawandcityordinance.
ORIGINALPACKAGE. Thebottleorsealedcontainerinwhichtheliquorisplacedbythe
manufacturer.
PERSON. Anaturalpersonofeithersex, partnership, corporationandassociationof
personsandtheagentormanagerofanyoftheaforesaid. Thesingularnumberincludesthe
plural.
RESTAURANT. Anestablishmentwheremealsareregularlyservedattablestothegeneral
publicforconsumptiononthepremise.
SALEorSELLorSOLD. Allbartersandallmannersoffurnishingintoxicatingliquor,
wineor3.2% maltliquorincludingfurnishingsinviolationorevasionoflaw.
SMALLBREWER. AbrewerlicensedunderM.S. §3 40A.301, subdivision6,c lause (c), i(),
or (j).
WHOLESALER. Anypersonengagedinthebusinessofsellingintoxicatingliquorfrom
stockmaintainedinawarehousewithinthestatetoretaildealers.
WINE. Theproductmadefromthenormalalcoholicfermentationofgrapes, includingstill
wine, sparkingandcarbonatedwine, winemadefromcondensedgrapemust, winemadefrom
otheragriculturalproductsthansound, ripegrapes, imitationwine, compoundssoldaswine,
vermouth, cider, perryandsake, ineachinstancecontainingnotlessthan .05% normorethan
24% alcoholbyvolumefornonindustrialuse. WINE doesnotincludedistilledspiritsas
Page6of37
definedinM.S. Ch. 340A.
PriorCode, § 3-2-7) ( Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001; Ord. 766, passed1-19-2016)
111.022 LICENSEREQUIRED.
Noperson, exceptasprovidedinM.S. §3 40A.301, Subd. 1and8,a sitmaybeamended
fromtimetotime,M .S. §3 40A.510, asitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime,a ndmanufacturers
andwholesalerstotheextentauthorizedbylaw, shalldirectlyorindirectlydealin, sell, keepfor
saleordeliveranyintoxicatingliquor, 3.2% maltliquororwineaspartofacommercial
transactionwithoutfirsthavingreceivedalicensetodosoasprovidedinthissubchapter; nor
shallanyprivatecluborpublicplace, directlyorindirectly, oruponanypretenseorbyany
device, allowtheconsumptionordisplayofintoxicatingliquororserveanyliquidforthe
purposeofmixingwithintoxicatingliquorwithoutfirstobtainingalicensefromthecityas
providedinthissubchapter, otherthansalesbytheCityatitsmunicipalliquordispensary.
PriorCode, § 3-2-8) ( Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001; Ord. 713, passed1-22-13) Penalty, see §
10.99
111.023 CLASSIFICATIONSOFLICENSES.
A) On-saleintoxicatingliquorlicense.
1) Torestaurants. Anon-saleintoxicatingliquorlicenseshallbegrantedtoaperson
orpersonswhoownoroccupyarestaurantwherefoodispreparedandservedforconsumption
onthepremise. Therestaurantmusthave: afairmarketvalueofatleast $300,000includingthe
building, fixturesandequipment, butexcludingland; aminimumsquarefootageof3,500; a
printedmenuandwaitstaff, alicenseforfoodbytheMinnesotaStateDepartmentofHealth,
seatingforaminimumof30guests.
a) Inthecaseofamultipurposebuilding, onlythatportionofthebuildingdirectly
attributabletothepreparation, handling, storingorservingoffoodandliquorshallbeconsidered
indeterminingthesquarefootageofthelicensedpremise.
b) Theminimumsquarefootagerequiredfortherenewalortransferoflicenses
issuedpriortotheeffectivedateofthisprovisionshallbethesquarefootageofthelicensed
premiseatthetimethelicensewasfirstissued, plusanysubsequentsquarefootagevoluntarily
addedtothelicensedpremise.
2) Toclubs. Anon-saleintoxicatinglicenseshallbegrantedtoabonafideclubin
accordancewith §§1 11.060through111.061ofthischapter.
Page7of37
3) Tohotelsandmotels. Anon-saleintoxicatinglicenseshallbegrantedtoaperson
orpersonswhoownoroccupyarestaurantandloungewhichisopentothegeneralpublic, and
whichispartofanintegratedhotelormotelcomplexthatmaintainsfortheuseofitsguestsnot
lessthan25roomsorunits. Thebarandrestaurantportionofthehotelormotelmusthave: afair
marketvalueofatleast $250,000includingfixturesandequipment, butexcludingland; alicense
forfoodbytheMinnesotaStateDepartmentofHealth, seatingforaminimumof30guests.
4) CompliancewithZoningCode. Thepremiseforanon-saleintoxicatingliquor
licenseshallcomplywithallapplicablerequirementsoftheZoningCode.
5) Additionallicense. Alicenseeforon-saleintoxicatingliquormayalsosellon-sale
3.2% maltliquorwithoutobtaininganadditionallicenseunderthissection.
6) Licenseeligibility. Forpurposesofdetermininglicenseeligibility, theCityCouncil
may, attheexpenseoftheapplicant, provideforanindependentappraisalofpremiseforwhich
anon-saleintoxicatingliquorlicensehasbeenrequested.
B) On-salewinelicenses. On-salewinelicensesshallbeissuedonlytorestaurantsmeeting
thequalificationsofM.S. §3 40A.404,S ubd. 5,a sitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime,a nd
shallpermitonlythesaleofwinenotexceeding14% byvolumeforconsumptiononthelicensed
premiseonlyinconjunctionwiththesaleoffood.
C) On-salemaltliquor. Theholderofawinelicenseandon-sale3.2% maltliquorlicense,
whosegrossreceiptsareatleast60% attributabletothesaleoffood, mayuponapprovalbythe
CityCouncilsellmaltliquoron-salewithoutanadditionallicense.
D) On-sale3.2% maltliquor. Anon-sale3.2% maltliquorlicensemaybegrantedonlyto
bonafideclubs, restaurantsandhotelsormotelswherefoodispreparedandservedfor
consumptiononthelicensedpremise.
E) Off-sale3.2% maltliquor. Off-sale3.2% maltliquorlicensesshallpermitthesaleof
3.2% maltliquoratretailintheoriginalpackageforconsumptionoffthepremiseonly.
F) Off-saleintoxicatinglicense. Off-saleintoxicatinglicensesshallonlybeissuedtobrew
pubs, smallbrewers, andmicrodistilleriesasprovidedbydivisions (L)(2), ( M)(2), and (N)(2) of
thissection. Nootheroff-saleintoxicatinglicensesshallbeissuedinthecity.
G) Privateset-upliquorlicense. Privateset-upliquorlicenseshallbeissuedinaccordance
withdivision (D) ofthissection.
H) On-saleSundayliquorlicense. Theelectorateofthecity, havingheretoforeauthorized
thesame, aSundayintoxicatingliquorlicensemaybeissuedtohotels, motels, restaurantsand
bonafideclubslicensedforon-saleintoxicatingliquor, inconjunctionwiththeservingoffood.
I) Temporaryon-salelicense. TheCityCouncilmayissueatemporarylicenseforthesale
ofintoxicatingliquor, 3.2% beer, maltliquorand/orwinenotexceeding14% volumetoaclubor
Page8of37
charitable, religiousornonprofitorganizationinexistenceforatleastthreeyearsorapolitical
committeeregisteredunderM.S. §1 0A.14,a sitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime,i n
connectionwithasocialeventwithintheCitysponsoredbythelicensee. Thelicensemaybefor
aperiodofonetofourdaysinconnectionwithasocialeventsponsoredbythelicenseeand
withintheboundariesofthecity. Thefeeshallbeasestablishedbyordinance. Thelicenseshall
besubjecttorequirementssetforthbyM.S. §3 40A.404, Subd. 10,a sitmaybeamendedfrom
timetotime, thissection, andbythefollowingspecialrequirements. (PriorCode, § 3-2-9) (Ord.
804, passed4-15-2019)
1) Licensedpremises. TheCityCouncilmayrequirethelicensedpremisestohavea
physicalbarrierseparatingthelicensedpremisesfromotherareasastopreventthepassingof
patronsinlocationsotherthanthroughapprovedentrancesandexits.
2) Salesandconsumption. Nosalesorconsumptionofalcoholicbeveragesshallbe
permittedbeyondthelicensedpremises.
3) Manager. TheCityCouncilmayrequirethatthelicensedpremisesbeunderthe
directsupervisionofamanagerapprovedbythePoliceChief. Andapprovingthequalifications
ofthemanager, thepoliceshallconsiderthemanager’sexperienceinoverseeingtheoperationof
anestablishmentthatservesalcoholicbeverages.
4) Policeprotection. IfrequiredbytheCityCouncil, theapplicantshallprovide, at
theapplicant’sexpense, policingofthelicensedpremisesbysecuritypersonnelapprovedbythe
PoliceChief.
5) Hoursofsaleandconsumption. Inadditiontotheprovisionsof §1 11.035 ofthis
subchapter, theCityCouncilmayfurtherrestrictthesaleandconsumptionofalcoholic
beveragespursuanttoatemporarylicensetocertainhours.
6) Saleprices. Nolicenseeshallpromotetheconsumptionofalcoholicbeverageson
thelicensedpremisesbyanymeansormethodswhichresultinpriceswhicharelessthanthose
normallychargedduringthelicensedtermincluding, butnotlimitedto, two-for-oneoffers,
happyhours, orothersimilaroffers, privatecoupons, gamesorbarters.
7) Identification. Theapplicantshallrequireproofoflegalagetoconsumeatthetime
ofsaleofanalcoholicbeverage. Furthermore, theapplicantshallrequireeachpersontowhoma
saleismadetowearawristbandoranidentificationstampontheperson’shandtoidentifythat
thepersonisoflegalagetoconsumealcoholicbeverages.
8) Otherrequirements. TheCityCouncilalsomayimposeotherrequirementsasit
deemsnecessarytopromotepublicsafety.
J) Temporaryexpansionofpremiseslicense. TheCityCouncilmayallowfortheissuance
ofatemporaryexpansionofpremiseslicense (“temporaryexpansionlicense”) toalicenseewith
avalidandpre-existingon-saleintoxicatingliquorlicense. Thepremisesmayonlybeexpanded
toanareathatiscompactandcontiguoustothepermanentlylicensedpremises (“expanded
Page9of37
premises”). Thetemporaryexpansionlicensemaybeobtainedforaperiodofonetofourdaysin
connectionwithasocialeventsponsoredbythelicenseeandwithintheboundariesofthecity.
Thelicensefeeshallbeasestablishedbyordinance. UponCityCouncilapprovalofatemporary
expansionofpremiseslicense, applicantshallbeexemptfromtheprovisionssetforthin §§
152.490through152.502, § 152.076and § 152.097oftheSavageZoningCode. Thetemporary
expansionlicenseshallbesubjecttorequirementssetforthbyM.S. Ch. 304A, asitmaybe
amendedfromtimetotime, andbythefollowingrequirements.
1) Applicationforatemporaryexpansionofpremiseslicense. Thelicenseeshall
providethefollowinginformationonformsprovidedbytheCityClerk:
a) Thenameandaddressesoftheon-salelicenseholderandiftheholderisa
company, thenameandaddressesofitsowners, officersorpartners;
b) Aspecificdescriptionanddiagramoftheareainwhichthetemporary
expansionactivityistooccur. Thisareamustbecompactandcontiguoustothepermanently
licensedpremisesandbesurroundedbyphysicalenclosuredevices. Thediagramshould
indicatehowtheareawillbephysicallyenclosedandshowthelocationoftables, chairs, food
andbeveragestationsandanyotherimportantfeatures;
c) Thepurposeforwhichthetemporaryexpansionissoughtandadescriptionof
theplannedactivitiesincludingprojectedattendance, entertainmentincludinganyamplified
music, foodandbeverageservice, securityplans, parkingandhoursofoperation; and
d) OtherinformationastheCityCouncilmaydeemnecessary.
2) Salesandconsumption. Nosalesorconsumptionofalcoholicbeveragesshallbe
permittedbeyondtheexpandedpremises.
3) Policeprotection. IfrequiredbytheCityCouncil, theapplicantshallprovide, at
theapplicant’sexpense, policingofthelicensedpremisesbysecuritypersonnelapprovedbythe
PoliceChief.
4) Hoursofsaleandconsumption. Inadditiontotheprovisionsof §1 11.035ofthis
subchapter, theCityCouncilmayfurtherrestrictthesaleandconsumptionofalcoholic
beveragespursuanttoatemporaryexpansionlicensetocertainhours.
5) Identification. Theapplicantshallrequireproofoflegalagetoconsumeatthetime
ofsaleofanalcoholicbeverage. Furthermore, theCityCouncilmayrequireeachpersonto
whomasaleismadetowearawristbandoranidentificationstampontheperson’shandto
identifythatthepersonisoflegalagetoconsumealcoholicbeverages.
6) Annuallimit. Nolicenseeshallbegrantedatemporaryexpansionlicensemore
thantwotimespercalendaryear.
7) Proofofinsurance. Theapplicantshallfileproofthattheliabilityinsurance
Page10of37
requiredbythiscodeandbyM.S. Chapter340A, asitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime, apply
totheexpandedpremises.
8) Amplifiedmusic. Allspeakers, usedtoamplifymusicoranyotheractivity, aretobe
setupatgroundlevel. Anydeviationfromgroundlevelamplificationmusthavepriorapproval
bytheCityCouncilaspartoftheapplicationprocess.
9) Decibellevel. Outdooreventsassociatedwiththeexpandedpremisesshallnot
exceedadecibellevelof65decibelsatadistanceof100feetfromtheeventsite. Intheevent
themaximumdecibellevelisexceeded, thetemporaryexpansionlicensemayberevokedandthe
licenseshallimmediatelydiscontinuetheevent.
10) Foodvendors. Iffoodisservedattheeventanditisnotpreparedbythe
permanentlylicensedpremises, allfoodvendorsparticipatingintheeventmustbeproperly
licensedandabidebyallMinnesotaDepartmentofHealthregulations.
11) Tents. Iftheeventoraportionoftheeventwillbeheldunderatent, thelicensee
shallprovideplansshowingtheproposedlocationofthetent, tentlayout, numberandsizeof
exitsandfirepreventionmeasures. ThetentshallbeincompliancewiththeInternationalFire
CodeandshallbesubjecttoinspectionbytheSavageFireDepartment.
12) Otherrequirements. TheCityCouncilalsomayimposeotherrequirementsasit
deemsnecessarytopromotepublicsafety, healthandwelfare.
K) Salesbycatererunderpermitissuedbystate. Anypersonissuedacaterer’spermitto
servealcoholicbeveragespursuanttoM.S. §3 40A.404, Subd. 12shall, whenservingalcoholic
beveragesinthecity, besubjecttothemorestringentoftherestrictionsandregulationsinthis
divisionandtherestrictionsandregulationsofthecitywhichissuedthecatereritsrestaurant
licenseforthesaleintoxicatingliquor.
1) Thepremiseatwhichthecateredeventisheld (hereinafterthe “premise”) shall
haveafairmarketvalueofaleast $300,000includingthebuilding, fixturesandequipment, but
excludingland; aminimumsquarefootageof3,500; awaitstaff; andseatingforaminimumof
30guests.
2) ThecaterermusthavealicenseforfoodfromtheStateDepartmentofHealth.
3) Foodsales, whethermadeindividuallytopeopleattendinganeventatthepremises
ortothepersonhiringthecaterermustaccountfor60% ofthecaterer’sgrossreceiptsfromthe
cateredevent.
4) Nosalesorconsumptionofalcoholicbeveragesshallbepermittedbeyondthe
buildingorinthecaseofamulti-purposebuilding, beyondthatportionofthebuildingavailable
tothecateredevent.
5) ThecaterershallnotifythePoliceChief15workingdayspriortothecateredevent.
Page11of37
6) IfrequiredbythePoliceChief, thecaterershallprovide, atthecaterer’sexpense,
policingofthepremisesbysecuritypersonnelapprovedbythePoliceChief.
7) Nosalesofalcoholicbeveragesmaybemadeinanytemporarystructureincluding
butnotlimitedtoatent.
8) Hoursofsaleandconsumptionshallcomplywiththeprovisionsof §1 11.035.
L) BrewPubLicenses.
1) On-SaleBrewPubLicense. Abrewpubmaybeissuedanon-saleintoxicating
liquorlicenseoranon-sale3.2% maltliquorlicenseforarestaurantoperatedintheplaceof
manufacture. On-salebrewpublicensesaresubjecttoallconditionsandrestrictionscontainedin
M.S. §3 40A.24.
2) Off-SaleBrewPubLicense. Abrewpubthatholdsanon-salebrewpublicensemay
beissuedamaltliquoroff-salebrewpublicenseforthesaleofgrowlers. Off-salebrewpub
licensesaresubjecttoallconditionsandrestrictionscontainedinM.S. §§3 40A.24and
340A.285.
M) SmallBrewerLicenses.
1) On-SaleBrewerTaproomLicense. Asmallbrewermaybeissuedamaltliquoronsalebrewertaproomlicense.
On-salebrewertaproomlicensesaresubjecttoallconditionsand
restrictionscontainedinM.S. §3 40A.26.
2) Off-SaleSmallBrewerLicense. Asmallbrewermaybeissuedanoff-salesmall
brewerlicensefortheoff-saleofgrowlersatitslicensedpremises. Off-salesmallbrewerlicenses
aresubjecttoallconditionsandrestrictionscontainedinM.S. §3 40A.28and340A.285.
N) MicrodistilleryLicenses.
1) On-SaleCocktailRoomLicense. Amicrodistillerymaybeissuedanon-salecocktail
roomlicensefortheon-saleofdistilledspirits. Cocktailroomlicensesaresubjecttoall
conditionsandrestrictionscontainedinM.S. §3 40A.22.
2) Off-SaleMicrodistilleryLicense. Amicrodistillerymaybeissuedanoff-sale
microdistillerylicensefortheoff-saleofdistilledspiritsproducedonthelicensedpremises.
Microdistilleryoff-salelicensesaresubjecttoallconditionsandrestrictionscontainedinM.S. §
340A.22.
PriorCode, § 3-2-9) ( Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001; Ord. 621, passed3-19-2007; Ord. 626, passed
6-4-2007; Ord. 655, passed8-3-2009; Ord. 766, passed1-19-2016) Penalty, see § 10.99
111.024 REQUIREMENTSFORTHELICENSEE.
Page12of37
A) Nolicenseshallbegrantedtoanyperson:
1) Under21yearsofage;
2) Whohasbeenconvictedofafelonyorviolationofafederalorstatelaworlocal
ordinancerelatingtothemanufactureortransportationofintoxicatingliquors;
3) Whoisamanufacturerorwholesalerofalcoholicbeveragesorwhoseretail
businesssellingalcoholicbeveragesisowneddirectlyorindirectlybyamanufactureror
wholesalerofalcoholicbeverages;
4) Who, withinoneyearoftheapplication, shallhavehadalicenserevokedforthe
violationofanyprovisionsofthissubchapterorstatelawregulatingthesaleof3.2% maltliquor
orwine;
5) Whois, orduringtheperiodofthislicense, becomestheholderofafederalretail
liquordealer’sspecialtaxstampforthesaleofintoxicatingliquoratanyplaceunlesstherehas
alsobeenissuedalocallicensetosellintoxicatingliquorattheplace;
6) Whoisnottheproprietoroftheestablishmentforwhichthelicenseisissued;
7) Nopersonshallownaninterestasdefinedhereininmorethanthreeestablishments
orbusinessesforwhichan “on-sale” intoxicatingliquorlicensehasbeengranted;
8) Who, ifacorporation, doesnothaveamanagerwhoiseligiblepursuanttothe
provisionsofthissubchapter; or
9) Whoisthespouseofapersonineligibleforalicensepursuanttotheprovisionof
thissubchapterorwho, inthejudgmentoftheCityCouncil, isnottherealpartyininterestor
beneficialownerofthebusinessoperated, ortobeoperatedunderthelicense.
B) ThetermINTERESTasusedinthissectionincludesanymonetaryinterestinthe
ownership, operation, managementorbonafideloans; bonafidefixedsumrentalagreements;
bonafideopenaccountsorotherobligationsheldwithorwithoutsecurityarisingoutofthe
ordinaryandregularcourseofbusinessofsellingorleasingmerchandise, fixturesorsuppliesto
theestablishment; oranyinterestof10% orlessinanycorporationholdingalicense. Aperson
whoreceivesmoniesfromtimetotimedirectlyorindirectlyfromalicensee, intheabsenceofa
bonafideconsiderationthereforeandexcludingbonafidegiftsordonations, shallbedeemedto
haveamonetaryinterestintheretaillicense. Indeterminingbonafide, thereasonablevalueof
thegoodsorthingsreceivedasconsiderationforanypaymentbythelicenseeandallotherfacts
reasonablytendingtoproveordisprovetheexistenceofanypurposefulschemeorarrangement
toevadetheprohibitionsofthissectionshallbeconsidered.
PriorCode, § 3-2-10) (Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001) Penalty, see § 10.99
Page13of37
111.025 REQUIREMENTSFORTHEPREMISE.
A) Nolicensemaybegrantedorrenewedforoperationonanypremisesonwhichtaxes,
assessmentsorotherfinancialclaimsofthecityaredelinquentandunpaid.
B) Nolicensemaybegrantedforpremisesprohibitedfromholdingalicensebystatelaw.
C) Nolicensemaybeissuedforapremiseownedbyapersontowhomalicensecouldnot
begrantedunderthissubchapter, exceptanyownerwhoisaminor, alienorapersonwhohas
beenconvictedofacrimeotherthanaviolationofM.S. Chapter340A, asitmaybeamended
fromtimetotime.
D) Unobstructedview. Allwindowsinthefrontofanyplacelicensedfor “on-sale”
intoxicatingliquorshallbeofclearglassandtheviewofthewholeinteriorshallbeunobstructed
byscreens, curtainsorpartitions. Thereshallbenopartition, box, stall, screen, curtainorother
device, whichobstructstheviewofanypartoftheroomfromthegeneralobservationofpersons
intheroom; butpartitions, subdivisionsorpanelsnothigherthan48inchesfromthefloorshall
notbeconsideredasobstructions.
E) Effectoflicense. Nolicenseshallbeeffectivebeyondthespacenamedinthelicense
forwhichitwasgranted.
F) Enlargementandalterations. Proposedenlargement, alterationorextensionof
premisespreviouslylicensedshallbereportedtotheCityCouncilatorbeforethetime
applicationismadeforabuildingpermitforanychangeandthelicenseeshallalsogiveany
informationasisrequiredbythiscitycode.
PriorCode, § 3-2-11) (Ord. 441, passed12-2-1996; Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001) Penalty, see §
10.99
111.026 REQUIREMENTSFORCORPORATIONS, PARTNERSHIPSOR
ASSOCIATIONS.
A) Allcorporations, partnershipsandassociationsmustdelegateanoperatingmanager.
Theoperatingmanagermustbethepersonworkingfulltimeatthelicensedpremiseswhoisin
daytodaychargeofliquorsales.
B) Licensesissuedtocorporationsshallbevalidonlysolongasthereisnochangeinthe
officersorownershipinterestofthecorporationwithinthemeaningof §1 11.024ofthis
subchapter, unlessthechangeisapprovedbytheCouncil, inwhichevent, thelicensesshall
continueinforceuntiltheendofthethencurrentlicenseyear. Therequirementconcerning
changeinofficersdoesnotapplytocorporationswhosestockistradedontheNewYorkor
Americanstockexchanges.
C) Licensesissuedtoassociationsorpartnershipsshallbevalidonlysolongasthereisno
changeinthepartnershiporassociation, unlessthechangeisapprovedbytheCouncil, inwhich
event, thelicenseshallcontinueinforceuntiltheendofthecurrentlicenseyear.
Page14of37
D) Corporations, partnerships, orassociationsholdinglicensesshallsubmitwrittennotice
totheCityClerkofanychangesdescribedhereinonorbefore30dayspriortotheeffectivedate
ofanychange. Notwithstandingthedefinitionofinterestasgivenin § 111.024ofthis
subchapter, inthecaseofacorporation, thelicenseeshallnotifytheCityClerkwhenaperson
notlistedintheapplicationacquiresaninterestwhich, togetherwiththatofaspouse, parent,
brother, sister, orchild, exceeds5% andshallgiveallinformationaboutthepersonasisrequired
ofapersonpursuanttotheprovisionsofthissubchapter.
E) CorporationsholdinglicensesshallsubmitwrittennoticetotheCityClerkofany
changeinoperatingmanagersatleasttendayspriortotheeffectivedateofthechange. The
writtennoticeshalldesignatethenewoperatingmanagerandshallcontainalloftheinformation
aboutthepersonasrequiredofasingleapplicant. Thenewoperatingmanagershallbesubjectto
theinvestigationrequiredherein.
F) Thedesignationofanewoperatingmanagershallnotcausethecorporation’slicenseto
becomeinvalidbeforeadecisionisrenderedbytheCityCouncil, providedpropernoticeand
applicationaremade. Aproposednewoperationmanagershallbereferredtoastheinterim
manager. IntheeventaninterimoperatingmanagerisrejectedbytheCityCouncil, the
corporationshalldesignateanotherinterimoperatingmanagerandmaketherequiredapplication
within15calendardaysoftheCouncil’sdecision. Inanyevent, acorporationshallbelimitedto
twosuccessiveinterimoperatingmanagers.
PriorCode, § 3-2-12) (Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001) Penalty, see § 10.99
111.027 LICENSEAPPLICATION.
A) Contentsoforiginalapplication. Alicenseapplicantmustcompletetheapplicable
applicationformpreparedbytheCityClerk. TheCityClerkmaywaivecompletionofpartsof
theformthatareinappropriateorunnecessary.
B) Applicationforrenewal.
1) Licenseperiod, expiration. Eachrenewallicenseshallbeissuedforamaximum
periodofoneyear. Alllicenses, excepttemporarylicenses, expireonFebruary28ofeachyear.
2) Timeofmakingapplication. Applicationsfortherenewalofanexistinglicense
shallbemadeatleast30dayspriortothedateoftheexpirationofthelicenseandmuststatethat
everythinginthepriorapplicationsremainstrueandcorrectexceptasotherwiseindicated. The
citywillmailapplicationformstoexistinglicenseesapproximately60dayspriortoexpirationof
thelicenses. If, inthejudgmentoftheCouncil, goodandsufficientcauseisshownbyany
applicantforhisorherfailuretofileforarenewalwithinthetimeperiodprovided, theCouncil
may, iftheotherprovisionsofthissubchapterarecompliedwith, granttheapplication.
C) Executionofapplication. Iftheapplicationisbyanaturalperson, itshallbesignedand
sworntobytheperson; ifbyacorporation, byanofficerthereof; ifbyapartnership, byoneof
Page15of37
thepartners; ifbyanincorporatedassociation, bytheoperatingofficerormanagingofficer
thereof. Iftheapplicantisapartnership, theapplication, licenseandinsurancepolicyshallbe
madeandissuedinthenameofallpartners. Itisunlawfultomakeanyfalsestatementinan
application. ApplicationsmustbefiledwiththeCityClerk.
PriorCode, § 3-2-13) (Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001) Penalty, see § 10.99
111.028 FEES.
A) Licensefees. Theannualfeesforalllicensesandtemporarylicensesshallbe
establishedbyordinanceandshallbedueandpayableuponapplication. Thefeeforalicense
grantedafterthecommencementofthelicenseyearshallbeproratedonamonthlybasisand
eachpartofamonthshallconstituteafullmonth. Failuretopayanyportionofafeewhendue
iscauseforrevocation.
1) Refund. Uponrejectionofanyapplicationforalicense, oruponwithdrawalofany
applicationbeforeapprovaloftheissuancebytheCityCouncil, thelicensefeeshallberefunded
totheapplicant. Inallothercases, nopartofthefeepaidforanylicenseshallberefunded,
exceptasauthorizedunderM.S. §3 40A.408,S ubd. 5,a sitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime.
2) Unfinishedconstruction. Whenthelicenseisforapremisewherethebusinessis
notreadyforoccupancy, thefeeshallbeproratedfromthefirstofthemonthwhenthebuilding
isreadyforoccupancy.
B) Investigativefee. Atthetimeofeachapplicationforalicense, includingthereforethe
applicationbyanewownerforapremisealreadylicensed, theapplicantshallpaytotheCity
Clerkanon-refundablefeeassetbyordinancetocovertheexpenseofthePoliceDepartment
investigationtoassurecompliancewiththischapter..
1) Changeoflocation. Atanytimeanadditionalinvestigationisrequiredbecauseofa
transferfromplacetoplace, orbecauseofanenlargementorsubstantialalteration, which, inthe
city’sopinion, changesthecharacterorextensionofapremisepreviouslylicensed, thelicensee
shallpayanadditionalinvestigativefeeequaltotheactualcostoftheinvestigationandlicense
re-issuance.
2) Exception. Noinvestigationfeeshallbechargedforatemporarylicense.
C) Administrativefee. Theapplicantmayalsoberesponsibleforthepaymentofall
administrativecostsrelatingtolicenseissuance. Thisshallinclude, butisnotlimitedto, time
spentbytheCityAdministratorandclericalpersonnel, copychargesandmailingcosts.
PriorCode, § 3-2-14) (Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001; Ord. 738, passed7-7-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
Page16of37
111.029 INVESTIGATION.
Atthetimeofmakinganinitialapplication, renewalapplication, orrequestfor
approvalforanewofficerormanager, theCityClerk, orotherpersonactingontheCity
Clerk’sbehalfshallreviewtheapplicationandconductanyinvestigationnecessarytoverify
theprovidedinformation.
PriorCode, § 3-2-15) (Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001; Ord. 704, passed8-6-2012; Ord. 724,
passed9-3-2013) Penalty, see § 10.99
111.030 HEARINGREQUIREMENTS.
A) Noticeofhearing. UponreceiptofthewrittenreportandrecommendationbythePolice
Departmentandwithin20daysthereafter, theCityClerkshallcausetobepublishedinthe
officialnewspapertendaysinadvance, anoticeofhearingtobeheldbytheCouncil, setting
forththeday, timeandplacewhenthehearingwillbeheld, thenameoftheapplicant, the
premiseswherethebusinessistobeconducted, thenatureofthebusinessandanyother
informationastheCouncilmaydirect.
B) Conductofhearing. Atthehearing, opportunityshallbegiventoanypersontobe
heardfororagainstthegrantingofthelicense.
C) Hearingonrenewalapplications. Iftherehasbeenachangeintheownershipor
controlofalicensee, nomorethan60daysafterthedateforsubmittingrenewalapplications, the
Councilshallholdapublichearing. Noticeofthetimeandplaceofthemeetingandthefactthat
renewalapplicationswillbeconsideredshallbepublishedintheofficialnewspapertendaysin
advanceofthehearing. Opportunityshallbegiventoanypersontobeheardfororagainstthe
grantingofarenewallicense.
D) Costofhearing. Thecostofallhearingsexceptuncontested, routinerenewalhearings
shallbebornebytheapplicant.
E) Notapplicabletotemporarylicenses. Theprovisionsofthissectionarenotapplicable
toapplicationsfortemporarylicenses.
PriorCode, § 3-2-16) (Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001) Penalty, see § 10.99
111.031 INSURANCEREQUIREMENTS.
A) Liabilityinsurancepolicytobefiled. Priortotheissuanceofanyliquorlicense, the
applicant, unlessexceptedasprovidedbelow, shallfilewiththeCityClerkaliabilityinsurance
policy, whichshallbesubjecttotheapprovaloftheCityCouncil. Theinsurerontheliability
insurancepolicyshallbedulylicensedtodobusinessinthestate, andtheinsurancepolicyshall
beapprovedastoformandexecutionbytheCityAttorney. Theliabilityinsurancepolicyshall
beintheamountofnotlessthan $50,000coverageforonepersonand $100,000coveragefor
Page17of37
morethanoneperson, andshallspecificallyprovideforthepaymentbyinsurancecompanyon
behalfoftheinsuredallsumswhichtheinsuredshallbecomeobligatedtopaybyreasonor
liabilityimposeduponhimorherbylawforinjuriesordamagestopersonsotherthan
employees, includingtheliabilitiesimposedupontheinsuredbyreasonofM.S. §3 40A.801, as
itmaybeamendedfromtimetotime.
B) Nocancellation. Theliabilityinsurancepolicyshallfurtherprovidethatnocancellation
foranycausecanbemadeeitherbytheinsuredortheinsurancecompanywithoutfirstgiving
tendaysnoticetothecityinwritingoftheintentiontocancelthesame, addressedtotheCity
Administrator. Further, itshallprovidethatnopaymentofanyclaimbytheinsurancecompany
shall, inanymanner, decreasethecoverageprovidedforinrespecttoanyotherclaimorclaims
broughtagainsttheinsuredorcompanythereafter. Thepolicyshallbeconditionedsothatthe
insurershallpay, totheextentoftheprincipalamountofthepolicy, anydamagesfordeathor
injurycausedby, orresultingfromtheviolationofanylawrelatingtothebusinessforwhichthe
licensehasbeengranted.
C) Exception. Applicantsshallnotberequiredtofiletheinsurancepolicyrequiredbythis
sectioniftheapplicantprovidesthecitywithanaffidavit, subjecttotheapprovalofthecity,
establishingthatitstotalsalesof3.2% maltliquorandwinearelessthan $10,000peryear.
PriorCode, § 3-2-17) (Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001; Ord. 772, passed7-18-2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
111.032 GRANTINGORTRANSFEROFLICENSE: VOTEREQUIRED; BUILDINGS
UNDERCONSTRUCTION.
Aftertheinvestigationandhearing, whereapplicable, theCouncilshallgrantorrefusethe
applicationinitsdiscretion. Athree-fifthsvoteoftheCouncilshallberequiredforthegranting
ortransferofalicense.
A) Issuedtoapplicantonly. Eachlicenseshallbeissuedtotheapplicantonly.
B) Premisesandtransferability. Eachlicenseshallbeissuedonlyfortheexactroomsand
squarefootagedescribedintheapplication. Nolicensemaybetransferredtoanotherpersonor
toanotherplacewithouttheapprovaloftheCouncilandwithoutanewapplicationhavingbeen
filed.
C) Premisesunderconstruction. Whenalicenseisgrantedforpremiseswherethe
buildingisunderconstructionorotherwisenotreadyforoccupancy, theCityClerkshallnot
issuethelicenseuntilnotifiedbytheBuildingInspectorthatthebuildingisreadyforoccupancy.
PriorCode, § 3-2-18) (Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001) Penalty, see § 10.99
111.033 POSTINGLICENSE.
Thelicenseshallbepostedinaconspicuousplaceinthelicensedestablishmentatalltimes.
Page18of37
PriorCode, § 3-2-19) (Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001) Penalty, see § 10.99
111.034 REPORTTOSTATE.
Ifrequiredbystatestatute, theCityClerkshall, withintendaysafterissuanceofanylicense
underthissubchapter, submittotheCommissionerofPublicSafetythefullnameandaddressof
eachpersongrantedalicense, thetruename, theeffectivelicensedateandthedateofexpiration
ofthelicense. TheCityClerkshallalsosubmittotheCommissionerofPublicSafetyany
changeofaddress, transfer, cancellationorrevocationofanylicensebytheCouncilduringthe
licenseperiod.
PriorCode, § 3-2-20) (Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001) Penalty, see § 10.99
111.035 HOURSOFOPERATION.
A) No3.2% maltliquorshallbesoldon-saleonanySundaybetweenthehoursof1:00
a.m. and10:00a.m., norbetweenthehoursof1:00a.m. and8:00a.m. onanyotherday. Forall
purposessetforthinthissubchapter, thehoursduringwhich3.2% maltliquormaybesoldare
extendedto2:00a.m. forlicenseeswhoobtainapermitfromtheCommissionerofPublicSafety
underM.S. §3 40A.504,a sitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime.
B) No3.2% maltliquormaybesoldoff-salebetweenthehoursof1:00a.m. and8:00a.m.,
MondaythroughSaturday, norbetween1:00a.m. and10:00a.m. onSunday.
C) Nomaltliquororwineshallbesoldon-saleonanySundaybetweenthehoursof1:00
a.m. and8:00a.m., norbetweenthehoursof1:00a.m. and8:00a.m. onanyotherday. Forall
purposessetforthinthissubchapter, thehoursduringwhichmaltliquorandwinemaybesold
areextendedto2:00a.m. forlicenseeswhoobtainapermitfromtheCommissionofPublic
SafetyunderM.S. §3 40A.504,a sitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime.
D) Nointoxicatingliquorordistilledspiritsshallbesoldon-salebetween1:00a.m. and
8:00a.m., MondaythroughSaturday. NointoxicatingliquorordistilledspiritsshallbesoldonsaleonSundayunlessthelicenseehasbeengrantedaSundayliquorlicense,
inwhichcase
intoxicatingliquorordistilledspiritsmaytobesoldbetweenthehoursof8:00a.m. onSunday
and1:00a.m. onMonday. Theholderofanon-salecocktailroomlicensemaynotselldistilled
spiritson-salebetweenthehoursof1:00a.m. onSundayand8:00a.m. onMonday. Forall
purposessetforthinthissubchapter, thehoursduringwhichintoxicatingliquorordistilled
spiritsmaybesoldareextendedto2:00a.m. forlicenseeswhoobtainapermitfromthe
CommissionerofPublicSafetyunderM.S. §3 40A.504,a sitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime.
E) Nopersonshallconsumeordisplayliquorinanyplacelicensedtosellliquorafterthe
legaltimeofsale. Duringthehours, ifalicenseeisnottheownerorholderofaspecialfood
licenseoroperatingabowlingestablishment, nopersonorpersonsshallbeallowedtobeor
remainupon, within, oraroundoroutsidetheplaceorpremisesafterclosinglongerthan30
minutesforanypurposewhatsoever; except, thattheownerorlicensee, licensee’sagents,
Page19of37
servantsoremployeesmaybeorremainthereinforcleaning, preparationofmeals, necessary
repairsandotherworkinconnectiontherewith.
F) (1) Thereshallbenoconsumptionofanyliquoronthegroundsorpropertyoutsidethe
actualbuildingatwhichtheliquorissoldordistributed, unlessthepersonistheowneror
licensee, licensee’sagent, servantoremployeewhoisthereonlyforthepurposeofcleaning,
makingrepairsorotherworkinconnectiontherewith.
2) Itisthespecificintentofthisdivisionthatthereshallbenocongregatingor
loiteringatoraroundthegroundsorpropertyoutsideoftheactuallicensedpremises30minutes
afterclosingandthatallconsumptionofliquorbeconfinedtotheinteriorofestablishments
licensedpursuanttothissubchapter.
G) Theholderofanoff-salebrewpublicenseoroff-salesmallbrewerlicensemaysell
growlersoff-saleonSundays. Nogrowlersmaybesoldoff-salebetweenthehoursof1:00a.m.
and8:00a.m., MondaythroughSaturday, norbetween1:00a.m. and10:00a.m. onSunday.
H) Theholderofanoff-salemicrodistillerylicensemaynotselldistilledspiritsoff-sale
betweenthehoursof1:00a.m. and8:00a.m., MondaythroughSaturday. Distilledspiritsmay
notbesoldoff-saleonSundays.
PriorCode, § 3-2-21) (Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001; Ord. 581, passed8-17-2004; Ord. 655,
passed8-3-2009; Ord. 716, passed5-20-2013; Ord. 749, passed05-18-2015; Ord. 766, passed1-
19-2016; Ord. 772, passed7-18-2016) Penalty, see § 10.99
111.036 COMPLIANCEWITHLAWS.
A) Cityandstatelaws. Everylicenseshallbegrantedsubjecttotheconditionsofthis
subchapterandofanyotherapplicableordinanceofthecityandstatelawincluding, butnot
limitedto, thetimelypaymentofrealestatetaxes, assessmentsandallothercitycharges.
B) Consumptionanddisplay. Nopersonshallmixorprepareintoxicatingliquorfor
consumptioninanypublicplacenotlicensedinaccordancewiththeordinancesofthecityand
thelawsofthestate.
PriorCode, § 3-2-22) (Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001) Penalty, see § 10.99
111.037 RESPONSIBILITIESOFLICENSEE; ORDERLYCONDUCT.
A) Everylicenseeisresponsibleforthemannerinwhichthelicensee’sbusinessis
conductedandthemaintenanceofsobrietyandorderonthelicensedpremises. Theactofany
employeeofthelicenseeisdeemedtheactofthelicensee, andthelicenseeshallbeliableforall
penaltiesprovidedbythissubchapterandthelawequallywiththeemployee.
B) Arestaurantshallbeconductedinamannerthatasubstantialpartofthebusinessfora
licenseyearistheservingoffood.
Page20of37
C) Ahotelormotelshallbeconductedinamannerthat, ofthatpartofthetotalbusiness
attributabletoorderivedfromtheservingoffoodandintoxicatingliquors, asubstantialpartof
thebusinessforthelicenseyearistheservingoffood.
D) Nosaleofintoxicatingliquorshallbemadetooringuestroomsofhotels, unlessthe
rulesofthehotelprovidefortheserviceofmealsinguestrooms; ornotunlessthesaleofthe
intoxicatingliquorismadeinthemanner “on-sales” arerequiredtobemade; norunlessthesale
accompaniesandisincidentaltotheregularserviceofmealstogueststherein; norunlessthe
rulesofthehotelandthedescription, locationandnumberoftheguestroomsarefullysetoutin
theapplicationforalicense.
PriorCode, § 3-2-23) (Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001) Penalty, see § 10.99
111.038 RIGHTOFINSPECTION.
A) Premises. Anypoliceofficer, buildinginspectororanyproperlydesignatedofficeror
employeeofthecityshallhavetheunqualifiedrighttoenter, inspectandsearchthepremisesof
anylicenseehereunderatanytimewithoutawarrant.
B) Records. Thebusinessrecordsofthelicensee, includingfederalandstatetaxreturns,
shallbeavailableforinspectionbythecityatallreasonabletimesuponwrittenrequest.
PriorCode, § 3-2-24) (Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001) Penalty, see § 10.99
111.039 MINORS.
A) Employment. Nopersonunder18yearsofageshallbeemployedinaroomwhere
on-sales” aremadeorbeallowedtobeorremaininaroomunlessaccompaniedbytheminor’s
parentorguardian; except, thatpersonsunder18yearsofagemaybeemployedasmusiciansor
toperformthedutiesofabuspersonordishwashingservicesinplacesdefinedasarestaurant,
hotelormotel.
B) Dispensing, consumptionbyminors. Nolicensee, licensee’sagentoremployeeshall
serveordispenseuponthelicensedpremisesanyliquortoanypersonundertheageof21years,
norshallalicensee, licensee’sagentoremployeepermitanypersonundertheageof21yearsto
befurnishedorconsumeanyliquoronthelicensedpremises, norshallthelicensee, licensee’s
agentoremployeepermitanypersonundertheageof21yearstobedeliveredanyliquor.
C) Minor - possessionofbeerorwine. Nominorshallhavebeerorwineinhisorher
possessionwiththeintenttoconsumeitataplaceotherthanthehouseholdoftheminor’s
parentsorguardian, andwiththeconsentoftheparentorguardian. Possessionofbeerorwineat
aplaceotherthanasprovidedinthisdivisionshallbeprimafacieevidenceofintenttoconsume
thesameinviolationofthissection.
Page21of37
D) Misrepresentationofage, purchaseprohibited. Nopersonunder21yearsofageshall
misrepresenthisorherageforthepurposeofobtainingliquor; norshalltheminorenterany
premiseslicensedfortheretailsaleofintoxicatingliquorforthepurposeofpurchasingorhaving
servedordeliveredtotheminorforconsuminganyliquor; norshallanyminorpurchase, attempt
topurchase, consumeorhaveanotherpersonpurchasefortheminoranyliquor.
E) Receiptofliquor. Nopersonunder21yearsofageshallreceivedeliveryofliquor.
F) Encouragingminortopurchase. Nopersonshallinduceapersonundertheageof21
yearstopurchaseorprocureorobtainliquor.
G) Identification.
1) Identificationrequired. Anypersonshall, upondemandofthelicensee, licensee’s
employeeoragent, produceandpermittobeexaminedacurrentdriver’slicenseorno
qualificationcertificateissuedbytheauthorizeddepartmentofanystate. Inthecaseofaforeign
nation, avalidpassportmaybeusedasanalternativetotheforegoingmethodsofidentification.
2) Primafacieevidence. Ineveryprosecutionforaviolationoftheprovisionsofthis
sectionrelatingtothesaleorfurnishingofliquortounder-agedpersonsandineveryproceeding
beforetheCouncilwithrespectthereto, thefactthattheunder-agedpersoninvolvedhasobtained
andpresentedtothelicensee, licensee’sagentoremployee, adriver’slicense, passportor
non-qualificationcertificateissuedbytheauthorizeddepartmentofanystate, fromwhichit
appearsthatthepersonwasnotanunder-agedpersonandwasregularlyissuedanidentification
card, shallbeprimafacieevidencethatthelicensee, licensee’sagentoremployeeisnotguiltyof
aviolationofaprovisionandshallbeconclusiveevidencethataviolation, ifonehasoccurred,
wasnotwillfulorintentional.
PriorCode, § 3-2-25) (Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001) Penalty, see § 10.99
111.040 PROHIBITEDACTS.
A) Intoxicatedpersons. Noliquorshallbesoldorfurnishedordeliveredtoanyintoxicated
person, toanyhabitualdrunkard, toanypersonunder21yearsofageortoanypersontowhom
saleisprohibitedbystatelaw.
B) Unlicensedpremises. Nopersonshallmixorprepareliquorforconsumption, or
consume, inanypublicplacenotlicensedinaccordancewiththeordinancesofthecityandthe
state.
C) Controlledsubstances. Nolicenseeshallknowinglypermitthesale, possessionor
consumptionofcontrolledsubstancesonthelicensedpremisesinviolationofM.S. Chapter152,
asitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime.
Page22of37
D) Gamblingandgamblingdevices. Nolicenseeshallkeep, possessoroperateorpermit
thekeeping, possessionoroperationofanygamblingdeviceorapparatusonthelicensed
premises, unless
thegamblingactivityhasbeendulylicensedbytheStateCharitableGamblingControlBoard
and, whenapplicable, bythecity. Anygamblingactivityshallbeconductedinfullcompliance
withthiscode.
E) Prostitution. Nolicenseeshallknowinglypermitthelicensedpremises, oranyroomin
thosepremisesoranyadjoiningbuildingdirectlyorindirectlyunderlicensee’scontroltobeused
byprostitutes.
F) Adultentertainment. TheCityCouncilfindsthatthepresenceofalcoholicbeverages
andadultentertainmentoccurringonthesamepremisescanincreasedisorderlyconductandcan
resultinincidentsofprostitution, publicmasturbation, indecentexposure, sexualassaultand/or
sexualharassment. Inordertoprotectthehealth, safetyandwelfareofcityresidents, and
pursuanttotheCityCouncil’sauthoritytoregulatealcoholicbeveragesunderM.S. Chapter
340A, asitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime, andtheTwenty-FirstAmendmenttotheUnited
StatesConstitution, nolicenseeunderthischaptershallpermitthefollowingkindsofconducton
thelicensedpremisesorinareasadjoiningthelicensedpremiseswherethefollowingkindsof
conductcanbeseenorperformedbypatronsofthelicensedpremises:
1) Theperformanceofactsorsimulatedactsofsexualintercourse, masturbation,
sodomy, bestiality, oralcopulationorflagellation;
2) Theactualorsimulatedtouching, caressingorfondlingonthebreasts, buttocks,
anusorgenitals;
3) Theactualorsimulateddisplayingofthepubichair, anus, vulvaorgenitals;
4) Thedisplayingoffilmsdepictingtheactsdescribedindivisions (F)(1), (2) or (3)
above;
5) Thepresentationofanyfemaleinamannerorattiretoexposetoviewanyportion
ofthebreastbelowthetopoftheareola, oranysimulationthereof; or
6) Alleroticdancingatalicensedpremisesshalloccuronaplatformintendedforthat
purposewhichisraisedatleasttwofeetfromthelevelofthefloorandnocloserthansixfeetto
anypatron. Noeroticdancershallfondleorcaressanypatronandnopatronshallfondleor
caressanyeroticdancer. Nopatronshalldirectlypayorgiveanygratuitytoanyeroticdancer
andnoeroticdancershallsolicitanypayorgratuityfromanypatron.
G) Interestbyliquormanufacturersorwholesalers. Noequipmentorfixtureinany
licensedplaceshallbeownedinwholeorinpartbyanymanufacturerorsupplierofliquor,
exceptasshallbeexpresslypermittedbystatelaw.
Page23of37
H) Tamperingwithpackagecontentsprohibited. Nolicenseeshallsell, offerforsaleor
keepforsale, liquorinanyoriginalpackage, whichhasbeenrefilledorpartlyrefilled. No
licenseeshalldirectlyorthroughanyotherpersondiluteorinanymannertamperwiththe
contentsofanyoriginalpackagesoastochangeitscompositionoralcoholiccontentwhileinthe
originalpackage. Possessiononthepremisesbythelicenseeofanyliquorintheoriginal
packagedifferingincompositionoralcoholiccontentintheliquorwhenreceivedfromthe
manufacturerorwholesalerfromwhomitwaspurchasedshallbeprimafacieevidencethatthe
contentsoftheoriginalpackagehavebeendiluted, changedortamperedwith.
I) Federalstampsprohibited. Nolicenseeshallapplyfororpossessafederalwholesale
liquordealer’sspecialtaxstamporafederalgamblingstamp.
J) Beveragesprohibited. Nolicenseeshallkeepethylalcoholorneutralspiritsonany
licensedpremisesorpermittheiruseonthepremisesasabeverageormixedwithbeverage.
K) Organizationchanges. Changesinthecorporateorassociationofficers, management,
corporatecharter, articlesofincorporation, bylawsorpartnershipagreement, asthecasemaybe,
shallbesubmittedtotheCityClerkwithin30daysafteranychangeismade. Notwithstanding
thedefinitionofinterestasgivenin §1 11.024ofthischapter, inthecaseofacorporation, there
shallbenotransferofstockinacorporatelicenseewhenthetransferwillgiveaninteresttoany
person, whichtogetherwiththatoftheperson’sspouse, parent, brother, sisterorchildexceeds
5%, untilallinformationaboutthepersonasrequiredinatypicalapplicationhasbeenprovided,
andtheCityCouncilhasapprovedthetransferofstock. Violationofthisdivisionshallbecause
forimmediaterevocationoflicense.
L) Consumptioninpublic. Consumptionofany3.2% maltliquor, wineorintoxicating
liquorisherebyprohibitedinallpublicplacesincluding, butnotlimitedto, publicstreetsand
highwaysandpublicboulevards. Theconsumptionisalsoprohibitedinpublicparksbetween
thehoursof10:00p.m. and10:00a.m., saveandexceptwhenapermitisauthorizedandissued
bythecity.
M) Consumptionorpossessiononprivateproperty. Nopersonorpersonsshallpossessor
consumeliquoronprivatepropertywithouttheexpressconsentoractualphysicalpresenceand
knowledgeoftheowneroftheprivateproperty.
PriorCode, § 3-2-26) (Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001) Penalty, see § 10.99
111.041 GROUNDSFORREVOCATION.
TheCouncilmaysuspendorrevokeanylicenseforthesaleofintoxicatingliquor, 3.2%
maltliquororwineforanyofthefollowingreasons:
A) Falseormisleadingstatementsmadeonalicenseapplicationorrenewal, orfailureto
abidebythecommitments, promisesorrepresentationsmadetotheCityCouncil;
Page24of37
B) Violationofanyspecialconditionsunderwhichthelicensewasgranted, including, but
notlimitedto, thetimelypaymentofrealestatetaxes, specialassessmentsandallothercity
charges;
C) Violationofanystateorfederallawregulatingthesaleofliquororcontrolled
substances;
D) Creationofanuisanceonthepremisesorinthesurroundingarea;
E) Thelicenseesufferedorpermittedillegalactsuponthelicensedpremisesoronproperty
ownedorcontrolledbythelicenseeadjacenttothelicensedpremises, unrelatedtothesaleof
beer, wineorliquor;
F) Thelicenseehadknowledgeofillegalactsuponorattributabletothelicensedpremises,
butfailedtoreportthesametothepolice; or
G) Violationofanyofthetermsofthissubchapterand §§ 111.060and111.061.
PriorCode, § 3-2-27) (Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001; Ord. 626, passed6-4-2007) Penalty, see §
10.99
111.042 PENALTIES.
A) Purpose. Thepurposeofthissectionistoestablishastandardamountoffine, the
lengthoflicensesuspensionsandtheproprietyofrevocations, andshallapplytoallon-saleand
off-salelicensedpremises. Thesepenaltiesarepresumedtobeappropriateforeverycase.
B) Definition. BestPracticesBusinessmeansalicenseethatiscertifiedintheCity’s
ServerAwarenessProgram. Tobecertifiedalicensee’smanagersandorownersshallhave
attendedtheServerAwarenessProgramandatalltimeshaveprovidedtheServerAwareness
Programtrainingtonolessthan75% ofitsemployees Alicenseeshalldocumentthetrainingits
providestoitsemployeesandhavetheserecordsavailableforreviewuponrequestbythe
SavagePoliceDepartment.
C) PenaltiesforViolations. Penaltiesforconvictionsorviolationsmustbepresumedas
follows (unlessspecified, numbersbelowindicateconsecutivedays' suspension):
1) RevocationonFirstViolation. Thefollowingviolationsrequirerevocationofthe
licenseonthefirstviolation:
a) Commissionofafelonyrelatedtothelicensedactivity.
b) Saleofalcoholicbeverageswhilelicenseisundersuspension.
c) Saleofintoxicatingliquorwhereonlylicenseisfor3.2percentmaltliquor.
2) UnderageSalesandComplianceCheckFailures. Thepenaltiessetforthbelow
applytothefollowingviolations:
a) Licenseefailureofanunderagecompliancecheck.
b) Saleofalcoholicbeveragestounderageperson.
Page25of37
Violation BestPracticeBusiness Non-BestPracticesBusiness
Firstviolation $500.00fine. 1,000.00fineandmandatory training.
Second 1,500.00fineand2dayconsecutive violationwithin $750.00fineandmandatorytraining. suspensionoflicense. 2years
Thirdviolation $ 1,000.00fine,2 dayconsecutive 2,000.00fineand7dayconsecutive within2years suspensionoflicense, andbestpractices suspensionoflicense. reviewpanel.
Fourthviolation $1,500.00fine,7 dayconsecutive 2,000.00fineand12day within2years suspensionoflicense, andbestpractices consecutivesuspensionoflicense. reviewpanel.
Fifthviolation 2,000fineandrevocation. (Minimum $ 2,000.00fineandrevocation. within2years revocationperiodwillbe1yearstarting (Minimumrevocationperiodwillbe1 fromtherevocationdate.) yearfromtherevocationdate)
3) PenaltiesforOtherViolations. Thepenaltiessetforthbelowapplytoviolations
notcontainedinsubsections (C) 1and (C) 2ofthissection. TheCouncilmayinitsdiscretion
imposeacivilfineof $500.00inlieuofasuspensiononthefirstappearanceforviolation
numbers1, 2, 3, 6and7.
Appearance
TypeOfViolation 1st 2nd 3rd 4th
1.S aleofalcoholicbeveragesto 3-day 6-day 18-day obviouslyintoxicatedperson. consecutive consecutive consecutive Revocation suspension suspension suspension
2.A fterhourssaleofalcoholic 3-day 6-day 18-day beverages. consecutive consecutive consecutive Revocation suspension suspension suspension
3. Afterhoursdisplayor 2-day 4-day 12-day
consumptionofalcoholic consecutive consecutive consecutive Revocation
beverages. suspension suspension suspension
4. Refusaltoallowcity 5-day 15-day
inspectorsorpoliceadmissionto consecutive consecutive Revocation n/a
inspectpremises. suspension suspension
3-day 6-day 18-day 5.I llegalgamblingonpremises. consecutive consecutive consecutive Revocation suspension suspension suspension
6. Failuretotakereasonable 2-day 4-day 12-day Revocation
Page26of37
stepstostoppersonfromleaving consecutive consecutive consecutive
premiseswithalcoholic suspension suspension suspension
beverages.
7. Failuretomakeapplicationfor 3-day 6-day 18-day
licenserenewalpriortolicense consecutive consecutive consecutive Revocation
expirationdate. suspension suspension suspension
D) MultipleViolations. Atalicensee'sfirstappearancebeforetheCouncil, theCouncil
mustactuponalloftheviolationsthathavebeenallegedinthenoticesenttothelicensee. The
Councilinthatcasemustconsiderthepenaltyforeachviolationunderthefirstappearance
columninsubsection (A) ofthissection. Theoccurrenceofmultipleviolationsisgroundsfor
deviationfromthepresumedpenaltiesintheCouncil'sdiscretion.
E) SubsequentViolation.: Violationsoccurringafterthenoticeofhearinghasbeenmailed,
butpriortothehearing, mustbetreatedasaseparateviolationanddealtwithasasecond
appearancebeforetheCouncil, unlessthecityadministratorandlicenseeagreeinwritingtoadd
theviolationtothefirstappearance. Thesameprocedureappliestoasecond, thirdorfourth
appearancebeforetheCouncil.
F) SubsequentAppearances. Uponasecond, thirdorfourthappearancebeforetheCouncil
bythesamelicensee, theCouncilmustimposethepenaltyfortheviolationorviolationsgiving
risetothesubsequentappearancewithoutregardtotheparticularviolationorviolationsthat
werethesubjectofthefirstorpriorappearance. However, theCouncilmayconsidertheamount
oftimeelapsedbetweenappearancesasabasisfordeviatingfromthepenaltyimposedbythis
section.
G) ComputationofAppearances. Afterthefirstappearance, asubsequentappearanceby
thesamelicenseewillbedeterminedasfollows:
1) Ifthefirstappearancewaswithineighteen (18) monthsofthecurrentviolation,
thecurrentappearancewillbetreatedasasecondappearance.
2) IfalicenseehasappearedbeforetheCouncilontwo (2) previousoccasions, and
thecurrentviolationoccurredwithinthirty (30) monthsofthefirstappearance, thecurrent
appearancewillbetreatedasathirdappearance.
3) IfalicenseehasappearedbeforetheCouncilonthree (3) previousoccasions, and
thecurrentviolationoccurredwithinfortyeight (48) monthsofthefirstappearance, thecurrent
appearancewillbetreatedasafourthappearance.
4) Anyappearancenotcoveredbysubsection (G)1, (G)2or (G)3ofthissectionwill
betreatedasafirstappearance.
H) OtherPenalties. Nothinginthissectionshallrestrictorlimittheauthorityofthe
Counciltosuspenduptosixty (60) days, revokethelicense, orimposeacivilfinenottoexceed
Page27of37
twothousanddollars ($2,000.00), toimposeconditionsortakeanyotheractioninaccordance
withlawprovided, thatthelicenseholderhasbeenaffordedanopportunityforahearinginthe
mannerprovidedforinsection3-2-29ofthischapter.
I) Notice. Nosuspensionorrevocationmaytakeeffectuntilthelicenseehasreceived
notice, servedpersonallyorbymail, oftheallegedviolationandanopportunityforahearing
beforetheCityCouncil.
J) ReviewPanel. TheReviewPanelwillconsistoftheChiefofPoliceorhis/herdesignee
andtheCityClerk. ForBestPracticeestablishmentsthirdandfourthviolationstheReview
Panelwillconveneandmakeappropriaterecommendations.
Ord. 655, passed8-3-2009; Ord. 705, passed8-6-2012)
111.043 INACTIVELICENSE.
TheCityCouncilmayrevoketheintoxicatingliquor, 3.2% maltliquororwinelicenseof
anyestablishmentgrantedalicensethatisnotunderconstructionandexhibitingsatisfactory
progresstowardcompletionwithinsixmonthsfromitsissuance, oranyestablishmentthatceases
operationforaperiodofsixmonths. Ahearingshallbeheldtodeterminewhatprogresshas
beenmadetowardopeningorreopeningtheestablishmentand, ifsatisfactoryprogressisnot
demonstrated, theCouncilmayrevokethelicense.
PriorCode, § 3-2-28) (Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001)
111.044 HEARINGNOTICE.
RevocationorsuspensionofalicensebytheCouncilshallbeprecededbyahearing
conductedinaccordancewithM.S. §§1 4.57through14.70,a stheymaybeamendedfromtime
totime. TheCityCouncilmayappointahearingexaminerormayconductthehearingitself.
Thehearingnoticeshallbegivenatleasttendayspriortothehearing, includenoticeofthetime
andplaceofthehearing, andshallstatethenatureofthechargesagainstthelicensee.
PriorCode, § 3-2-29) (Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001) Penalty, see § 10.99
111.045 COSTS.
Onceanoticeofintenttorevokeorsuspendalicensehasbeenmailed, thelicenseebecomes
responsibleforanyreasonablecostsofinvestigation, administrationandhearingsassociatedwith
theactionasaconditiontoreinstatement, terminationofsuspensionordismissalpriortohearing.
PriorCode, § 3-2-30) (Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001) Penalty, see § 10.99
Page28of37
111.046 VALIDITY.
Ifanytermorprovisionofthissubchapterisdeclaredbyacourtofcompetentjurisdictionto
beillegalorinconflictwithanylaw, thevalidityoftheremainingtermsorprovisionsshallnot
beaffectedandthesubchaptershallbeconstruedandenforcedasifthesubchapterdidnot
containtheparticulartermorprovisionheldtobeinvalid.
PriorCode, § 3-2-32) (Ord. 533, passed8-6-2001) Penalty, see § 10.99
CLUBLICENSES
111.060 PURPOSE.
Thecityhashadalonghistoryofliquorlicenseeswhopayareducedlicensefeeas “clubs.”
Thepurposeofthissubchapteristocontinuetoallowfortheestablishmentswhilecreating
specificconditionsandrequirementsforprivateclubsandclubswithrestaurantsoverandabove
theotherconditionsandrequirementsfoundinthissubchapter. Theeffectivedateofthis
subchaptershallbeMarch1, 1999.
PriorCode, § 3-2-37) (Ord. 494, passed2-1-1999)
111.061 STATELAWADOPTED.
A) Excepttotheextenttheprovisionsofthischapteraremorerestrictive, theprovisionsof
M.S. Chapter340A, asitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime, relatingtothedefinitionofterms,
licensing, consumption, sales, hoursofsaleandallothermatterspertainingtotheretailsale,
distributionandconsumptionofintoxicatingliquorand3.2% maltliquorareadoptedandmadea
partofthissubchapterasifsetoutinfull.
B) Allotherprovisionsofthissubchapterinadditiontothissubchaptershallapplytoclub
licenses.
PriorCode, § 3-2-38) (Ord. 494, passed2-1-1999)
111.062 DEFINITIONS.
Forthepurposeofthissubchapter, thefollowingdefinitionsshallapplyunlessthecontext
clearlyindicatesorrequiresadifferentmeaning.
CLUB. Anyincorporatedorcharteredorganizationorganizedunderthelawsofthestatefor
civic, fraternal, socialorbusinesspurposes, forintellectualimprovement, orforthepromotionof
sports, oracongressionallycharteredveterans’ organization, which:
1) Hasmorethan50members;
Page29of37
2) Hasownedorrentedabuildingorspaceinabuildingformorethanoneyearthatis
suitableandadequatefortheaccommodationofitsmembers; and
3) Isdirectedbyaboardofdirectors, executivecommittee, orothersimilarbody
chosenbythemembersatameetingheldforthatpurpose. Nomember, officer, agentor
employeeshallreceiveanyprofitfromthedistributionorsaleofbeveragestothemembersof
theclubortheirguestsbeyondareasonablesalaryorwagesfixedandvotedeachyearbythe
governingbody.
GUEST. Non-memberswhoareexpresslyinvitedbyamembertoaccompanythemember
intheprivilegesoftheclub.
LICENSEDPREMISES. Theinsideofthebuildingortheleasedspaceinsideabuildingas
shownontheplansubmittedtotheCityClerkwiththeoriginallicense. Outsideareas, suchas
patios, parkinglots, banquetareaornon-clubareas, shallnotbeincludedunlessspecifically
listedonthelicenseorspecialpermissioninwritingisobtainedforalimitedperiodoftime
undercertainconditions.
MEMBER. Anaturalpersonwhoqualifiesformembershipestablishedbytheby-lawsof
thecluband/orrecognized, asoutlinedinthearticlesofincorporationwiththeSecretaryofState.
PRIVATECLUB. Includesanyincorporatedorcharteredorganizationorganizedunderthe
lawsofthestateforcivic, fraternal, socialorbusinesspurposeforintellectualimprovementor
forthepromotionofsportsoracongressionallycharteredveterans’ organization, whichby
conditionofthelicenseisnotopentothepublic.
PUBLICDANCE. Anydancewhereinthepublicmayparticipatebypayment, directlyor
indirectly, ofanadmissionfeeorpricefordancing, orbyexpressedinvitationbytherenteeof
thebanquetandrentedhallarea.
RESTAURANTCLUB. Anyincorporatedorcharteredorganizationorganizedunderthe
lawsofthestateforcivic, fraternal, socialorbusinesspurposeorforintellectualimprovementor
forthepromotionofsportsoracongressionallycharteredveterans’ organization, whichby
conditionofthelicensealsoincludesarestaurant.
PriorCode, § 3-2-39) (Ord. 494, passed2-1-1999)
111.063 BUILDINGORPREMISERESTRICTIONS.
A) Delinquenttaxes. Nolicensemaybegrantedorrenewedforoperationonanypremises
onwhichtaxes, assessmentsorotherfinancialclaimsofthecityaredelinquentandunpaid.
B) Prohibitedbystate. Nolicensemaybegrantedforpremisesprohibitedfromholdinga
licensebystatelaw.
Page30of37
C) Ownerrequirements. Nolicensemaybeissuedforapremisesownedbyapersonto
whomalicensecouldnotbegrantedunderthissubchapter, exceptanyownerwhoisaminor,
alienorapersonwhohasbeenconvictedofacrimeotherthanaviolationofM.S. Chapter340A,
asitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime.
D) Diningareaopentopublic. No “on-sale” licensemaybegrantedtoaprivateclubthat
hasadiningareaopentothegeneralpublic.
E) Effectivearea. Noliquorlicenseshallbeeffectivebeyondthewallsofthebuildingor
premisesareadescribedinthelicenseforwhichitwasgrantedunlessthelicenseeobtainsthe
appropriateCityCouncilapprovedpermitorlicenseforsaleorconsumptionbeyondthelicensed
area.
F) Enlargement, alterationorextensionofpremises. Proposedenlargement, alternationor
extensionofpremisespreviouslylicensedshallbereportedtotheCityClerkatorbeforethetime
applicationismadeforthebuildingpermitforanychangeandthelicenseeshallalsogive
informationasisrequiredbythischapter.
G) Unobstructedview. Allwindowsinthefrontofa “restaurantclub” licensedfor
on-sale” intoxicatingliquorshallbeofclearglassandofsufficientnumberastoallowan
unobstructedviewoftheentireinterior, andtheviewofthewholeinteriorshallbeunobstructed
byscreens, curtainsorpartitions. Thereshallbenopartition, box, stall, screen, curtainorother
device, whichobstructstheviewofanypartoftheroomfromthegeneralobservationofpersons
intheroom; butpartitions, subdivisionsorpanelsnothigherthan48inchesfromthefloorshall
notbeconsideredasobstructions. Anyrestaurantclubconstructedpriortotheenactmentofthis
subchaptershallhavethreeyearstocomplywiththisrequirement. Modificationstocomplywith
thisprovisionshallbesubmittedtotheSavagePoliceDepartmentandBuildingInspectionsfor
approvalpriortoconstruction. Allwindowsinthefrontofa “privateclub” licensedfor
on-sale” intoxicatingliquormaybecoveredtoobstructtheviewfromthegeneralpublic.
Accesstothepremisesbypoliceand/orrepresentativesofthelicensingagents, forinspection
purposesshallbegranted.
H) Privateclub. Liquorshallbeservedonlyinaseparatebarorloungeareaaccessible
onlytomembersorguestsexpresslyinvitedandaccompaniedintotheareabyamember. The
followingconditionsalsoapplytoprivateclubs.
1) Liquorshallnotbeservedinarestaurantareaopentothepublic.
2) Liquormaynotbeservedinabanquetareaforweddingsandotherlargeeventsfor
whichbanquetfacilitieshavebeenrented, unlessprovidedbytherenteeofthefacility.
a) Aset-uplicensemustbesecuredforthebanquetfacility.
b) Guestsshallnothavedirectaccesstothebarorloungearea.
3) Onlyfourguestsandimmediatefamilymayaccompany, byexpressedinvitationby
Page31of37
themember, intheuseandaccessoftheseparatebarandloungearea.
4) Themembermuststaywiththeguestandberesponsiblefortheconductand
behavioroftheguestsandimmediatefamilymember. Whenthememberleavestheclub, the
non-member’sexpressedinvitationisexpiredandthenon-membermustleavethebarorlounge
areaimmediately, unlessthenon-memberisfinishingamealwhenthememberleaves
unexpectedly.
5) Allprivateclubsarerequiredtouseaguestbook. Allguestsshallsignname,
addressandthenameofthememberwhotheguestaccompanies, beforebeingserved. Clubs
shallcheckmembershipcardsatalltimes. Theprivilegesoftheclubshallnotbeextendedto
personsnotmembersoftheclub.
I) Restaurantclub. Liquorshallbeservedinabarorloungeareaaccessibletothepublic.
Thebarorloungeshallbeoperatedandconductedinthesamemannerasnon-clubfacility.
PriorCode, § 3-2-40) (Ord. 494, passed2-1-1999) Penalty, see § 10.99
PRIVATESET-UPLIQUORLICENSE
111.075 DEFINITIONS.
Forthepurposeofthissubchapter, thefollowingdefinitionsshallapplyunlessthecontext
clearlyindicatesorrequiresadifferentmeaning.
BEER. Anymaltbeveragewithanalcoholiccontentofmorethan0.5% byvolumeandnot
morethan3.2%in weight.
CITY. TheCityofSavage, Minnesotawithinthecitylimits.
FURNISH. Tosell, giveorinanyothermannerprovide.
LICENSE. Apermitorlicenseissuedbythecityforthepurposeoffurnishingbeer, set-ups
and/ormixesandwines.
LIQUOR. Includesdistilled, fermented, spirituous, vinousandmaltbeveragescontainingin
excessof3.2% ofalcoholbyweight.
PERMIT. ApermitgrantedbytheCommissionerofPublicSafetypursuanttoM.S.
340A.414, asitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime.
PRIVATECLUB. A clubasdefinedbyM.S. §3 40A.101,a sitmaybeamendedfromtime
totime, oranyunincorporatedsocietyasdescribedinM.S. §3 40A.414, asitmaybeamended
fromtimetotime.
Page32of37
PUBLICPLACE. Anyplaceopentothepublicortowhichthepublicisinvited, butdoes
notincludeaprivateresidence.
RESTAURANT. Anyestablishmenthavingappropriatefacilitiesforthepreparationand
servingofmealsattablestonotlessthan30personsatonetime, whichemploysanadequate
stafftoprovidetheusualandsuitableservicetoitscustomers, andwhichhastheprincipalpartof
itsbusinessthesellingandservingoffoodforconsumptiononthepremises.
WINES. Anybeveragecontainingnotlessthan7% ormorethan24% alcoholbyvolume.
PriorCode, § 3-2-41) (Ord. 237, passed1-8-1987; Ord. 494, passed2-1-1999)
111.076 LIMITATIONSONLIQUORCONSUMPTIONANDDISPLAYANDON
FURNISHINGSET-UPS.
A) Nopersonshallconsumeordisplayorallowtheconsumptionordisplayofintoxicating
liquororfurnishset-upsorallowthefurnishingofset-upsatanyplacewithinthiscityexcept:
1) Aprivateresidence;
2) Themunicipaldispensary; and
3) Anestablishmenthavingapermitandmaintainingtheconditionssetforthin §§
111.020through111.045ofthischapter.
B) Thefurnishingofset-upsandtheconsumptionanddisplayofintoxicatingliquoratany
privateresidence, oranestablishmenthavingapermitshallbesubjecttotheprovisionsofthis
subchapterandotherapplicablelaws.
C) Nolicensedestablishmentmaypermitapersontoconsumeordisplayintoxicating
liquor, andnopersonmayconsumeordisplayintoxicatingliquorbetween1:00a.m. and12:00
p.m. onSundays, andbetween1:00a.m. and8:00a.m. onMondaythroughSaturday.
D) Noperson, unlessoflegalage, shallbeallowedtosellorserve3.2% maltliquor,
set-upsorwinesinanyestablishmentinthiscity, thelegalagebeing21yearsold.
PriorCode, § 3-2-42) (Ord. 237, passed1-8-1987; Ord. 494, passed2-1-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
111.077 RESTRICTIONSONAPPROVINGPERMITS.
Noofficeroremployeeofthecityshallsignanyletterorotherdocumentexpressing
approvalofanapplicationforastateconsumptionanddisplaypermit, orinanyothermanner
expressingorconveyingtheimpressionthattheapprovalhasbeengiven, untiltheofficeror
employeeofthecityhasbeenauthorizedbyaresolutionpassedbyamajorityofthemembersof
Page33of37
theCouncilauthorizingapprovaloftheset-uplicense.
PriorCode, § 3-2-43) (Ord. 237, passed1-8-1987; Ord. 249, passed5-14-1987; Ord. 494,
passed2-1-1999)
111.078 REQUIREDCONDITIONSFORFURNISHINGSET-UPSANDFORTHE
DISPLAYORCONSUMPTIONOFLIQUOR.
A) Thepremisesmusthaveastateconsumptionanddisplaypermit.
B) Thepremisesarezonedcommercial.
C) Thepremisesarenotwithin300feetofanychurchorschool.
D) Thepremisesarelicensedbythecityforthesaleof3.2% maltliquor.
E) Theestablishmentisarestaurantorhasarestaurantaspartofitsfacilities.
F) Ifaprivateclub, theclubhasnomemberswhoareminors.
G) Thecity’sfeerequiredby § 111.081hasbeentenderedtothecity.
H) Thepersonhavingthepermit, orseekingthepermit, hasnotbeenconvictedofafelony,
orhasnotviolatedanypartoftheMinnesotaLiquorAct.
I) Thepersonhavingorseekingthepermitisnotamanufacturerorwholesalerofbeeror
liquorandhasnointerestinanyplacewherebeerorliquorismanufactured, orwhereliquoris
sold.
J) Thepersonhavingorseekingthepermithasnotbeenconvictedofwillfullyviolating
theordinancesofthecityrelatingtothesale, consumptionordisplayofliquor.
K) Thepremiseshavesinksandothersuitableequipment, andhotandcoldrunningwater
forthemaintenanceofsanitaryconditionsforpersonseatingordrinkingonthepremises.
L) Thepremiseshaveadequateseparatetoilets, whichareconvenientlylocatedsothatthey
canbereachedfromtherestaurantareawithoutgoingoutsideorthroughbuildingareasnot
occupiedbytheapplicantwhichareequippedwithhotandcoldrunningwater, individualtowels
andsoap, andwhicharereadilycleanableandareadequatelyheated, lightedandventilated.
M) Thepremisesaresolocatedthatnounusualsafetyhazardsarepresentedtopersons
goingtoandfromorbeingonthepremisesbyreasonoflightingorthedesignorlocationof
stairways, windows, steps, doors, sidewalks, streetsorparkingfacilities.
Page34of37
N) Thepremiseshaveadequateemergencyfireexitforfacilitiesandnounusualfirehazard
existsonthepremises.
O) Thereareadequateparkingfacilitiesforthepremises.
P) Nopersonorpersonsoperatinganestablishmentholdingapermitorlicenseshallallow
orcausetoallowanynuisanceorconsumptionofset-ups3.2% maltliquororwinesoutsideof
thebuildingorallowmusicoutsideofthebuilding.
Q) Nopersonorpersonsholdingapermitorlicenseshallallowanydisturbances, vulgaror
loudlanguageonthepremises; itshallbethedutyoftheoperatortocontrolanyviolations.
R) Noestablishmentholdingapermitorlicenseshallplaceshutters, curtainsorotherwise
coverwindowsonthestreetsideofthebuilding. Windowsatalltimeswillbeunobstructedso
thattheinteriorcanbeviewedfromthestreetside.
S) Nopersonholdingalicenseorpermitforthefurnishingofbeer, set-ups, mixesorwines
shallalloworcausetobeallowedanylivemusicfordancingonthepremiseswithoutfirst
obtainingapermitfromtheCityCouncil.
T) Nopersonororganizationshallholdadanceorhavelivemusicwithoutfirstobtaining
apermitorlicense.
PriorCode, § 3-2-44) (Ord. 237, passed1-8-1987; Ord. 494, passed2-1-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
111.079 LIMITATIONSWHEREPERMITSHAVEBEENGRANTED.
A) Nopersonwhohasbroughtintoxicatingliquortoapublicplacehavingapermitshall
keeporleaveintoxicatingliquorattheplaceduringhisorherabsence.
B) Nopersonhavingapermit, andnopersonwhoisemployedatanestablishmenthaving
apermit, shallhaveorkeepanyintoxicatingliquorbelongingtohimorheronthepermit
premises.
C) Nopersonatanestablishmenthavingapermitshallfurnishintoxicatingliquortoany
personotherthanhisorherbonafideguest.
D) Nopersonataprivateclubhavingapermitshallfurnishaset-uptoanypersonwhois
notthebonafideguestofamemberwhoisthenpresent.
E) Nopersonshallfurnishintoxicatingliquororset-upstoaminoratanestablishment
havingapermit.
F) Nopersonunder21yearsofageshallremainorbeallowedtoremainatapublicplace
orprivateclub) havingapermit (unlessaccompaniedbyhisorherparentorguardian).
Page35of37
G) Nomemberofaprivateclubhavingapermitshallkeepintoxicatingliquorattheclub
unlessthebottle, containerorotherreceptaclecontainingtheintoxicatingliquorhasattachedto
italabelsignedbythemember. Anyintoxicatingliquoronthepremisesoftheclubnotbeing
actuallyusedorconsumedbytheownerthereofshallbekeptinalockerdesignatedtotheuseof
themember.(H) Nopersonunder21yearsofageshallbeassignedalockerforthestorageof
intoxicatingliquoratanyprivateclub, norshallanyminorconsumeordisplayorbepermittedto
consumeordisplayonanypremisesownedorcontrolledbytheclub.
I) Anyestablishmenthavingapermitshallbekeptopenforinspectionatalltimesbythe
lawenforcementofficersordesignatedagentsofthecity. Nopersonshallrefusetopermitthe
lawenforcementofficersordesignatedagentsofthecitytoenterandinspectthepremisesfor
whichapermithasbeengranted.
PriorCode, § 3-2-45) (Ord. 237, passed1-8-1987; Ord. 494, passed2-1-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
111.080 GRANTINGOFLICENSE.
A) Afterinvestigationandalltherequiredconditionssetforthinthissubchapterhavebeen
metbytheapplicant, theCityCouncilshallgrantorrefusetheapplicationatitsdiscretion. The
sameprocedure, withtheexceptionoftheinvestigationfee, shallapplytotherenewalofthe
license.
B) Eachlicenseshallbeissuedtotheapplicantonlyandexcept:
1) Partnerships, whereallpartnersshallbenamedonthelicense; and
2) Corporationsandclubs, wherethemanagershallhavedirectcontroland
supervisionofthepremisesshallalsobenamedonthelicense.
PriorCode, § 3-2-46) (Ord. 237, passed1-8-1987; Ord. 494, passed2-1-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
111.081 FEE.
Thecity’sfeefortheoperationofaprivatecluborpublicplacehavingaconsumptionand
displaypermitissetbyordinance.
PriorCode, § 3-2-47) (Ord. 237, passed1-8-1987; Ord. 494, passed2-1-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
111.082 REPORTOFVIOLATIONS.
TheCityPoliceChiefshallnotifytheCommissionerofPublicSafetyofanyviolationofthe
provisionsofthissubchapter.
Page36of37
PriorCode, § 3-2-48) (Ord. 237, passed1-8-1987; Ord. 494, passed2-1-1999)
111.083 STATESTATUTESINCORPORATED.
TheregulatoryprovisionsofM.S. §3 40A.414,a sitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime,a re
herebyincorporatedandmadepartofthissubchapterascompletelyasifsetouthereinfull.
PriorCode, § 3-2-49) (Ord. 237, passed1-8-1987; Ord. 494, passed2-1-1999)
Page37of37
CHAPTER 112: SOLICITATION
Section
Peddling and Solicitation
112. 01 Definitions
112. 02 Permit required
112. 03 Transient merchant; regulation of
112. 04 Application for permit; fee
112. 05 Permit issuance procedure
112. 06 Suspension of permit
112. 07 Revocation of permit
112. 08 Practices prohibited
112. 09 Severability
112. 10 Penalty
Temporary/Seasonal Outdoor Sales
112.25 Definition
112.26 Permit required
112.27 Application for permit; fee
112.28 Duration
112.29 Exemptions
112. 30 Permit holder
112. 31 Permit authority/performance standards
112. 32 Denial for noncompliance
112. 33 Violations
PEDDLING AND SOLICITATION
112. 01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
APPLICANT. A person who files an application with the City Clerk for a permit pursuant to
this subchapter.
CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of Police for the Savage Police Department.
Page 1 of 10
NON-COMMERCIAL DOOR- TO-DOOR ADVOCATE. A person who goes door-to- door
for the primary purpose of disseminating religious, political, social, or other ideological beliefs.
For purposes of this subchapter, the term door-to- door advocate shall include door-to- door
canvassing, pamphleteering intended for non- commercial purposes, and seeking donations for
which no product or service is given in return.
PEDDLER. A person who goes from house to house, from place to place, or from street to
street, carrying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise, and who receives payment and/ or
delivers merchandise within 24 hours of time of sale.
PERMITACTIVITIES. All activities identified in the definitions of peddler, solicitor and
transient merchant.
PERMITHOLDER. A person to whom a permit has been issued pursuant to this
subchapter.
SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house to house, place to place, street to street for the
purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares, products, merchandise,
other personal property or service, of which the person may be carrying or transporting samples,
or that may be described in a catalog or by other means, and for which payment, delivery and/ or
performance shall occur at least 24 hours after time of sale.
TRANSIENTMERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a vehicle,
trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, empty store front, vacant lot or parking lot for the
purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivering, goods,
wares, products, merchandise or other personal property.
Prior Code, § 3- 3- 1) ( Ord. 412, passed 8- 7- 1995; Ord. 593, passed 8- 8- 2005; Ord. 716, passed
5- 20- 2013; Ord. 769, passed 2- 16- 2016)
112. 02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in any permit activities within the City without first
having secured a permit in compliance with this subchapter. In addition, peddlers, solicitors and
transient merchants shall comply with all other applicable local, state and federal laws, rules and
regulations. Each peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant engaged in permit activities, whether
independently or on behalf of another, must have a separate permit. Each person engaged in
permit activities must be permitted as provided herein and may not be accompanied by a person
who is not permitted while engaging in such activities.
A) The permit requirement in this subchapter does not apply to merchants or their
employees delivering goods in the regular course of business; to persons who distribute printed
material but who do not make personal contact with the resident thereon; to the daily delivery of
newspapers; to the sale at wholesale to a retailer; to the delivery of perishable food or dairy
products to customers on an established delivery route; or to activities associated with the
exercise of a person' s constitutional rights ( freedom of press, speech, religion and the like)
Page 2 of 10
providing that no merchandise is concurrently offered for sale.
B) The permit requirement in this subchapter does not apply to peddlers or solicitors who
are 17 years of age or younger, who are engaged in permit activities on behalf of a public school
or private school, philanthropic organization, or community organization, which private school,
philanthropic organization or community organization or its parent organization is on file with
the Minnesota Secretary of State as a Minnesota domestic or a foreign business organization or
has filed an assumed name, where the proceeds of the sales are mainly devoted to the benefit of
the children engaged in the permit activities.
C) The permit requirement in this subchapter does not apply to non-commercial door-todoor
advocates. This exemption will not apply if the person' s exercise of constitutional rights is
merely incidental to a commercial activity.
Prior Code, § 3- 3- 2) ( Ord. 412, passed 8- 7- 1995; Ord. 716, passed 5- 20- 2013; Ord. 769,
passed 2- 16- 2016) Penalty, see § 10. 99
112. 03 TRANSIENT MERCHANT; REGULATION OF.
A) A transient merchant shall be eligible for a permit only under the following
circumstances:
1) Transient merchant operates within a building in accordance with Chapter 152 of
the City Code ( zoning) and other applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations;
or
2) Transient merchant operates in compliance with requirements of§§ 112.25 through
112. 33.
B) Exceptions. No permit under this subchapter shall be required for the following
activities: the sale of farm or garden products upon property in which the products were grown;
any sale under court order; garage sales, rummage sales, estate sales conducted by the property
owner; or any sale conducted by a properly licensed auctioneer. The number of the occasions
per property shall be limited to three per year, and the duration of each occasion shall be limited
to four days.
Prior Code, § 3- 3- 3) ( Ord. 412, passed 8- 7- 1995; Ord. 769, passed 2- 16- 2016) Penalty, see §
10. 99
112. 04 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE.
A) An Application for a permit under this subchapter shall be made on a form available
from the office of the City Clerk, and shall be accompanied by the permit fee set forth in the City
Fee Schedule as may be amended from time to time. The application form shall require a current
photograph of the applicant taken by the City Clerk at the time of submitting the application. No
fees are required of persons taking orders for the shipment of goods through interstate
Page 3 of 10
commerce.
Prior Code, § 3- 3- 4) ( Ord. 412, passed 8- 7- 1995; Ord. 769, passed 2- 16- 2016) Penalty, see §
10. 99
112. 05 PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCEDURE.
A) Applications. Applications shall be submitted to the City Clerk and shall be
accompanied by the application fee. The City Clerk shall take a photograph of the applicant for
inclusion on the permit. The City Clerk shall determine whether an application is complete
within two ( 2) regular business days. An application shall be considered complete if all required
information is provided, the fee is paid and the applicant allows a photograph to be taken by the
City Clerk. Upon determining that the application is complete the City Clerk shall refer the
application to the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall review the application and conduct
all investigation he/ she deems necessary including, but not limited to, a criminal history and
wanted persons check with the Bureau of Criminal Apprehension, and shall approve or deny the
application in the manner prescribed in this Section within a reasonable period of time.
B) If grounds exist under Section 112. 05 ( C) for denying the permit the Chief of Police
shall deny the permit, otherwise the Chief of Police shall immediately issue the permit to the
applicant.. In the case of a denial the Chief of Police shall notify the applicant in writing that
his/ her application is denied, the reason for denial, and that the applicant has the right to appeal
the denial as set forth below. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the permanent
residential address listed on the permit application, or if no residential address is listed, to the
business address provided on the permit application.
C) The following shall be grounds for denying a permit:
1) The applicant has failed to truthfully provide any of the information requested by
the City as part of the application or failed to pay the permit fee.
2) Conviction of any crime or crimes directly related to carrying on business as a
peddler, solicitor or transient merchant as provided in M.S. § 364. 03, Subd. 2, as it may be
amended from time to time; where the applicant has not shown competent evidence of sufficient
rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties and responsibilities as provided in M.S. §
364. 03, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time. Crimes that are considered to be
directly related to the business of peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants include but are not
limited to crimes involving assault, criminal sexual conduct, burglary, robbery, fraud, theft,
murder, manslaughter, rape, child abuse, incest, kidnapping, arson, blackmail, embezzlement,
extortion, forgery or larceny.
3) The revocation of any permit issued to the applicant for the purpose of conducting
business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant within the past five years.
4) The applicant is determined to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of a bad
business reputation shall include, but is not limited to, the existence of substantiated complaints
Page 4of10
against the applicant with the Better Business Bureau, the Attorney General' s office, or other
similar business or consumer rights office or agency, within the preceding 12 months; a rating of
C or less with the Better Business Bureau or other similar business or consumer rights office or
agency; or the existence of substantiated complaints against the applicant with the City or with
any other jurisdiction where the applicant performed permit activities within the preceding 3
years.
5) Failure to follow all Federal, State and Local laws, rules and regulations related to
permit activities.
6) If the permit activities are to be performed on another person' s behalf, the person on
whose behalf the permit activities are to be performed would be disqualified under any of the
above.
D) Appeal. An applicant may appeal the denial of a permit under this subchapter by filing a
request for a hearing with the Chief of Police, within ten ( 10) days of the date of mailing of the
notice of denial of the permit. The request for a hearing shall be accompanied by an appeal
deposit in the amount of$ 1, 000, in the form of cash or certified check. If no request for a
hearing is received in the time proscribed, the permit shall be deemed denied. If a hearing is
requested within the time proscribed, a hearing shall be scheduled before an impartial hearing
officer within 20 calendar days of the date of the request. Within 10 calendar days of the hearing
the hearing officer shall notify the City and the applicant in writing of his or her decision and the
reasons therefore. In the event the denial of the permit is upheld, the actual expenses of the
hearing shall be withdrawn from the deposit by the Chief of Police for reimbursement to the City
for said expenses and the amount remaining in the deposit, if any, shall be returned to the
applicant. In the event the denial is overturned the deposit shall be returned to the applicant.
E) Permit. Each person engaged in permit activities shall carry the City issued permit on
his or her person and shall display the permit between the waist and the neck on the front of his
or her outer garment while engaged in permit activities. In addition, each person engaged in
permit activities shall make the permit available for inspection by City employee or law
enforcement upon request. The City issued permit shall be invalidated upon suspension or
revocation and shall immediately be surrendered to the City.
F) Duration. All permits granted under this subchapter shall expire on December 31 at
9: 00 P. M.
G) Transferability. No permit issued under this subchapter shall be transferred to any other
person.
Prior Code, § 3- 3- 5) ( Ord. 412, passed 8- 7- 1995; Ord. 704, passed 8- 6- 2012; Ord. 724, passed
9- 3- 2013; Ord. 769, passed 2- 16- 2016) Penalty, see § 10. 99
112. 06 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
A permit issued under and pursuant to this subchapter may be immediately suspended by the
Page 5 of 10
Chief of Police by oral or written notice if the permit holder:
A) Uses fraud, misrepresentation or false statements during the course of permitted
activity;
B) Has been convicted of any offense, or takes any other action, for which a permit could
have been denied under this subchapter;
C) Conducts permit activities in an unlawful manner or a manner as to constitute a breach
of peace, or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public; or
D) Violates any part of this subchapter.
The suspension shall remain in effect until the permit is revoked or the suspension is lifted
subject to the procedure set forth below in Section 112. 07.
Prior Code, § 3- 3- 6) ( Ord. 412, passed 8- 7- 1995; Ord. 769, passed 2- 16- 2016) Penalty, see §
10. 99
112. 07 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
A) Notification. After the suspension of any permit issued under this subchapter, the City
shall notify the permit holder in writing of the alleged violation(s) and the permit holder' s right
to appeal the suspension as set forth below. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the
permanent residential address listed on the license application, or if no residential address is
listed, to the business address provided on the license application. A permit holder may appeal
the suspension of a permit under this subchapter by filing a request for a hearing with the Chief
of Police, within ten ( 10) days of the date of mailing of the notice of suspension. The request
shall be accompanied by an appeal deposit in the amount of$ 1, 000, in the form of cash or
certified check.
B) Hearing. If no request for a hearing is received by the Chief of Police within the time
proscribed, the permit shall be deemed revoked. If a hearing is requested within the time
proscribed, a hearing shall be scheduled before an impartial hearing officer within 20 calendar
days of the date of the request. Within 10 calendar days of the hearing the hearing officer shall
notify the City and the permit holder in writing of his or her decision and the reasons therefore.
In the event the permit is suspended or revoked, the actual expenses of the hearing shall be
withdrawn from the deposit by the Chief of Police for reimbursement to the City for said
expenses and the amount remaining in the deposit, if any, shall be returned to the permit holder.
In the event the permit is not suspended or revoked the deposit shall be returned to the applicant.
Prior Code, § 3- 3- 7) ( Ord. 412, passed 8- 7- 1995; Ord. 769, passed 2- 16- 2016) Penalty, see §
10. 99
112. 08 PRACTICES PROHIBITED.
Page 6 of 10
No peddler, solicitor, transient merchant or non-commercial door-to- door advocate, any
person acting on his or her behalf, or other person engaged in permit activities shall:
A) Shout, cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell, or use any sound amplifying device upon any of
the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the City or upon private property where sound
of sufficient volume is emitted or produced there from to be capable of being plainly heard upon
the streets, avenues, alleys, parks, or other public places.
B) Enter in or upon the property of another or attempt to enter in or upon the property of
another if a placard or sign has been posted excluding peddlers and solicitors. The printed
placard or sign must bear the notice: " Peddlers and Solicitors Prohibited"; " No Soliciting"; or
similar language clearly prohibiting permit activities. Such placard shall be at least 3- 3/ 4 inches
tall and 3- 3/ 4 inches wide and the letters shall be at least 1 inch tall. . No person other than the
person occupying such property shall remove, injure or deface such placard or sign.
C) Enter in or upon the property of another or attempt to enter in or upon the property of
another to engage in permit activities or similar activities before 9: 00 a.m. or after 9: 00 p.m.
local time.
D) Obstruct the free flow of traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian in any public or private
road, street or right of way.
E) Make false or misleading statements about the permit activities or the products or
services being sold.
F) State or imply that the City, by issuance of a permit, has endorsed his/ her activities or
products.
G) Harass, intimidate, abuse or threaten a person.
H) Engage in offensive, obscene, or abusive language, push open a door not opened by an
occupant, place any portion of the person' s body through an opened doorway without the
invitation of an occupant, or physically attempt to stop an occupant from closing a door.
I) Enter onto the property of another through any side or rear yard or attempt to make
contact with a person at any point other than the main point of entrance of the building or
property being approached.
J) Remain on the property of another and/ or engage or continue to engage in permit
activities after instructed to leave.
K) Conduct permit activities in a manner that threatens the health, safety, or welfare of any
person or the general public.
Prior Code, § 3- 3- 9) ( Ord. 412, passed 8- 7- 1995; Ord. 716, passed 5- 20- 2013; Ord. 769,
passed 2- 16- 2016) Penalty, see § 10. 99
Page 7 of 10
112. 09 SEVERABILITY.
Should any section, clause or portion of this article be found invalid, unenforceable or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the finding shall not apply to any other
section, clause or portion of this subchapter, unless the court' s finding specifically provides
otherwise.
Prior Code, § 3- 3- 11) ( Ord. 412, passed 8- 7- 1995; Ord. 769, passed 2- 16- 2016)
112. 10 PENALTY.
A) Failure to perform, meet or comply with any condition or obligation imposed upon any
person by the City Code shall constitute a sufficient ground to deny, suspend, or revoke a permit.
B) A person who commits or attempts to commit, conspires to commit or aids or abets in the
commission of an act constituting a violation of this subchapter, whether individually or in
connection with one or more other persons or as principal, agent, or accessory is guilty of a
misdemeanor. A person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or willfully induces, causes, coerces,
permits or directs another to violate a provision of subchapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
Ord. 769, passed 2- 16- 2016)
TEMPORARY/SEASONAL OUTDOOR SALES
112. 25 DEFINITION.
As used in this subchapter, TEMPORARY OUTDOOR SALES shall be defined as the
display or sale of seasonal items including but not limited to nursery stock, Christmas trees,
plants and related material, lawn and garden accessories and farm produce.
Prior Code, § 3- 3- 12) ( Ord. 287, passed 8- 24- 1989)
112. 26 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall conduct temporary/seasonal outdoor sales without having first received a
permit as provided in this subchapter.
Prior Code, § 3- 3- 13) ( Ord. 287, passed 8- 24- 1989) Penalty, see § 10. 99
112. 27 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE.
A) Applications for the permit shall be made to the city and shall include a list of materials
to be sold or displayed, the duration of the proposed activity, and graphics to show layout and
relationship of the sales area/ display to other improvements and/ or structures on the property and
Page 8 of 10
any other information deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator.
B) The permit fee shall be set by ordinance. The fee is non-refundable and shall be paid in
full before the application is accepted. The City Administrator shall be authorized, at its
discretion, to waive the fee or a part thereof
Prior Code, § 3- 3- 14) ( Ord. 287, passed 8- 24- 1989) Penalty, see § 10. 99
112. 28 DURATION.
Permits issued under this subchapter shall be for a period not to exceed 90 days in any
calendar year. No more than two permits shall be issued to the same applicant or property in any
calendar year.
Prior Code, § 3- 3- 15) ( Ord. 287, passed 8- 24- 1989) Penalty, see § 10. 99
112. 29 EXEMPTIONS.
Schools, academies, universities, libraries, churches, hospitals or similar institutions shall be
required to obtain a permit for temporary/ seasonal outdoor sales, and to meet performance
standards thereof, but shall be exempt from payment of the permit fee.
Prior Code, § 3- 3- 16) ( Ord. 287, passed 8- 24- 1989)
112. 30 PERMIT HOLDER.
Each permit shall be issued for a particular use and only to the applicant, who shall be the
owner of the property or who is authorized by the owner to apply for the permit. The permit
shall not be transferred or assigned for use by another without the written consent of the city.
The consent, by the city, shall not be unreasonably withheld.
Prior Code, § 3- 3- 17) ( Ord. 287, passed 8- 24- 1989)
112. 31 PERMIT AUTHORITY/PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
The Zoning Administrator, or his or her assignee shall review applications and grant permits
for temporary/ seasonal outdoor sales. The approval shall be given if the applicant demonstrates
that the following performance standards have been met.
A) Property value within the vicinity is protected.
B) The goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan are achieved.
C) The number, area, bulk, height, location, frequency and duration of the uses are
controlled.
Page 9 of 10
D) Ingress and egress to the property and the proposed area/ structure( s) thereon shall be
provided in a way that the following are assured: vehicle and pedestrian safety and convenience,
traffic flow and control, access in case of fire or catastrophe.
E) If required, off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided.
F) Public address systems shall not be permitted.
G) The site shall be kept in a neat and orderly fashion, free from litter, refuse, debris, junk
or other waste which results in offensive odors or unsightly conditions.
H) No uses or displays shall be permitted in required parking areas, or within any
right-of-way or other public property.
I) Signage shall be limited to one sign not to exceed 32 square feet. The sign shall have a
professional appearance and shall be mounted or erected in an appropriate location. This
limitation applies to all signs associated with the use or event, including those affixed to
vehicles. The sign may be illuminated but must comply with all requirements of the sign
regulations.
J) The use or event shall not interrupt vehicular circulation on the site or obstruct parking
spaces needed by any permanent business established on the site.
K) Written authorization of the property owner must be available upon request at all times.
L) No portion of the use or event shall take place within 100 feet of any developed
property zoned for residential use.
M) Display of items shall be arranged in as compact a manner as reasonably practical.
Prior Code, § 3- 3- 18) ( Ord. 287, passed 8- 24- 1989) Penalty, see § 10. 99
112. 32 DENIAL FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.
A denial of a permit by the Zoning Administrator shall include findings as to reason the
proposed use does not comply with the standards set forth in this subchapter.
Prior Code, § 3- 3- 19) ( Ord. 287, passed 8- 24- 1989)
112. 33 VIOLATIONS.
Violation of the above performance standards shall constitute grounds for revocation of the
permit. Notice of the violations shall be served in writing. Three days ( following the date the
notice was given) shall be given for the permit holder to make the required corrections. If, after
three days, the area and/ or activity remain in noncompliance, the permit shall be immediately
revoked.
Prior Code, § 3- 3- 20) ( Ord. 287, passed 8- 24- 1989) Penalty, see § 10. 99
Page 10 of 10
CHAPTER 113: TAXICABS
Section
113. 01 Definitions
113. 02 License required; exceptions as to reciprocity
113. 03 Application for license
113. 04 License fees
113. 05 Insurance requirements
113. 06 Issuance of license
113. 07 Rates of fare
113. 08 Vehicle requirements
113. 09 Operation of taxicabs; requirements for drivers
113. 10 Revocation of license
113. 01 DEFINITIONS.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter, the following words shall
have the meanings hereinafter set forth:
OPERATOR. Includes any person, partnership or corporation owning or having control of
the use of one or more taxicabs.
TAXICAB. A motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying persons for hire, having a
seating capacity of less than ten persons and not operated on a fixed route.
TAXICAB DRIVER. Shall mean and include any person who drives a taxicab, whether the
person be the owner of the taxicab or be employed by a taxicab owner or operator.
Prior Code, § 3- 4- 1) ( Ord. 144, passed 11- 30- 1981)
113. 02 LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS AS TO RECIPROCITY.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the taxicab business without a license therefore
from the city. This section shall not apply to taxicabs licensed by any municipality within the
counties of Scott, Carver, Dakota, Hennepin, Ramsey and Washington which licenses taxicab or
taxicab drivers under regulations that meet or exceed the requirements of this section and if
taxicab drivers are checked by such municipality for traffic and criminal offenses. Taxicabs
operating with the city by virtue of a license issued by such other municipality are deemed
licensed by the city for purposes of§ 113. 10..
Prior Code, § 3- 4- 2) ( Ord. 144, passed 11- 30- 1981) Penalty, see § 10. 99
Page 1 of 4
113. 03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
Application shall be filed with the City Administrator upon forms provided and the
application shall furnish the following:
A) The name and address of the applicant;
B) The financial status of the applicant, including the amount of all unpaid judgments
against the applicant and the nature of the transaction or acts giving rise to the judgment;
C) The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers;
D) Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that public convenience and
necessity require the granting of a license;
E) The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant, the location of
proposed depots and terminals, the owner of the vehicles and the license number of each vehicle;
F) The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicle or vehicles of the
applicant;
G) A statement signed by the applicant indicating the applicant' s understanding that
falsification of any item on the application is sufficient reason upon which to base a denial of the
license; and
H) Further information as the Council may require.
Prior Code, § 3- 4- 3) ( Ord. 144, passed 11- 30- 1981) Penalty, see § 10. 99
113. 04 LICENSE FEES.
If the Council approves the license upon the application, a license shall be issued to the
applicant upon the payment of an annual per vehicle license fee as established by ordinance. The
license fee shall be prorated and shall be in effect for the remainder of the calendar year and shall
expire on the last day of February of each calendar year. A new license for each succeeding year
shall be issued upon the payment of a like fee unless the license has been revoked as provided
herein.
Prior Code, § 3- 4- 4) ( Ord. 144, passed 11- 30- 1981) Penalty, see § 10. 99
Page 2 of 4
113. 05 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
No license to operate a taxicab shall be issued by the city until a certificate of insurance has
been filed with the City Administrator establishing that there is in full force and effect a liability
insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of
Minnesota for each vehicle authorized to be operated by the applicant in the amount of$ 100, 000
for bodily injury to any one person and the amount of$ 300,000 for injury to more than one
person which are sustained in the same accident, and $ 50,000 for property damage resulting from
any one accident. Each policy will provide that the city shall receive ten days' written notice
prior to cancellation of the policy.
Prior Code, § 3- 4- 5) ( Ord. 144, passed 11- 30- 1981) Penalty, see § 10. 99
113. 06 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
If the City Council is satisfied that the public convenience and good order will be served
thereby, it may issue license in the numbers as it shall from time to time determine. In making
the above findings, the Council shall take into consideration the number of taxicabs already in
operation; whether existing transportation is adequate to meet the public needs; the probable
effect of increased service on local traffic conditions; the character, experience and responsibility
of the applicant; and the criminal background check if conducted.
Prior Code, § 3- 4- 6) ( Ord. 144, passed 11- 30- 1981; Ord. 704, passed 8- 6- 2012; Ord. 724,
passed 9- 3- 13)
113. 07 RATES OF FARE.
Every taxicab operated under this chapter shall have a rate card setting forth the authorized
rates or fares displayed in a place as to be visible to all passengers. Every operator licensed to
operate a taxicab or taxicabs in the city shall submit to the Council for approval, the rates to be
charged, and no other rates may be charged without the approval of the Council.
Prior Code, § 3- 4- 7) ( Ord. 144, passed 11- 30- 1981) Penalty, see § 10. 99
113. 08 VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS.
A) License number. Each taxicab operated by the licensee shall bear upon the exterior
surface of the body at the rear of the taxicab, so as to be plainly visible at all times, the taxicab
license number.
B) Name of owner on door. Every taxicab, which shall solicit or accept business on the
streets of this city, shall have some designation of the character of the vehicle painted in plain
visible letters on each side thereof.
Page 3 of 4
C) Vehicle condition, inspection. Prior to the use of any vehicle by a taxicab operator for
an operation licensed by the city, the vehicle shall be inspected by a competent and experienced
mechanic, approved by the Chief of Police, and a certificate issued by that mechanic that the
vehicle is in good condition, that it is thoroughly safe for transportation of passengers, and that it
is neat and clean. A similar inspection of each vehicle shall be made at least every 12 months or
sooner if directed by the Chief of Police.
Prior Code, § 3- 4- 8) ( Ord. 144, passed 11- 30- 1981) Penalty, see § 10. 99
113. 09 OPERATION OF TAXICABS; REQUIREMENTS FOR DRIVERS.
A) Driver' s license and identification required. No person shall drive a taxicab licensed
under this chapter on the streets of the city without having a valid Minnesota driver' s license of
the proper class or kind issued to him or her and in his or her possession. Each driver shall
display an identification card, including a photograph of the driver, visible to all passengers at all
times that he or she is driving a taxicab.
B) Additional passengers, consent required. No driver of any licensed taxicab shall carry
any other than the passenger first employing a taxicab without the consent of the passenger.
C) Increased rates offare. No person shall charge or attempt to charge any passenger a
greater rate of fare than that to which the taxicab' s is entitled under the schedule of the rates
filed.
D) Deceit. No taxicab driver shall deceive any passenger who may ride with him or her, or
may desire to ride in any vehicle, as to his or her destination or distance traveled or to be
traveled.
E) Drivers to he clean and courteous. All taxicab drivers shall be clean and courteous at all
times.
Prior Code, § 3- 4- 9) ( Ord. 144, passed 11- 30- 1981) Penalty, see § 10. 99
113. 10 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
The license of any operator under this chapter may be revoked for failing or refusing to
comply with the provisions hereof or for the failure of any driver of a taxicab employed by the
operator to comply with all city, state and federal laws. The revocation will be pursuant to a
hearing before the Council at which the applicant shall have an opportunity to present evidence
in his or her behalf.
Prior Code, § 3- 4- 10) ( Ord. 144, passed 11- 30- 1981)
Page 4 of 4
CHAPTER 114: THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE ENTERPRISES
AND
THERAPISTSREGULATION
Section
114.01 FindingsoftheCouncil
114.02 Definitions
114.03 Licenserequired
114.04 Licenseapplications
114.05 Applicationrequirements, investigationandconsideration, andlicensetermand
renewal
114.06 Standards
114.07 Exemptions
114.08 Generalprovisionsregardinglicenses
114.09 Revocationorsuspension
114.10 Violationamisdemeanor
114.11 ApplicationofthisOrdinance
114.01. FINDINGSOFTHECOUNCIL.
TheCouncilmakesthefollowingfindingsregardingtheneedtolicensetherapeutic
massageenterprisesandtherapistsandtoprohibitallothertypesofmassagebusinessesand
servicestothepublic:
A) Personswhohavebonafideandstandardizedtrainingintherapeuticmassage,
health, andhygienecanprovidealegitimateandnecessaryservicetothegeneralpublic.
B) Healthandsanitationregulationsgoverningtherapeuticmassageenterprisesand
therapistscanminimizetheriskofthespreadofcommunicablediseasesandcanpromoteoverall
healthandsanitation.
C) Licensequalificationsfortherestrictionsontherapeuticmassageenterprisesand
therapistscanminimizetheriskthatsuchbusinessesandpersonswillfacilitateprostitutionand
othercriminalactivityinthecommunity.
D) Massageservicesprovidedbypersonswithnospecializedandstandardized
traininginmassagecanendangercitizensbyfacilitatingthespreadofcommunicablediseases,
byexposingcitizenstounhealthyandunsanitaryconditions, andbyincreasingtheriskof
personalinjury.
E) Massagebusinesseswhichemploypersonswithnospecializedandstandardized
trainingcantaxCitylaw-enforcementservices, becausesuchbusinessesaremorelikelytobe
operatedasfrontsforprostitutionandothercriminalactivitythanoperationsestablishedby
Page1of18
personswithstandardizedtraining.
F) Thetrainingofprofessionalmassagetherapistsataccreditedinstitutionsisan
importantmeansofensuringthefullestmeasureofprotectingthepublichealth, safety, and
welfare.
Ord. 664, passed5-3-2010)
114.02 DEFINITIONS.
AsusedinthisChapter, unlessotherwisestatedinspecificsections, thefollowingwords
andtermsshallhavethemeaningsstated:
APPLICANT - anypersonmakinganapplicationforalicenseunderthisChapter.
APPLICATION - aformtobecompletedbytheapplicantashisorherrequestfora
license, furnishedbytheCityandrequiredasaprerequisitetotheconsiderationoftheissuance
ofalicense.
ACCREDITEDINSTITUTION - aneducationalinstitutionholdingaccreditedstatus
withtheUnitedStatesDepartmentofEducation.
ACCREDITEDPROGRAM - aprofessionalmassageprogramaccreditedbythe
CommissiononMassageTherapyAccreditation (COMTA).
CLEAN - theabsenceofdirt, grease, rubbish, garbage, andotheroffensive, unsightly, or
extraneousmatter.
GOODREPAIR - freeofcorrosion, breaks, cracks, chips, pitting, excessivewearand
tear, leaks, obstructions, andsimilardefectssoastoconstituteagoodandsoundcondition.
ISSUINGAUTHORITY - theSavagePoliceDepartment.
MASSAGE - anymethodofpressureon, orfrictionagainst, ortherubbing, stroking,
kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating, stimulating, orrollingoftheexternalpartsofthehuman
bodywiththehandsorwiththeaidofanymechanicalorelectricalapparatus, orotherappliances
ordevices, withorwithoutsuchsupplementaryaidsasrubbingalcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil,
powder, cream, lotion, ointment, orothersimilarpreparations.
MASSAGETHERAPIST - anindividualwhopracticesoradministersmassagetothe
publicwhocandemonstratetotheIssuingAuthoritythatheorshe:
1) hascurrentinsurancecoverageofonemilliondollars ($1,000,000) forprofessional
liabilityinthepracticeofmassage;
2) isaffiliatedwith, employedby, orownsatherapeuticmassageenterpriselicensedby
theCity; and
Page2of18
3) hascompletedsixhundred (600) hoursofcertifiedtherapeuticmassagetrainingwith
contentthatincludessubjectsofanatomy, physiology, hygiene, ethics, massagetheoryand
research, andmassagepracticefromanAccreditedInstitutionorAccreditedProgramapproved
bytheIssuingAuthority, orhasatleasttwo (2) yearsoffull-timeexperienceworkingasa
licensedmassagetherapistatalicensedtherapeuticmassageenterpriseorotherlicensedbusiness
approvedbytheIssuingAuthority.
OPERATE - toown, manage, orconduct, ortohavecontrol, charge, orcustodyover.
PERSON(S) - anyindividual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, jointventure, or
combinationofindividuals.
THERAPEUTICMASSAGEENTERPRISE - abusinesswhichemploysorhires
therapeuticmassagetherapistslicensedinaccordancewiththisChaptertoprovidemassageto
thepublic. Theowner/operatorofatherapeuticmassageenterpriseneednotbelicensedasa
therapeuticmassagetherapistifheorshedoesnotatanytimepracticeoradministermassageto
thepublic.
WITHINTHECITY - includesphysicalpresenceaswellastelephonereferralssuchas
phone-a-massageoperationsinwhichthebusinesspremises, althoughnotphysicallylocated
withintheCity, servesasapointofassignmentofemployeeswhorespondtorequestsfor
servicesfromwithintheCity.
PriorCode, § 3-6-1) ( Ord. 68, passed2-26-1976; Ord. 570, passed2-2-2004; Ord. 664, passed
5-3-2010)
114.03 LICENSEREQUIRED.
A) TherapeuticMassageEnterpriseLicense. Itshallbeunlawfulforanypersonto
operate, engagein, orcarryonatherapeuticmassageenterprisewithintheCitywithoutfirst
havingobtainedalicensefromtheCitypursuanttothisChapter.
B) MassageTherapistLicense. Itshallbeunlawfulforanyindividualtopractice,
administer, orprovidemassageservicestothepublicforconsiderationwithintheCitywithout
firsthavingobtainedalicensefromtheCitypursuanttothisChapter.
PriorCode, § 3-6-2) ( Ord. 68, passed2-26-1976; Ord. 664, passed5-3-2010; Ord. 794, passed
6-4-2018) Penalty, see § 10.99
114.04 LICENSEAPPLICATIONS.
A) Application. AllapplicationsforlicensesissuedunderthisChaptershallbemadeon
formssuppliedbytheIssuingAuthority. Allquestionsaskedorinformationrequiredbythe
applicationformsshallbeansweredfullyandcompletelybytheapplicant.
B) TherapeuticMassageEnterpriseLicenseApplication. Anapplicationfora
Page3of18
therapeuticmassageenterpriselicenseshallrequestthefollowinginformation:
1) AllApplicants. Forallapplicants:
a) Whethertheapplicantisanindividual, corporation, partnership, or
otherformoforganization.
b) Thelegaldescriptionofthepremisestobelicensedtogetherwitha
planoftheareashowingdimensions, locationofbuildings, street
access, andparkingfacilities.
c) Thefloornumber, streetnumber, androomswherethemassage
servicesaretobeconducted.
d) Whetherallrealestateandpersonalpropertytaxesthataredueand
payableforthepremisestobelicensedhavebeenpaid, andifnot
paid, theyearsandamountsthatareunpaid.
e) Whenevertheapplicationisforpremiseseitherplannedorunder
constructionorundergoingsubstantialalteration, theapplication
shallbeaccompaniedbyasetofpreliminaryplansshowingthe
designoftheproposedpremisestobelicensed. Iftheplansfor
designareonfilewiththeCityBuildingInspectionsDepartment,
noplansneedbesubmittedtotheCity.
f) Thenameandstreetaddressofthebusinessifitistobeconducted
underadesignation, name, orstyleotherthanthenameofthe
applicant, andacertifiedcopyofthecertificateasrequiredby
MinnesotaStatutes §333.01.
g) Theamountoftheinvestmentthattheapplicanthasinthe
business, building, premises, fixtures, furniture, andequipment,
andproofofthesourceofsuchinvestment. Theidentityofall
otherpersonsinvestinginthebusiness, building, premises, fixture,
furnitureandequipment, theamountoftheirinvestmentandproof
ofthesourceofsuchinvestment.
h) Thenameandaddressofeachpersonemployedorwhothe
applicantintendstoemployasamassagetherapistatthepremises,
acopyoftheperson’smassagetherapistlicenseissuedbytheCity
andanyotherjurisdiction, ifany, anddocumentationtoevidence
compliancewith § 114.02, MASSAGETHERAPIST, (3).
i) SuchotherinformationastheCityCouncilorIssuingAuthority
mayrequire.
2) Individuals. Forapplicantswhoareindividuals:
Page4of18
a) Thename, placeanddateofbirth, andstreetresidenceaddressof
theapplicant.
b) Whethertheapplicanthaseverusedorbeenknownbyaname
otherthantheapplicant'sname, andifso, thenameornamesand
informationconcerningdatesandplaceswhereused.
c) WhethertheapplicantisacitizenoftheUnitedStatesoraresident
alienorhasthelegalauthoritytoworkintheUnitedStates.
d) Streetaddressesatwhichtheapplicanthaslivedduringthe
precedingfive (5) years.
e) Thetype, name, andlocationofeverybusinessoroccupationthe
applicanthasbeenengagedinduringtheprecedingfive (5) years.
f) Namesandaddressesoftheapplicant'semployersforthe
precedingfive (5) years.
g) Whethertheapplicanthaseverbeenconvictedofanyfelony,
crime, orviolationofanyordinanceotherthanaminortraffic
offense. Ifso, theapplicantshallfurnishinformationastothe
time, placeandoffenseforwhichconvictionswerehad.
h) Whethertheapplicanthashadaninterestin, asanindividualoras
partofacorporation, partnership, association, enterprise, business
orfirm, amassagelicensethatwasrevokedorsuspendedwithin
thelastfive (5) yearsofthedatethelicenseapplicationis
submittedtotheCity.
i) Whethertheapplicanthaseverbeenengagedintheoperationof
massageservices. Ifso, applicantshallfurnishinformationasto
thename, placeandlengthoftimeoftheinvolvementinsuchan
establishment.
3) Partnerships. Fortheapplicantsthatarepartnerships: thenamesand
addressesofallgeneralandlimitedpartnersandallinformationconcerningeachgeneralpartner
asisrequiredin (B)(2) ofthisSection. Themanagingpartnersshallbedesignated, andthe
interestofeachgeneralandlimitedpartnerinthebusinessshallbedisclosed. Atruecopyofthe
partnershipagreementshallbesubmittedwiththeapplication, andifthepartnershipisrequired
tofileacertificateastoanassumednameunderMinnesotaStatutes §333.02, acertifiedcopyof
suchcertificateshallbesubmitted. Thelicenseshallbeissuedinthenameofthepartnership.
4) CorporationsandOtherOrganizations. Forapplicantsthatare
corporations, limitedliabilitycompanies, orotherbusinessentities, otherthanapartnership (all
Page5of18
referredtoasacorporationororganization):
a) Thenameofthecorporation, limitedliabilitycompanyor
organization, andifincorporatedororganized, thestateof
incorporationororganization.
b) AtruecopyoftheCertificateofIncorporationorCertificateof
Organization, and, ifaforeigncorporation, aCertificateof
AuthorityasdescribedinMinnesotaStatutes §303.06.
c) Thenameofthegeneralmanager, officers, proprietor, andother
personinchargeofthepremisestobelicensed, andallthe
informationaboutsaidpersonsasisrequiredin (B)(2) ofthis
Section.
d) Alistofallpersonswhoownorcontrolaninterestinthe
corporationororganizationorwhoareofficersofsaidcorporation
ororganization, togetherwiththeiraddressesandallthe
informationregardingsuchpersonsasisrequiredin (B)(2) ofthis
Section.
C) MassageTherapistLicenseApplication. Anapplicationforamassagetherapist
licenseshallrequestthefollowinginformation:
1) Theapplicant'snameandcurrentaddress.
2) Theapplicant'scurrentemployer.
3) Theapplicant'semployersforthepreviousfive (5) years, includingthe
employer'sname, addressanddatesofemployment.
4) Theapplicant'saddressesforthepreviousfive (5) years.
5) Theapplicant'sdateofbirth, hometelephonenumber, weight, height,
colorofeyes, andcolorofhair.
6) Whethertheapplicanthaseverbeenconvictedofanyfelony, crime, or
violationofanyordinanceotherthanaminortrafficoffenseand, ifso, thetime, place, and
offenseforwhichconvictionswerehad.
7) Whethertheapplicanthashadaninterestin, asanindividualoraspartof
acorporation, partnership, association, enterprise, businessorfirm, amassagelicensethatwas
revokedorsuspendedwithinthelastfive (5) yearsofthedatethelicenseapplicationissubmitted
totheCity;
Page6of18
8) WhethertheapplicantisaU.S. citizenorresidentalienorhasthelegal
authoritytoworkintheUnitedStates.
9) Whethertheapplicanthaseverusedorbeenknownbyanameotherthan
theapplicant'sname, andifso, thenameornamesandinformationconcerningdatesandplaces
whereused.
10) Whethertheapplicantmeetsthedefinitionofmassagetherapistin §114.02
ofthisChapter.
11) SuchotherinformationastheCityCouncilorIssuingAuthoritymay
require.
PriorCode, § 3-6-3) ( Ord. 68, passed2-26-1976; Ord. 664, passed5-3-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
114.05 APPLICATIONREQUIREMENTS, INVESTIGATIONAND
CONSIDERATION, ANDLICENSETERMANDRENEWAL.
A) Filing. Anapplicationforatherapeuticmassageenterpriseortherapistlicenseunder
thisChaptermustbefiledwiththeIssuingAuthority.
B) InsuranceRequirements.
1) Eachapplicantforatherapeuticmassageenterpriselicenseshallfilewith
theIssuingAuthorityapublicliabilityinsurancepolicyorcertificateofinsurancefroma
companyauthorizedtodobusinessintheStateofMinnesota, insuringtheapplicantagainstany
andalllossarisingoutoftheuse, operation, ormaintenanceofthetherapeuticmassage
enterprise. Thepolicyofinsuranceshallbeinlimitsofnotlessthan $1,000,000.00.
2) EachapplicantforamassagetherapistlicenseshallfilewiththeIssuing
Authorityacurrentcertificateofinsuranceprovidingcoverageofonemilliondollars
1,000,000) forpersonalliabilityinthepracticeofmassage.
3) Failuretokeepinfullforceandeffecttheinsurancerequiredbythis
Sectionisgroundsforsuspensionorrevocationofthelicense
C) ApplicationandInvestigationFees. Uponsubmissionoftheapplication, applicants
fortherapeuticmassageenterprisesandtherapistlicensesshallpayafeetotheCitywhichshall
beconsideredanapplicationandinvestigationfee, notrefundabletoapplicant, tocoverthecosts
oftheCityinprocessingtheapplicationandtheinvestigationthereof. Allapplicationand
investigationfeesprovidedforinthisChaptershallbefixedanddeterminedbytheCouncil.
Suchfees, may, fromtimetotime, beamendedbytheCouncil.
D) LicenseApplicationVerificationandConsideration.
Page7of18
1) TherapeuticMassageEnterpriseLicense.
a) VerificationandConsideration. Theinitialapplicationfora
therapeuticmassageenterpriselicenseunderthisChaptershallbe
presentedtotheCityCouncilforconsideration, aftertheIssuingAuthority
hasverifiedtheinformationontheapplication. TheIssuingAuthorityis
empoweredtoconductanyandallinvestigationstoverifytheinformation
ontheapplication. UponadenialofanapplicationbytheCityCouncil,
noticeshallbesentbyregularmailtotheapplicantwhichshallprovide
thegroundsforsuchdenial. UponapprovalofanapplicationbytheCity
Council, theIssuingAuthorityshallissueatherapeuticmassageenterprise
licensetotheapplicant.
2) MassageTherapistLicense.
a) VerificationandConsideration. Theinitialapplicationfora
massagetherapistlicenseunderthisChaptershallbepresentedtotheCity
ClerkforreviewforcompliancewiththisCode, aftertheIssuing
Authorityhasverifiedtheinformationontheapplication. TheIssuing
Authorityisempoweredtoconductanyandallinvestigationstoverifythe
informationontheapplication, includingorderingacomputerized
criminalhistoryinquiryand/oradriver'slicensehistoryinquiryonthe
applicant. IftheCityClerkfindstheapplicationisnotincompliancewith
thisCode, theCityClerkshalldenytheapplication. Uponadenialofthe
application, noticeshallbesentbyregularmailtotheapplicantwhich
noticeshallprovidethegroundsforsuchdenialandshallinformthe
applicantoftheapplicant’sright, within20calendardaysofreceiptofthe
noticebyapplicant, torequestanappealoftheCityClerk’sdetermination
totheCityCouncil. IfanappealtotheCityCouncilistimelyreceivedby
theCityClerk, thehearingbeforetheCityCouncilshalltakeplacewithin
20calendardaysofthereceiptoftheappealbytheCityClerk. IftheCity
ClerkfindstheapplicationisincompliancewiththisCode, theCityClerk
shallapprovetheapplication. Uponapprovalofanapplication, the
IssuingAuthorityshallissueamassagetherapistlicensetotheapplicant
whichshallbeaccompaniedbyacolorphotoofthelicensee.
b) PhotoI.D. Cards. PhotoIdentificationcardsshallbeissuedto
individualsreceivingamassagetherapistlicense.
E) CurrentInformationRequired. AlicenseemustpromptlynotifytheIssuing
Authorityofachangeintheinformationorfactsrequiredtobefurnishedontheapplicationfora
license, evenafterthelicensehasbeenissued.
F) TermofLicense. MassagetherapistlicensesissuedunderthisChaptershall
expireontheone-yearanniversaryofissuanceofthelicense. Therapeuticmassageenterprise
Page8of18
licensesshallexpireonthelastdayofFebruaryeachyear.
G) RenewalofLicense.
1) TherapeuticMassageEnterpriseLicense. Applicationsforrenewalof
TherapeuticMassageEnterpriseLicensesissuedunderthisSectionshallbemadeatleastninety
90) dayspriortotheexpirationdateofthelicenseandshallbeinsuchformasrequiredbythe
IssuingAuthority. Withinareasonableperiodafterthecompletionoftherenewalapplication
verificationprocess, therenewalapplicationshallbepresentedtotheCityCouncilfor
consideration. UponadenialofarenewalapplicationbytheCityCouncil, noticeshallbesentby
regularmailtotheapplicantwhichshallprovidethegroundsforsuchdenial. Uponapprovalofa
renewalapplicationbytheCityCouncil, theIssuingAuthorityshallrenewtheapplicant’s
license.
2) MassageTherapistLicense. ApplicationsforrenewalofMassage
TherapistLicensesissuedunderthisSectionshallbemadeatleastninety (90) dayspriortothe
expirationdateofthelicenseandshallbeinsuchformasrequiredbytheIssuingAuthority.
Withinareasonableperiodafterthecompletionoftherenewalapplicationverificationprocess,
therenewalapplicationshallbepresentedtotheCityClerkforreviewforcompliancewiththis
Code. IftheCityClerkfindstheapplicationisnotincompliancewiththisCode, theCityClerk
shalldenytheapplication. Uponadenialofarenewalapplication, noticeshallbesentbyregular
mailtotheapplicantwhichnoticeshallprovidethegroundsforsuchdenialandshallinformthe
applicantoftheapplicant’sright, within20calendardaysofreceiptofthenoticebyapplicant, to
requestanappealoftheCityClerk’sdeterminationtotheCityCouncil. IfanappealtotheCity
CouncilistimelyreceivedbytheCityClerk, thehearingbeforetheCityCouncilshalltakeplace
within20calendardaysofthereceiptoftheappealbytheCityClerk. IftheCityClerkfindsthe
applicationisincompliancewiththisCode, theCityClerkshallapprovetheapplication. Upon
approvalofarenewalapplication, theIssuingAuthorityshallrenewtheapplicant’slicense.
PriorCode, § 3-6-4) ( Ord. 68, passed2-26-1976; Ord. 570, passed2-2-2004; Ord. 664, passed
5-3-2010; Ord. 704, passed8-6-2012; Ord. 724, passed9-3-2013; Ord. 733, passed3-17-2014)
Penalty, see § 10.99
114.06 STANDARDS.
A) TherapeuticMassageEnterpriseLicense.
1) Notherapeuticmassageenterpriselicenseshallbeissuedto:
a) Anindividualwhoisnoteighteen (18) yearsofageorolderatthe
timetheapplicationissubmittedtotheCity;
b) Apersonwhohasbeenconvictedofanycrimedirectlyrelatedto
theoccupationlicensedasprescribedbyMinnesotaStatutes
364.03, subdivision2, andwhohasnotshowncompetent
evidenceofsufficientrehabilitationandpresentfitnesstoperform
Page9of18
thedutiesandresponsibilitiesofalicenseeasprescribedby
MinnesotaStatutes §364.03, subdivision3;
c) AnindividualwhoisnotacitizenoftheUnitedStatesoraresident
alien, orislegallyprohibitedfromworkingintheUnitedStates;
d) Apersonwhoisnotofgoodmoralcharacterorrepute;
e) Apersonwhoisnottherealpartyininterestoftheenterprise;
f) Apersonwhohasknowinglymisrepresentedorfalsified
informationonthelicenseapplication;
g) Apersonwhohadaninterestinorhasapersoninvestinginthe
business, building, premises, fixture, furnitureorequipmentthat
hadaninterestin, asanindividualoraspartofacorporation,
partnership, association, enterprise, businessorfirm, amassagerelatedlicensethatwasrevokedorsuspendedwithinthelastfive
5) yearsofthedatethelicenseapplicationissubmittedtothe
City;
h) Apersonthatcannotmeetthedefinitionoftherapeuticmassage
enterprisein §114.02ofthisChapter;
i) ApersonwhoowestaxesorassessmentstotheState, County,
SchoolDistrict, orCitythataredueanddelinquent;
j) Anindividualwhoisthespouseofapersonwhosemassagerelatedlicensehasbeensuspendedorrevokedinthepastfive
(5)
years;
k) Apersonwhohasbeendeniedatherapeuticmassageenterprise
licensebytheCitywithinone (1) yearofthedateofthelicense
application; or
l) Apersonwhodoesnotprovideallinformationrequiredbythe
licenseapplicationorsuchotherinformationastheIssuing
AuthorityorCityCouncilmayrequire.
m) Apersonwhodoesnothaveone (1) ormoremassagetherapists
employedbyoraffiliatedwiththetherapeuticmassageenterprise
whoislicensedbytheCityatthetimethetherapeuticmassage
enterpriselicenseisissued.
n) Apersonthatdoesnothave, oratthetimeofissuanceofalicense
doesnotplantohave, atleastonepermanentphysicalpremisesin
Page10of18
theCityonwhichthetherapeuticmassageenterprisewillbe
located.
2) Notherapeuticmassageenterpriseshallbelicensedif:
a) Suchenterpriseislocatedonpropertyonwhichtaxes, assessments,
orotherfinancialclaimstotheState, County, SchoolDistrict, or
Cityaredueanddelinquent. Intheeventasuithasbeen
commencedunderMinnesotaStatutes, §§ 278.01 - 278.13,
questioningtheamountorvalidityoftaxes, theCouncilmayon
applicationwaivestrictcompliancewiththisprovision; nowaiver
maybegranted, however, fortaxesoranyportionthereof, which
remainunpaidforaperiodexceedingone (1) yearafterbecoming
due.
b) Thelocationofsuchenterpriseisnotinconformancewiththeland
useregulationsoftheCityCodeunlesssuchenterpriseisalegal,
nonconforminguse.
B) MassageTherapistLicense. Nomassagetherapistlicenseshallbeissuedtoan
individualwho:
1) Isnoteighteen (18) yearsofageorolderatthetimetheapplicationis
submittedtotheCity;
2) Hasbeenconvictedofanycrimedirectlyrelatedtotheoccupation
licensedasprescribedbyMinnesotaStatutes §364.03, subdivision2, andwhohasnotshown
competentevidenceofsufficientrehabilitationandpresentfitnesstoperformthedutiesand
responsibilitiesofalicenseeasprescribedbyMinnesotaStatutes §364.03, subdivision3;
3) IsnotacitizenoftheUnitedStatesoraresidentalien, orislegally
prohibitedfromworkingintheUnitedStates;
4) Isnotofgoodmoralcharacterorrepute;
5) Hasknowinglymisrepresentedorfalsifiedinformationonthelicense
application;
6) Isnotaffiliatedwith, employedby, ordoesnotownatherapeuticmassage
enterpriselicensedbytheCity;
7) Doesnotmeetthedefinitionofmassagetherapistin §114.02ofthis
Chapter;
8) Hadaninterestin, individuallyoraspartofacorporation, partnership,
association, enterprise, businessorfirmorhas , amassage-relatedlicensethatwas revokedor
Page11of18
suspendedwithinthelastfive (5) yearsofthedatethelicenseapplicationissubmittedtothe
City;
9) HasbeendeniedamassagetherapistlicensebytheCitywithinone (1)
yearofthedateofthelicenseapplication; or
10) Doesnotprovideallinformationrequiredbythelicenseapplicationor
suchotherinformationastheIssuingAuthorityorCityCouncilmayrequire.
PriorCode, § 3-6-5) ( Ord. 570, passed2-2-2004; Ord. 664, passed5-3-2010; Ord. 794, passed
6-4-2018) Penalty, see § 10.99
114.07 EXEMPTIONS.
Exemptions. Atherapeuticmassageenterpriseortherapistlicenseisnotrequiredforthe
followingpersonsandplaces:
A) Personsdulylicensedasadoctorbythisstatetopracticemedicine, surgery,
osteopathy, chiropractic, physicaltherapy, orpodiatry, providedthemassageisadministeredin
theregularcourseofthemedicalbusinessasitpreparesthepatientforamedicalprocedureor
complementsamedicalprocedurepreviouslyperformedonthepatientandnotprovidedaspart
ofaseparateanddistinctmassagebusiness. Anydulylicenseddoctorthatoffersanyformof
massagewithoutadirectlinktoamedicalproceduremustobtainamassagelicense.
B) Personsdulylicensedbythisstateasbeautyculturistsorbarbers, providedsuch
personsdonotholdthemselvesoutasgivingmassagetreatmentsandprovidedthemassageby
beautyculturistsislimitedtothehead, hand, neck, andfeetandthemassagebybarbersislimited
totheheadandneck.
C) Personsworkingsolelyunderthedirectionandcontrolofadulylicenseddoctor
bythisstatetopracticemedicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physicaltherapy, orpodiatry
providedthemassageisadministeredintheregularcourseofthemedicalbusinessasitprepares
thepatientforamedicalprocedureorcomplementsamedicalprocedurepreviouslyperformed
onthepatientandnotprovidedaspartofaseparateservice. Anypersonthatworksunderthe
directionandcontrolofadulylicenseddoctorandoffersanyformofmassagewithoutadirect
linktoamedicalproceduremustobtainamassagelicense.
D) Placesdulylicensedoroperatingasahospital, nursinghome, hospice, sanitarium,
orgrouphomeestablishedforthehospitalizationorcareofhumanbeingsprovidedthemassage
isadministeredonlytotheresidentsorpatientsofthefacilityaspartoftheircareandnot
providedasapartofaseparateservice.
E) Athletictrainers, certifiedbytheNationalAssociationofAthleticTrainers
NAAT), whenworkingwithanamateur, semiprofessionalorprofessionalathleteorathletic
team.
Page12of18
F) Studentsofanaccreditedinstitutionwhoareperformingmassageservicesinthe
courseofaclinicalcomponentofanaccreditedprogramofstudy, providedthatthestudentsare
performingthemassageservicesatthelocationoftheaccreditedinstitutionandprovidedthe
studentsareidentifiedtothepublicasstudentsofmassagetherapy.
G) Studentsofanaccreditedinstitutionmayperformmassageservicesatalocation
otherthantheaccreditedinstitution, providedtheaccreditedinstitutionhasformedapartnership
withthelocation. Studentsmustbeunderthedirectsupervisionofthefacultyoftheinstitution.
Thestudentsmustbeidentifiedtothepublicasstudentsofmassagetherapy. Studentsmayonly
performsuchservicesfornomorethan12calendardaysayear, andnomorethantwo
consecutivedays.
H) Studentsofanaccreditedinstitutionwhoareperformingmassageservicesinthe
courseofaclinicalcomponentofanaccreditedprogramofstudyatclinicsorotherfacilities
locatedoutsidetheaccreditedinstitution, andwithoutdirectfacultysupervision, musthave
earnedatleast400hoursofcertifiedtherapeuticmassagetrainingatanaccreditedinstitution
priortoperformingthetherapyoutsidetheinstitution. Thisworkmaybeperformedonlyasa
specificclassorinternship. Studentsmayworknomorethan20hoursaweek. Studentsmustbe
identifiedtothepublicasastudentofmassagetherapy. Aletterfromtheaccreditedinstitution
withproofofcertifiedtraininghours, authenticatedthroughacertifiedcopyofatranscriptfrom
theaccreditedinstitutionissuingthetraining, adescriptionofthecourseandtheexpectedhours
tobeworkedmustbesubmittedtotheIssuingAuthoritywithaletterofsponsorshipfromthe
clinicorlicensedfacilityexplainingtheschedulethestudentwillbeworkingpriortothestudent
beginninganymassageservice.
I) Personsproviding "chairmassage" arenotrequiredtoobtainatherapeutic
massageenterpriselicenseifthefollowingrequirementsaremet:
1) Themassageisprovidedinaplaceofbusinesswherethemassagecan
easilybeseenbyanyemployeeorvisitoronthepremises;
2) Thelocationdoesnotholdalicensetosellalcoholicbeverages;
3) Eachrecipientofamassageremainsinanuprightposition, eithersitting
orstanding; and
4) Eachrecipientofamassageremainsinthenormal, daytimeattireworn
whenenteringthebusinessanddoesnotremoveanyclothing, exceptouterwear, suchasacoat
orjacket.
J) PersonsprovidingmassageataneventissuedapermitinaccordancewithCity
CodeChapter92providedthefollowingrequirementsaremet:
1) Eachrecipientofamassagedoesnotremoveanyclothing, except
outerwear, suchasacoatorjacket, orshoes;
Page13of18
2) Themassagetherapistshallhavecurrentinsurancecoverageofone
milliondollars ($1,000,000) forprofessionalliabilityinthepracticeofmassageandshallhave
onhisorherpersonacertificateofinsuranceevidencingtherequiredcoveragewhenever
massageservicesarerendered; and
3) Themassagetherapistshallhavecompletedsixhundred (600) hoursof
certifiedtherapeuticmassagetrainingwithcontentthatincludessubjectsofanatomy,
physiology, hygiene, ethics, massagetheoryandresearch, andmassagepracticefroman
accreditedinstitution oraccreditedprogramapprovedbytheIssuingAuthority, orhasatleast
two (2) yearsoffull-timeexperienceworkingasalicensedmassagetherapistatalicensed
therapeuticmassageenterpriseorotherlicensedbusinessapprovedbytheIssuingAuthorityand
shallprovidetheIssuingAuthoritywithdocumentedproofofthesameupondemand.
PriorCode, § 3-6-6) ( Ord. 339, passed3-12-1992; Ord. 545, passed7-15-2002; Ord. 664,
passed5-3-2010; Ord. 706, passed8-6-2012) Penalty, see § 10.99
114.08 GENERALPROVISIONSREGARDINGLICENSES.
A) Posting. Atherapeuticmassageenterpriselicenseissuedshallbepostedina
conspicuousplaceonthepremisesforwhichitisused. Anindividuallicensedasamassage
therapistshallalsoposthis/hermassagetherapistlicense, withcolorphoto, inaconspicuous
placeonthelicensedpremisesatwhichthetherapistisassociated. TheIssuingAuthorityshall
issuephotoidentificationcardstoindividualswhoreceiveamassagetherapistlicense. The
individualshallhavethephotoidentificationcardonsuchpersonatalltimestherapeutic
massageservicesarerenderedandshalldisplaythephotoidentificationcardupondemand.
B) PremisesLicensed. Atherapeuticmassageenterpriselicenseisonlyeffectiveforthe
compactandcontiguousspacespecifiedintheapprovedlicenseapplication. Ifthelicensed
premisesisenlarged, altered, orextended, thelicenseeshallinformtheIssuingAuthority. A
massagetherapistlicenseshallentitlethelicensedtherapisttoperformon-sitemassageata
business, publicgathering, privatehome, orothersitenotonthetherapeuticmassageenterprise
premises, excludinghotelormotelguestrooms.
C) EmploymentofUnlicensedMassageTherapistsProhibited. Notherapeuticmassage
enterpriseshallemployoruseanypersontoperformmassagewhoisnotlicensedasamassage
therapistunderthisChapter, unlessthepersonisspecificallyexemptedfromobtainingamassage
therapistlicensepursuantto §114.07ofthisChapter. Atherapeuticmassageenterprisemaynot
openforbusinessuntilamassagetherapistemployedbyoraffiliatedwiththetherapeutic
massageenterpriseislicensedbytheCity.
D) AffiliationWithEnterpriseRequired. Amassagetherapistshallbeemployedby,
affiliatedwith, orownatherapeuticmassageenterpriselicensedbytheCity, unlessapersonor
placeisspecificallyexemptedfromobtainingatherapeuticmassageenterpriselicensein
114.07ofthisChapter.
E) HoursofOperation. Nocustomersorpatronsmaybeallowedtoenterthelicensed
Page14of18
premisesafter10:00p.m. andbefore7:00a.m. daily. Nocustomersorpatronsmaybeallowedto
remainonthelicensedpremisesafter10:00p.m. andbefore7:00a.m. daily. Nomassage
therapistshallperformmassageservicesafter10:00p.m. andbefore7:00a.m. daily.
F) PremisesSubjecttoInspection. Duringanyhoursinwhichanypersonispresenton
thelicensedpremises, thepremiseslicensedunderthisChaptershallbeopentoinspectionby
anydulyauthorizedrepresentativeoftheCitytodeterminewhetherornotthisChapterandall
otherrules, lawsandregulationsarebeingobserved. Licenseeshallbesubjecttoa $250.00fee
forathirdinspection, iforderstocorrectareissuedtoalicenseeandthoseordersarenot
correcteduponre-inspection. Allpersons, asaconditiontobeingissuedsuchlicense, consentto
suchinspectionandwithoutasearchwarrant. Upondemandbyahealth, buildingorlicense
inspectororpoliceofficer, apersonengagedinprovidingservicesinapremiseslicensedunder
thisChaptershallidentifyhimself/herselfgivinghis/hertruelegalnameandhis/hercorrect
address.
G) ConductonLicensedPremises. EverylicenseeunderthisChaptershallcomply
withthefollowing:
1) CoverageofGenitalsDuringMassage. Thelicenseeshallrequirethatthe
personwhoisreceivingthemassageshallatalltimeshavehisorhergenitalscoveredwithnontransparentmaterialorclothing.
2) TherapistClothingRequirements. Anymassagetherapistperforming
massageshallatalltimeshavehisorherbreasts, buttocks, anus, andgenitalscoveredwitha
non-transparentmaterialorclothing.
3) EffectofLicenseSuspensionorRevocation. Nolicenseeshallsolicit
businessoroffertoperformmassageserviceswhileunderlicensesuspensionorrevocationby
theCity.
4) MassageofCertainBodyPartsProhibited. Atnotimeshallthemassage
therapistintentionallymassageoroffertomassagethepenis, scrotum, monsveneris, vulva, or
vaginalareaofaperson.
H) ConditionandMaintenanceofPremises.
1) Cleanliness. Floors, walls, otherstructures, andequipmentinmassage
rooms, restroomsandbathroomsusedinconnectionwiththemassagebusinessshallbekept
cleanandinastateofgoodrepairandsanitaryatalltimes. Linensandothermaterialsshallbe
storedatleastsix (6) inchesoffthefloorinareasprotectedfromcontamination. Sanitarytowels,
washcloths, cleaningagentsandtoilettissueshallbemadeavailableforeachcustomer.
2) Restrooms. Restroomsusedinconnectionwiththetherapeuticmassage
enterpriseshallbeprovidedwithmechanicalventilationwithtwo (2) cfmpersquarefootoffloor
area, aminimumoftwenty (20) footcandlesofillumination, ahand-washingsinkequippedwith
hotandcoldrunningwaterunderpressure, single-usepapertowelsorotherapproveddrying
Page15of18
deviceandasoapdispenser.
3) Storage. Licensedpremisesshallhaveajanitor'sclosetforthestorageof
cleaningsupplies. Thisclosetshallhavemechanicalventilationwithtwo (2) cfmpersquarefoot
offloorareaandaminimumoftwenty (20) footcandlesofillumination. Theclosetshallinclude
amopsink. Forlicensee’soperatingatherapeuticmassageenterpriseasahomeoccupation, in
lieuofajanitor’scloset, allcleaningsuppliesshallbestoredseparateawayfromthebathroom
andmassageroomandawayfromotherequipmentandsuppliesusedinconjunctionwiththe
business.
4) Lockers. Individuallockersshallbemadeavailableforuseby
patrons. Thelockersshallhaveseparatekeysforlocking. Insteadofindividuallockers,
therapeuticmassageenterprisesmayprovidesecureareasdesignatedforstorageofpersonal
itemsbelongingtoemployeesandpatronswhileonthepremises. Therequirementsofthis
114.08 (H)(4) shallnotapplytotherapeuticmassageenterprisesoperatedasahomeoccupation.
5) HandWashingRequired. Aseparatehand-sinkshallbeeasilyaccessible
forhandwashingbeforeandaftermassageservicesareadministered. Amassagetherapistshall
washhis/herhandsandarmswithwaterandsoap, anti-bacterialscrubs, alcohol, orother
disinfectantsbeforeandaftermassageservicesareadministeredandwhenhandsaresoiled.
6) Linens. Thefurnitureuponwhichthepatronreclineswhilereceivinga
massageshalleitherbecoveredwithcleanlinenorbewashedaftereachusewithacleaning
agentsufficienttopreventthespreadofdisease. Linensandtowelsshallbechangedaftereach
useandlaunderedbyacommercialcleaningestablishmentorinapprovedlaundryfacilitieson
thepremises. Forlicensee’soperatingatherapeuticmassageenterpriseasahomeoccupation,
linensandtowelsshallbewashedseparatefrompersonalarticles. Single-uselinensshallbe
discardedaftereachuse.
I) Transfer. Thelicenseissuedisforthepersonorthepremisesnamedonthe
approvedlicenseapplication. Notransferofalicenseshallbepermittedfromplacetoplaceor
frompersontopersonwithoutcomplyingwiththerequirementsofanoriginalapplication.
J) HomeOccupation. Wheneveratherapeuticmassageenterpriseisoperatedina
residentialareaasahomeoccupation, theperson(s) conductingthebusinessshalladheretoall
aspectsofCityCodeTitleXV, §1 52.097relatingtohomeoccupations.
K) ProofofLocalResidencyRequired. Inthecaseofatherapeuticmassage
enterprise, thelicensee, managingpartner, ormanagerofthelicensedpremisesmustshowproof
ofresidencyacceptabletotheIssuingAuthorityinoneofthefollowingMinnesotacounties:
Anoka, Carver, Dakota, Goodhue, Hennepin, Ramsey, Rice, Scott, Washington, orWright. In
thecaseofamassagetherapist, thelicenseemustshowproofofresidencyacceptabletothe
IssuingAuthorityinoneofthefollowingMinnesotacounties: Anoka, Carver, Dakota, Goodhue,
Hennepin, Ramsey, Rice, Scott, Washington, orWright.
L) PostingRates. Alltherapeuticmassageenterprisesmustposttheirserviceratesin
Page16of18
aprominentplaceintheentranceorlobbyofthebusiness.
M) IllegalActivities. Atherapeuticmassageenterpriselicenseeshallbestrictly
responsiblefortheconductofthebusiness, includingconductofanyemployeeoragentofthe
licenseeonthelicensedpremises, beingincompliancewithallapplicablelaws, ordinances, rules
andregulations.
PriorCode, § 3-6-7) ( Ord. 570, passed2-2-2004; Ord. 664, passed5-3-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
114.09 REVOCATIONORSUSPENSION.
A) SuspensionorRevocation. TheCityCouncilmaysuspendorrevokealicense
issuedunderthisChapter. Thefollowingaregroundsforsuspensionorrevocationofalicense:
1) Fraud, misrepresentation, orfalsestatementcontainedinalicense
applicationorarenewalapplication;
2) Fraud, misrepresentation, orfalsestatementmadeinthecourseofcarrying
onthelicensedoccupationorbusiness;
3) Failuretocomplywithcityordinancesorstatelaw;
4) Alicensee'scriminalconvictionthatisdirectlyrelatedtotheoccupationor
businesslicensedasdefinedbyMinnesotaStatutes §364.03, subdivision2, providedthatthe
licenseecannotshowcompetentevidenceofsufficientrehabilitationandpresentfitnessto
performthedutiesofthelicensedoccupationorbusinessasdefinedbyMinnesotaStatutes
364.03, subdivision3.
5) Convictionofthetherapeuticmassageenterpriseormassagetherapist
licenseeor, managerorpersoninchargeofthelicensedpremises, oranemployeeofthe
therapeuticmassageenterpriseofprostitutionorotheroffenseinvolvingmoralturpitude;
6) Suspensionorrevocationofamassagetherapistlicenseofanemployee
employedbythelicensedpremiseswhensuchsuspensionorrevocationrelatestoactsoccurring
onthelicensedpremises; or
7) Conductingthelicensedoccupationorbusinessinanunlawfulmanneror
insuchamannerastoconstituteabreachofthepeaceortoconstituteamenacetothehealth,
safety, orgeneralwelfareofthecommunity.
B) NoticeandHearing. ArevocationorsuspensionbytheCityCouncilshallbe
precededbywrittennoticetothelicenseeandahearing. Thenoticeshallgiveatleasteight (8)
days' noticeofthetimeandplaceofthehearingandshallstatethenatureoftheviolation(s) or
groundsforsuspensionorrevocation. Thenoticeshallbemailedbyregularmailtothelicensee
atthemostrecentaddresslistedonthelicenseapplication.
Page17of18
C) EffectofSuspensionbyCouncil. Ifamassagetherapist, ortherapeuticmassage
enterpriselicenseholderhashisorherlicensesuspendedbytheCityCouncil, thelicenseholder
maycontinuehisorherlicensedactivitiesafterthesuspensionperiodconcludes. Thelicense
holderiseligibleforrenewalofhisorherlicenseafterthesuspensionperiodisserved.
PriorCode, § 3-6-8) ( Ord. 64, passed11-13-1975, Ord. 664, passed5-3-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
114.10 VIOLATIONAMISDEMEANOR.
Apersonwhocommitsorattemptstocommit, conspirestocommitoraidsorabetsinthe
commissionofanactconstitutingaviolationofthisChapter, whetherindividuallyorin
connectionwithoneormoreotherpersonsorasprincipal, agent, oraccessoryisguiltyofa
misdemeanor. Apersonwhofalsely, fraudulently, forciblyorwillfullyinduces, causes, coerces,
permitsordirectsanothertoviolateaprovisionofChapterisguiltyofamisdemeanor.
PriorCode, § 3-6-9) ( Ord. 68, passed2-26-1976; Ord. 664, passed5-3-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
114.11 APPLICATIONOFTHISORDINANCE.
TherequirementsofthisOrdinanceshallapplytoalltherapeuticmassageenterprise
licenseapplicationsandmassagetherapistlicenseapplicationspendingasofMay3, 2010.
PriorCode, § 3-6-11) (Ord. 68, passed2-26-1976; Ord. 570, passed2-2-2004; Ord. 664, passed
5-3-2010) Penalty, see § 10.99
Page18of18
CHAPTER 115: BODY ART
Section
115. 01 Adoption of State Regulations
115. 02 Technician' s License
115. 03 Establishment License
115. 01 ADOPTION OF STATE REGULATIONS.
The provisions of Minnesota Statute Chapter 146B regarding regulations for technicians
performing body art procedures and for body art establishments are herein adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set forth herein. (Prior Code, § 3- 7- 1) ( Ord. 152, passed 4- 8- 1982; Ord.
668, passed 6- 21- 10) Penalty, see § 10. 99
115. 02 TECHNICIAN' S LICENSE.
No person shall perform tattooing within the City unless the person holds a valid tattoo
technician license, temporary license, or guest artist license, as applicable, as required under
Minnesota Statute Chapter 146B. No person shall perform body piercing in the City unless the
person holds a valid body piercing technician license, temporary license, or guest artist
temporary license, as applicable, as required under Minnesota Statute Chapter 146B.
Prior Code, § 3- 7- 2) ( Ord. 152, passed 4- 8- 1982; Ord. 668, passed 6- 21- 10) Penalty, see §
10. 99
115. 03 ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE.
No person shall maintain, own or operate a body art establishment in the City unless the
person holds a valid body art establishment license issued in accordance with Minnesota Statute
Chapter 146B. Temporary event permits issued under Minnesota Statute 146B. 02, Subd. 8 shall
be required for all such qualifying events held within the City.
Prior Code, § 3- 7- 3) ( Ord. 152, passed 4- 8- 1982; Ord. 668, passed 6- 21- 10) Penalty, see §
10. 99
Page 1 of 1
CHAPTER 116: PAWNSHOPS
Section
116. 01 Purpose
116. 02 Definitions
116. 03 License required
116. 04 License application
116. 05 Execution of application
116. 06 Investigation
116. 07 Application consideration
116. 08 Annual renewal
116. 09 Fees
116. 10 Persons and locations ineligible for a license
116. 11 General regulations for licensee
116. 12 Restrictions regarding license transfer
116. 13 Suspension or revocation of license
116.01 PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this chapter to prevent pawnshops from being used as facilities for the
commission of crime, and to assure that pawnshops comply with basic consumer protection
standards, and to thereby protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of
the city.
Prior Code, § 3- 8- 1) ( Ord. 392, passed 4- 3- 199; Ord. 690, passed 10- 17- 2011)
116.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
AUTOMATED PAWNSYSTEM(APS). A computer database or service, approved for use
by licensees by the chief of police, accessible from remote location, designed to input and
retrieve data on transactions involving secondhand goods or items.
BILLABLE TRANSACTION. Every recorded or reportable transaction except renewals,
redemptions, or extensions of existing pawns on items previously reported and continuously in
the licensee' s possession is a billable transaction.
ISSUING AUTHORITY. The City of Savage.
LICENSED PREMISES. The compact and contiguous premises described in the approved
license issued by the city' s issuing authority.
Page 1 of 11
LICENSEE. All pawnbrokers regulated by this chapter, to whom a license is issued under
this chapter, including any agents or employees of the pawnbroker.
MINOR. Any natural person under the age of 18 years.
PAWN TRANSACTION. Any loan on the security of pledged goods or any purchase of
pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods are left with the pawnbroker and may be
redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time.
PAWNBROKER. A person who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property or
other valuable thing; who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable thing on
condition of selling that same back again at a stipulated price; or who loans money secured by
chattel mortgage or on personal property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so
mortgaged. To the extent that a pawnbroker business includes buying personal property
previously used, rented or leased, the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable. Any bank,
saving and loan association or credit union shall not be deemed a PAWNBROKER for purposes
of this chapter.
PAWNSHOP. A business that loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property or
other valuable thing, or that deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable thing
on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price; or that loans money secured by
chattel mortgage or on personal property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so
mortgaged. Any bank, savings and loan association or credit union shall not be deemed a
pawnshop.
PERSON. Any one or more natural persons; a partnership, including a limited partnership;
a corporation, including a foreign, domestic or nonprofit corporation; a trust; a political
subdivision of the state; or any other business organization.
RECEIVE. To purchase, accept for sale, on consignment, broker or receive in trade for an
item of equal or lesser value.
RECORDED OR REPORTABLE TRANSACTION. Transactions conducted by a
pawnbroker in which secondhand goods are received through a pawn, purchase, or consignment,
except:
The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used merchandise from a merchant,
manufacturer, nonprofit or wholesaler having an established permanent place of business, and
the retail sale of said merchandise, provided the pawnbroker must maintain a record of such
purchase; or
Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally received by pawn or purchase, and for
which all applicable hold and/ or redemption periods have expired; or
Trades of secondhand goods for items of greater value; or
Transactions in which a pawn is renewed, extended, or redeemed.
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER. A serial number, identification number, model number, owner
applied identifier or engraving, " operation ID" number or symbol, or other unique marking.
Page 2 of 11
Prior Code, § 3- 8- 2) ( Ord. 392, passed 4- 3- 1995; Ord. 690, passed 10- 17- 2011)
116.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall exercise, carry on or be engaged in the trade or business of pawnbroker
within the city unless the person is currently licensed under this chapter. Persons engaged in the
business of pawnbroker on the effective date of this chapter must receive a license within 60
days or cease doing business.
Prior Code, § 3- 8- 3) ( Ord. 392, passed 4- 3- 1995) Penalty, see § 10. 99
116.04 LICENSE APPLICATION.
Every application for a license under this chapter shall be made on a form supplied by the
city.
Prior Code, § 3- 8- 4) ( Ord. 392, passed 4- 3- 1995; Ord. 690, passed 10- 17- 2011) Penalty, see §
10. 99
116.05 EXECUTION OF APPLICATION.
All applications for a license under this chapter shall be signed and sworn to. If the
application is that of a natural person, it shall be signed and sworn to by a person; if that of a
corporation, by an officer thereof, if a partnership, by one of the general partners, if an
unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer thereof. Any falsification on a
license application shall result in the denial of the license.
Prior Code, § 3- 8- 5) ( Ord. 392, passed 4- 3- 1995) Penalty, see § 10. 99
116.06 INVESTIGATION.
All applications shall be referred to the Police Department for verification and investigation
of the facts set forth in the application. The Police Department shall make a written report and
recommendation to the City Council as to issuance or non-issuance of the license. The City
Council may order and conduct an additional investigation as it deems necessary.
Prior Code, § 3- 8- 6) ( Ord. 392, passed 4- 3- 1995; Ord. 704, passed 8- 6- 2012; Ord. 724, passed
9- 3- 2013)
116.07 APPLICATION CONSIDERATION.
A) Hearing: The city council shall conduct a public hearing on the license application
within a reasonable period following receipt of the police department's report and
recommendation regarding the application. After the hearing or hearings on the application, the
city council may, in its discretion, grant or deny the application.
Page 3 of 11
B) Denial: Any license under this chapter may be denied for one or more of the following
reasons:
1) The proposed use does not comply with Chapter 152 of the Savage City Code.
2) The premises do not comply with health, building, building maintenance, or other
provisions of Savage City Code or state law;
3) The applicant or the owner of the premises is ineligible for a license or has failed to
comply with one or more provisions of this chapter;
4) The applicant has committed fraud or bribery, or made misrepresentations or false
statements in the application, investigation, or operation of the applicant's business.
C) Certificate of Occupancy Required: If an application is granted for a location where a
building is under construction or not ready for occupancy, the license shall not be effective and
delivered to the licensee until a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the licensed
premises
D) Delinquent Taxes, Assessments, and Utility Bills: No license shall be approved if any
taxes, city utility bills, assessments or other city charges are delinquent.
Prior Code, § 3- 8- 7) ( Ord. 392, passed 4- 3- 1995; Ord. 690, passed 10- 17- 2011)
116.08 ANNUAL RENEWAL.
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be for a period not to exceed one year and shall
expire on the last day of February following their issuance. An application for the renewal of an
existing license shall be made prior to the expiration date of the license and shall be made in a
form as the issuing authority requires. A license under this section may not be renewed:
A) If the City Council determines that the licensee has failed to comply with the provisions
of this chapter in preceding license years;
B) If the manager of the pawnshop ( whether it be the licensee, the manager, the managing
partner, the proprietor or agent in charge of the establishment) is not a resident of Anoka, Carver,
Dakota, Hennepin, Ramsey, Scott, Washington, LeSueur or Rice Counties on the date the
renewal takes effect; or
C) The time for establishing residency in the above named counties may for good cause be
extended by the City Council.
Prior Code, § 3- 8- 8) ( Ord. 392, passed 4- 3- 1995) Penalty, see § 10. 99
116.09 FEES.
A) Investigationfee. An applicant for a license under this chapter shall pay to the City
Clerk at the time an original application is submitted, a nonrefundable fee at a rate set by
Page 4of11
ordinance to cover the expense of the Police Department investigation and cost of the public
hearing as set forth by §§ 116. 06 and 116. 07 of this chapter.
B) License fee. The fee for the initial license and the fee for annual renewal shall be set by
ordinance. When a new license application is submitted as a result of incorporation by an
existing licensee and the ownership, control and interest in the license are unchanged, no
additional fee shall be required.
C) Premises not readyfor occupancy. When the licensed premise is a building not ready
for occupancy, the fee shall commence 90 days after approval of the license by the City Council
or upon the date the building is ready for occupancy, whichever is sooner.
D) Payment offee. All fees shall be paid in full before the application for a license shall be
accepted. Upon rejection of any application for a license or upon withdrawal of any application
before City Council approval, the license fee shall be refunded in full to the applicant, except
where rejection is for a willful misstatement in the license application.
Prior Code, § 3- 8- 9) ( Ord. 392, passed 4- 3- 1995) Penalty, see § 10. 99
116.10 PERSONS AND LOCATIONS INELIGIBLE FOR A LICENSE.
A) No license under this chapter shall be issued to any natural person, partnership,
corporation or other organization if the pawnshop proposed to be licensed has a proprietor,
general manager, managing partner, or agent in charge of the business who:
1) Is a minor at the time the application is filed;
2) Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as
prescribed by M.S. § 364. 03, Subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time, and has not
shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of
a pawnbroker as described by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time;
3) Is not of good moral character or repute; or
4) Holds an intoxicating liquor license within the city.
B) Pawnshops are permitted as special/conditional uses within specified zoning districts,
according to provision of the Savage Zoning Code.
Prior Code, § 3- 8- 10) ( Ord. 392, passed 4- 3- 1995; Ord. 690, passed 10- 17- 2011) Penalty, see §
10. 99
116.11 GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR LICENSEE.
A) Recordkeeping. At the time of a receipt, sale or redemption of an item of property, the
pawnbroker shall immediately record, using the English language, in an indelible
Page 5 of 11
ink, on forms or in a computerized record in a format compatible with APS, and
approved by the chief of police, the following information:
1) An accurate description of the item of property including, but not limited to, any
trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other identifying
mark on the item;
2) The date, time and place the item of property was received by the pawnbroker;
3) The amount of money loaned upon or pledged therefore;
4) The full name, residence address, residence telephone number, date of birth and
reasonably accurate description of the person from whom the item of property was received,
including: sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes and color of hair;
5) The identification number from one of the following forms of identification of the
person from whom the item was received:
a) A valid Minnesota driver' s license;
b) A valid Minnesota identification card; and
c) A valid photo identification issued by the state of residency of the person
from whom the item was received and one other form of identification.
6) The signature of the person pledging or selling the item;
7) The maturity date of the transaction and the amount due, including monthly and
annual interest rates and all pawn fees and charges.
8) Color Photographs Or Color Video:
a) Photographs Or Recordings Of Customers And Items: A licensee must
take a color photograph or a color video recording of the same quality as a color photograph of
1. Each customer involved in a reportable transaction;
2. Every item pawned or sold that does not have a unique identifier
permanently engraved or affixed;
b) Digital Or Film Photograph: Photographs must be at least two inches ( 2")
in length by two inches ( 2") in width and must be maintained in such a manner that the
photograph can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of the reportable
transaction to which they relate. Such photographs must be available to the chief of police, or the
chiefs designee, upon request. A major portion of the photograph must include an identifiable
facial close-up of the person who pawned or sold the item. Items photographed must be
Page 6 of 11
accurately depicted. The licensee must inform the person that he or she is being photographed by
displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place in the licensed premises;
c) Video Photograph: A video photograph must include an identifiable closeup
of the face of the person who pawned or sold the item. Items photographed by video must be
accurately depicted. Video photographs must be electronically referenced by time and date so
they can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of the reportable transaction to
which they relate. The licensee must inform the customer of the videotaping by displaying a sign
of sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the premises. The licensee must keep the videotape
for three ( 3) months;
B) Reports To Police.
1) Posted Notice: A licensee must display a sign of sufficient size, and in a
conspicuous place in the premises, so as to inform all patrons that all transactions are recorded
and reported to the police department daily. Licensees must also post their license in a
conspicuous location.
2) Suspicious Property: A licensee must immediately report to the police department
any article sold or received or sought to be sold or received, if the licensee has reason to believe
that the article was stolen or lost. No licensee shall receive or accept any item of property that
contains an altered, obliterated, or obviously removed unique identifier.
3) Method: Licensees must provide to the police department the information required
in subsections ( A) 1 through (A)8 of this section, in writing, on forms approved by city or by
transferring it from their computer to the police department or APS via modem, internet, or other
electronic means acceptable to the police department no later than five o'clock( 5: 00) P.M. the
next business day ( Monday through Friday) following the date of the reportable transaction.
4) Records Retention: Licensee shall retain records required by this section 116. 11
for at least four (4) years.
C) Holding Period. Any item purchased by a licensee may not be sold or otherwise
transferred for thirty-one ( 3 1) days from the purchase transaction date. For items pawned, an
individual may redeem a pawned item sixty (60) days after the pawn transaction date.
D) Police Order To Hold Property.
1) Order to Hold: Whenever the chief of police, or the chief s designee, notifies a
licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the licensed premises
until authorized to be released by the chief of police or the chiefs designee. The order to hold
shall expire fifteen ( 15) days from the date it is issued unless the chief of police or the chiefs
designee determines the hold is still necessary.
2) Order To Confiscate: If an item is identified as stolen or evidence in a criminal case, the chief
of police or chiefs designee may:
Page 7 of 11
a) Physically confiscate and remove it from the licensee, pursuant to a written order
from the chief of police or the chiefs designee, or
b) Place the item on hold or extend the hold as provided in subsection ( D) 1 of this
section, and leave it with the licensee.
c) When the city confiscates an item, the police officer doing so shall provide
identification upon request of the licensee, and shall provide the licensee the name and phone
number of the police department and police officer, and the case number related to the
confiscation.
d) When an order to hold or confiscate is no longer necessary, the chief of police, or
the chiefs designee shall so notify the licensee.
E) Label Required. Licensees shall attach a label to every item at the time it is pawned,
purchased, or received in inventory from any reportable transaction. Permanently recorded on
this label must be the number or name that identifies the transaction in the licensee' s records, the
transaction date, the name of the item and the description or the model and serial number of the
item as reported to the police department, whichever is applicable, and the date the item is out of
pawn or can be sold, if applicable. Labels shall not be reused. As an alternative to using a label
with the required information, a label with a bar code containing the information may be used.
F) Receipt. The pawnbroker shall provide a receipt to the seller or pledger of any item of
property received, which shall include:
1) The name, address and telephone number of the pawnbroker business;
2) The date on which the item was received by the pawnbroker;
3) A description of the item received and amount paid to the pledger or seller in
exchange for the item pawned or sold;
4) The signature of the pawnbroker or agent;
5) The last regular business day by which the item must be redeemed by the pledger
without risk that the item will be sold and the amount necessary to redeem the pawned item on
that date;
6) The annual rate of interest charged on pawned items received; and
7) The name and address of the seller or pledger.
G) Hours of operation. No pawnbroker shall keep the licensed premises open for
transaction of business on any day of the week before 9: 00 a.m. or after 9: 00 p.m.
H) License display. A license issued under this chapter must be posted in a conspicuous
place in the premises for which it is used. The license issued is only effective for the compact
Page 8 of 11
and contiguous space specified in the approved license application.
I) Maintenance of order. A licensee under this chapter shall be responsible for the
conduct of the business being operated and shall maintain conditions of order.
J) Gambling. No licensee under this chapter may keep, possess or operate or permit the
keeping, possession or operation on the licensed premises of dice, slot machines, roulette wheels,
punchboards, blackjack tables or pinball machines, which return coins or slugs, chips or tokens
of any kind, which are redeemable in merchandise or cash. No gambling equipment authorized
under M.S. Chapter 349, as it may be amended from time to time, may be kept or operated and
no raffles may be conducted on the licensed premises and/ or adjoining rooms. The purchase of
lottery tickets may take place on the licensed premises as authorized by the director of the lottery
pursuant to M.S. Chapter 349A, as it may be amended from time to time.
K) Prohibited Acts.
1) No person under the age of eighteen ( 18) years may pawn or sell or attempt to pawn
or sell goods with any licensee, nor may any licensee receive any goods from a person under the
age of eighteen ( 18) years.
2) No licensee may receive any goods from a person of unsound mind or an
intoxicated person.
3) No licensee may receive any goods by a recordable or reportable transaction unless
the seller presents identification in the form of a valid driver's license, a valid state of Minnesota
identification card, or current valid photo driver's license or identification card issued by the state
of residency of the person from whom the item was received.
4) Licensee shall not receive any item ofproperty that possesses an altered, removed
or obliterated unique identifier.
5) No person may pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any article of property
that is the property of another, whether with permission or without, nor shall any person pawn,
pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any article of property in which another has a security
interest, with any licensee.
6) No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any article of
property with any licensee shall give a false or fictitious name, nor give a false date of birth, nor
give a false or out of date address of residence or telephone number, nor present a false or altered
identification, or the identification of another, to any licensee.
7) Licensee shall not lend money on a pledge at a rate of interest above that allowed
by law;
8) Licensee shall not knowingly possess stolen goods;
Page 9 of 11
9) Licensee shall not sell pledged goods before the time to redeem has expired;
10) Licensee shall not refuse to disclose to the city, after having sold pledged goods,
the name of the purchaser or the price for which the item sold; or
11) Licensee shall not make a loan on a pledge to a minor.
L) Inspection ofItems And Premises. The licensee shall, at all times during the term of the
license period, allow the police department and other law enforcement authorities with
jurisdiction to enter the premises where the business is located during normal business hours, and
in the case of an emergency after normal business hours, for the purpose of inspecting such
premises and inspecting the items, ware and merchandise and records therein for the purpose of
verifying compliance with this chapter and other applicable laws or of locating items suspected
or alleged to have been stolen or otherwise improperly disposed of.
M) Proper identification.
1) A licensee under this chapter shall not accept items of property unless the seller or
pledge provides to the pawnbroker one of the following forms of identification:
a) A valid Minnesota driver' s license;
b) A valid Minnesota identification card; or
c) A valid photo identification issued by the state of residency of the person from
whom the item was received and one other form of identification; or
N) Payment by check. When a pawnbroker accepts an item for purchase or as security for a
loan, payment for any article disposed, left, pledged or pawned shall be made only by a check,
draft or other negotiable or non-negotiable instrument or order of withdrawal, which is drawn
against funds held by a financial institution. This policy must be posted in a conspicuous place
in the premises.
0) Restrictions on sale. A pawnbroker shall suspend for one year any business transaction
with any person who has sold and/ or forfeited on six previous occasions articles for which the
person received $25 or more per transaction within a single six-month period.
P) Premises. All property deposited, left, pledged, pawned or held for sale must be stored
in an enclosed facility and may not be stored outside of the licensed premises. The city may,
however, permit the licensee to designate one off premises locked and secured facility in which
the licensee may store only cars, boats and other motorized vehicles. The licensee shall permit
immediate inspection of the facility at any time during business hours by the city. All property
shall be stored in compliance with zoning and/ of fire regulations and in an orderly manner and
subject to inspection by the Fire Department. The premises shall also be equipped with an
operational security alarm.
Page 10 of 11
Q) Number ofPawnshop Licenses Issued. No more than one ( 1) pawnbroker license shall
be issued for each fifteen thousand ( 15, 000) population within the City of Savage as calculated
by the most recent decennial census or Metropolitan Council estimate of population in noncensus
years.
R) Distance Between Pawnshops. No pawnbroker licensed under this Section shall be
located within one and one-half( 1. 5) miles, as measured in a straight line from property line to
property line, of another licensed pawnbroker establishment.
Prior Code, § 3- 8- 11) ( Ord. 392, passed 4- 3- 1995; Ord. 690, passed 10- 17- 2011) Penalty, see
10. 99
116.12 RESTRICTIONS REGARDING LICENSE TRANSFER.
Each license under this chapter shall be issued to the applicant only and shall not be
transferable to any other person. No licensee shall loan, sell, give or assign a license to another
person.
Prior Code, § 3- 8- 12) ( Ord. 392, passed 4- 3- 1995) Penalty, see § 10. 99
116.13 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
A) The City Council may suspend or revoke a license issued under this chapter upon a
finding of a violation of-
1)1) Any of the provisions of this chapter;
2) Any state statute regulating pawnbrokers; or
3) Any state or local law relating to moral character and repute.
B) A revocation or suspension by the City Council shall be preceded by written notice to
the licensee and a public hearing. The written notice shall give at least eight days' notice of the
time and place of the hearing and shall state the nature of the charges against the pawnbroker.
The notice may be served upon the pawnbroker personally or by United States mail addressed to
the most recent address of the business in the license application.
Prior Code, § 3- 8- 13) ( Ord. 392, passed 4- 3- 1995)
Page 11 of 11
CHAPTER 117: PRECIOUS METALS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
Section
117. 01 Purpose
117. 02 Definitions
117. 03 License required
117. 04 Application
117. 05 Licensing requirements
117. 06 Licensing issuance
117. 07 Billable-transfer fee
117. 08 Restrictions and regulations
117. 09 Recordkeeping
117. 10 Police hold
117. 11 Receipt
117. 12 Suspension and revocation of license
117.01 PURPOSE.
A) ( 1) The city finds that precious metal dealers and secondhand dealers can provide an
opportunity for the commission and concealment of crimes, because the businesses have the
ability to receive and transfer stolen property easily and quickly.
2) The city also finds that consumer-protection regulation is warranted in transactions
involving precious metal dealers and secondhand dealers.
3) The purpose of this chapter is to prevent precious metal and secondhand businesses
from being used as facilities for commission of crimes and to assure that the businesses comply
with basic consumer-protection standards, thereby protecting the public health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the city.
B) Further, it is the purpose of this chapter to help the Police Department better regulate
current and future precious metal and secondhand businesses, decrease and stabilize costs
associated with the regulation thereof and to increase identification of criminal activities through
the timely collection and sharing of information relating to the sale of precious metal and
secondhand merchandise.
Prior Code, § 3- 8A- 1) ( Ord. 605, passed 2- 21- 2006)
117.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Page 1 of 11
ITEMS CONTAINING PRECIOUS METAL. An item made in whole or in part of metal
and containing more than I% by weight of silver, gold or platinum.
PRECIOUS METAL DEALER. Any person engaging in the business of buying coins or
secondhand items containing precious metal including, but not limited to, jewelry, watches,
eating utensils, candlesticks and religious and decorative objects, as specified in M.S.
325F. 731, as it may be amended from time to time. Persons conducting the following
transactions shall not be deemed to be PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS:
1) Transactions at occasional garage sales, rummage sales, estate sales or farm
auctions at the decedents residence, except that precious metal dealers must comply with the
requirements of M.S. §§ 325F.734 through 325F.742, as they may be amended from time to
time, for these transactions; or
2) All other transactions regulated by M.S. Chapter 80A, as it may be amended from
time to time, or described in M.S. § 325F.732, as it may be amended from time to time.
PRECIOUS METALS. Silver, gold and platinum.
SECONDHAND DEALER. A person engaged in the business of buying previously used,
rented, owned or leased goods of any kind, including but not limited to coins, gold, silver,
jewelry, metals and wrecked or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicles intended to be
wrecked or dismantled. Persons conducting the following transactions shall not be deemed to be
SECONDHAND DEALERS.
1) Transactions where all of the following are present:
a) The sale is held on property occupied as a dwelling by the seller, or owned,
rented or leased by a charitable organization;
b) The items offered for sale are owned by the occupant;
c) No sale exceeds a period of 72 consecutive hours;
d) No more than four sales are held in any 12- month period; and
e) None of the items offered for sale was purchased for resale or received on
consignment for the purpose of resale.
2) Sales of goods at an auction held by an auctioneer.
3) Transactions involving goods taken as partial or full payment for new goods, where
the business is incidental to and not the primary business of the person.
4) Transactions by a business specializing in the sale of antiques and other goods
more than 20 years old, where any other transactions are incidental to the antique business.
Page 2 of 11
5) The sale and exchange of used books, where the business gives only credit and not
cash for used books it acquires from customers.
6) Purchases and sales of military goods, where all purchases are directly from offices
of the United States government or military surplus wholesalers. Military clothing also may be
purchased from current and former military personnel.
7) Bulk sales of property from a merchant, manufacturer or wholesaler having an
established place of business, or goods sold at open sale from bankrupt stock.
8) Sale of goods at an exhibition, providing the exhibition does not last longer than ten
days in any 12- month period.
9) Sales of automobiles by a licensed automobile dealer.
10) Sales made by the Sheriff or other public officials in the discharge of their official
duties.
11) Sales made by assignees or receivers appointed by the state or a court to make sales
for the benefit of creditors.
12) Sales by a charitable organization of donated items.
13) A secondhand store involving only the purchase and re- sale of clothing, jewelry
that does not contain precious metals, furniture, kitchen household items except for silverware,
household d6cor, miscellaneous household goods and sports memorabilia.
Prior Code, § 3- 8A-2) ( Ord. 605, passed 2- 21- 2006; Ord. 741, passed 9- 2- 2014)
117.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
A) License required. No person shall operate as a precious metal dealer or secondhand
dealer without a license therefore from the city.
B) Investigative fee. An applicant for a license under this chapter shall pay to the City
Clerk at the time an original application is submitted, a non-refundable fee as set by ordinance to
cover the expense of the Police Department investigation to assure compliance with this chapter.
Prior Code, § 3- 8A-3) ( Ord. 605, passed 2- 21- 2006; Ord. 738, passed 7- 7- 2014) Penalty, see §
10. 99
117.04 APPLICATION.
An application form provided by the city must be completed by every applicant for a new
license or for renewal of an existing license. Every new applicant must provide all of the
Page 3 of 11
following information.
A) Naturalperson. If the applicant is a natural person:
1) The name, place and date of birth, street resident address and phone number of
applicant;
2) Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or resident alien;
3) Whether the applicant has ever used or been known by a name other than the
applicant' s name and, if so, the name or names used and information concerning dates and places
used;
4) The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a designation, name or style
other than the name of the applicant and a certified copy of the certificate as required by M.S.
333. 01, as it may be amended from time to time;
5) The street address at which the applicant has lived during the preceding five years;
6) The type, name and location of every business or occupation in which the applicant
has been engaged during the preceding five years and the name(s) and address( es) of the
applicant' s employer(s) and partner( s), if any, for the preceding five years;
7) The physical description of the applicant;
8) Applicant' s current personal financial statement and true copies of the applicant' s
federal and state tax returns for the two years prior to application; and
9) If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the manager( s) or other
person( s) in charge of the business and all information concerning each of them required in
divisions ( A)( 1) through ( 8) above of this chapter.
B) Partnership. If the applicant is a partnership:
1) The name( s) and address( es) of all general and limited partners and all information
concerning each general partner required in division (A) above;
2) The name( s) of the managing partner( s) and the interest of each partner in the
licensed business;
3) A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the application. If
the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a trade name pursuant to M.S. § 333. 01, as it
may be amended from time to time, a certified copy of the certificate must be attached to the
application;
4) A true copy of the federal and state tax returns for partnership for the two years
Page 4of11
prior to application; and
5) If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the manager( s) or other
person( s) in charge of the business and all information concerning each of them required in
divisions ( A)( 1) through ( 8) above.
C) Corporation or other organization. If the applicant is a corporation or other
organization:
1) The name of the corporation or business form and, if incorporated, the state of
incorporation;
2) A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of incorporation or
association agreement and by- laws shall be attached to the application. If the applicant is a
foreign corporation, a certificate of authority as required by M.S. § 303. 06, as it may be amended
from time to time, must be attached;
3) The name of the manager( s) or other person( s) in charge of the business and all
information concerning each manager, proprietor, or agent required in divisions ( A)( 1) through
8) above; and
4) A list of all persons who control or own an interest in excess of 5% in the
organization or business form or who are officers of the corporation or business form and all
information concerning the persons required in division (A) above. This requirement does not
apply to a corporation whose stock is publicly traded on a stock exchange and is applying for a
license to be owned and operated by it.
D) All applicants. For all applicants:
1) Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker, precious metal dealer or
secondhand goods dealer license from any other governmental unit;
2) Whether the applicant has previously been denied, or had revoked or suspended, a
pawnbroker, precious metal or secondhand dealer license from any governmental unit;
3) The location, including the legal description, of the business premise;
4) If the applicant does not own the business premise, a true and complete copy of the
executed lease;
5) Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due and payable for the
premise to be licensed have been paid and, if not paid, the years and amounts that are unpaid;
6) Whenever the application is for premises either planned or under construction or
undergoing substantial alteration, the application must be accompanied by a set of preliminary
plans showing the design of the proposed premise to be licensed;
Page 5 of 11
7) Other information as the City Council may require; and
8) All applications for a license under this chapter must be signed and sworn to under
oath or affirmation by the applicant. If the application is that of a natural person, it must be
signed and sworn to by the person; if that of a corporation, by an officer thereof, if that of a
partnership, by one of the general partners; and if that of an unincorporated association, by the
manager or managing officer thereof.
E) New manager. When a licensee places a manager in charge of a business, or if the
named manager( s) in charge of licensed business changes, the licensee must submit to the city all
appropriate information required in this chapter within 14 days.
Prior Code, § 3- 8A-4) ( Ord. 605, passed 2- 21- 2006) Penalty, see § 10. 99
117.05 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
A) Liquor license. No license shall be issued to an applicant who holds a liquor license.
B) Gambling. No license shall be issued to any applicant who keeps, possesses or operates
any type of gambling equipment or operation, except that the purchase of lottery tickets may take
place on the licensed premise as authorized by the director of the lottery pursuant to M.S.
349. 01 to 349. 15, as they may be amended from time to time.
C) Minors. No license shall be issued to an applicant who is under the age of 21 at the
time the application is filed.
D) Delinquent taxes. No license shall be issued for an operation on any property on which
taxes, assessments or other financial claims of any governmental entity are due, delinquent or
unpaid.
E) Applicant convicted ofa crime. No license shall be issued to an applicant convicted of
a crime directly related to the occupation.
F) Precious metals license. No applicant shall be eligible for a precious metals or
secondhand dealers license unless the applicant has first obtained a precious metals license from
the county.
Prior Code, § 3- 8A-5) ( Ord. 605, passed 2- 21- 2006) Penalty, see § 10. 99
117.06 LICENSING ISSUANCE.
A) Investigation. The Police Department must investigate into the truthfulness of the
statements set forth in the application and shall endorse the findings thereon. The applicant must
furnish to the Police Department the evidence as the inspector may reasonably require in support
of the statements set forth in the application.
Page 6 of 11
B) Public hearing. Within a reasonable period following receipt of the Police
Department' s report and recommendation regarding the application, the City Council shall
conduct a public hearing on the license. At least ten days in advance of the hearing on the
application, the City Clerk shall cause notice of the hearing to be published in the official
newspaper of the city, setting forth the day, time and place of the hearing, the name of the
applicant, the premise where the business is to be conducted and the type of license which is
sought.
C) Hearing on application. At the hearing, opportunity shall be given to any person to be
heard for or against the granting of the license. After the hearing on the application, the City
Council may, at its discretion, grant or deny the application.
D) Annual renewal. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be for a period not to
exceed one year and shall expire on the last day of February following issuance. A license under
this chapter may not be renewed if the City Council determines that the licensee has failed to
comply with the provisions of this chapter in preceding license years.
Prior Code, § 3- 8A-6) ( Ord. 605, passed 2- 21- 2006; Ord. 704, passed 8- 6- 2012; Ord. 724,
passed 9- 3- 2013) Penalty, see § 10. 99
117.07 BILLABLE-TRANSFER FEE.
The annual fee for licenses issued under this chapter shall be:
A) A billable-transaction license fee, which reflects the cost of processing transactions and
other related regulatory expenses as determined by the City Council, shall be payable in an
amount as determined by the City Council; and
B) Billable-transaction fees shall be billed monthly and are due and payable within 30
days. Failure to do so is a violation of this chapter.
Prior Code, § 3- 8A-7) ( Ord. 605, passed 2- 21- 2006) Penalty, see § 10. 99
117.08 RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.
A) Hours of operation. Hours of operation shall be limited to between 7: 00 a.m. and 10: 00
p. m.
B) Inspection. The licensee shall, at all times, allow the Police Department to enter any
portion of the building or property where the licensee' s business is located or where goods are
stored, for the purpose of inspecting building or property, for inspecting the items therein for the
purpose of locating items suspected or alleged to have been stolen or otherwise improperly
disposed of, and for the purpose of checking for violations of the section.
C) Minors. No licensee shall purchase or receive personal property of any nature from any
Page 7 of 11
person under the age of 18 years.
D) Incompetents. No licensee shall purchase or receive personal property of any kind from
a person who is or appears to be of unsound mind, incompetent, or under the influence of alcohol
or drugs.
E) Prohibited items. No licensee shall accept any kind of property which contains an
altered or obliterated serial number, nor any item of property whose serial number has been
removed.
F) Licensed vehicles. No licensee shall accept any vehicle licensed or subject to licensing
by the State of Minnesota, unless the vehicle is licensed and operable. The licensee must be
shown the title, and the seller must be named as owner on that title.
G) Checks. Payment for any item containing precious metal, or any other type of
secondhand item costing over $20, shall be made only by a check, draft or other order of
withdrawal which is drawn against funds held by a financial institution.
H) Firearms. No firearm, as defined by § 132. 02 of this code may be purchased or sold
secondhand by a person licensed under this section.
I) Seller to present identification. No licensee may receive any goods unless the seller
presents identification in the form of a valid state driver' s license or state identification card.
J) Property not belonging to person. No person may sell, consign, leave or deposit any
article of property not their own, or give the licensee a false or fictitious name, address, date of
birth or telephone number.
K) Business at only one place. A license under this chapter authorizes the licensee to carry
on its business only at the permanent place of business designated in the license. However, upon
written request, the Chief of Police or designee may approve an off-site locked and secured
storage facility.
L) Holding period. Any item purchased or accepted by a licensee must not be sold or
otherwise transferred for 30 days from the date of the transaction. The item shall not be altered at
the time of sale, and shall remain unaltered during the required holding period.
M) Exceptions. This requirement does not apply to compact discs, movie media( to include
but not limited to DVDs) and video games.
Prior Code, § 3- 8A- 8) ( Ord. 605, passed 2- 21- 2006) Penalty, see § 10. 99
117.09 RECORDKEEPING.
A) Definition. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Page 8 of 11
BILLABLE TRANSACTION. Every reportable transaction.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTIONS. The receipt of any item of property bought or sold,
except:
a) The bulk purchase of new or used merchandise from a merchant, manufacturer
or wholesaler having an established permanent place of business, and the retail sale of the
merchandise, provided the licensee maintains a record of the purchase and marks each item in a
manner which relates it to that transaction; and
b) Items purchased from a Minnesota city, county or law-enforcement agency as
an alternative to disposing of unclaimed, impounded, seized or confiscated items through public
auction or sale, as allowed by state statute or local ordinance.
B) Required information. At the time of any reportable transaction, every licensee must
immediately record in English the following information by using ink or other indelible medium
on forms or in a computerized record approved by the Police Department:
1) A complete and accurate description of each item including, but not limited to, any
trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name or other identifying
mark on an item;
2) The purchase price;
3) Date, time and place the item of property was received by the licensee, and the
unique alpha and/ or numerical transaction identifier that distinguishes it from all other
transactions in the licensee' s records;
4) Full name, residence address, residence telephone number, date of birth and
accurate description of the person from whom the item of property was received, including: sex,
height, weight, race, color of eyes and color of hair;
5) The identification number of state of issue from any of the following forms of
identification of the seller:
a) Current valid Minnesota driver' s license;
b) Current valid Minnesota identification card; or
c) Current valid photo identification card issued by another state or a province of
Canada.
6) The signature of the person identified in the transaction; and
7) Any other information reasonably required by the Police Department.
Page 9 of 11
C) Modem reporting.
1) The licensee shall be required to implement, use and maintain the ( State of
Minnesota) Automated Pawn System (APS) and thereby submit on a daily basis every reportable
transaction to the Police Department. If, on any given day, a licensee is unable to successfully
transfer the required reports by modem, the licensee must have on the premise and available for
inspection by the Police Department printed copies of all reportable transactions that have not
been reported by modem.
2) The licensee must display a sign of sufficient size, in a conspicuous place in the
premise, which informs patrons that all transactions are reported to the Police Department daily.
D) Recordable surveillance device. A secondhand goods dealer shall run a recordable
surveillance device during all hours of operation. Recordings shall be retained a minimum of 30
days. The quality of the recording shall be sufficient to clearly identify the seller and to clearly
identify the goods involved in the transaction. Each tape shall automatically record the date and
time of each transaction. Recordings shall be provided to the Police Department upon request.
E) Records inspection. The records must at all reasonable times be open to inspection by
the Police Department. Data entries shall be retained for at least three years from the date of
transaction.
Prior Code, § 3- 8A-9) ( Ord. 605, passed 2- 21- 2006) Penalty, see § 10. 99
117.10 POLICE HOLD.
A) Whenever the Police Department notifies the licensee not to sell an item, the items shall
not be sold or removed from the licensed premises for a period of 60 days, or until authorized to
be released by the Police Department, whichever comes first.
B) The Police Department may remove items believed to be stolen from the licensee' s
business and hold them in the Police Department property room until it is determined whether
they are stolen or not. Under M.S. § 609. 523, as it may be amended from time to time, the
Police Department may return stolen property to the owner, with no recompense to the licensee.
Upon criminal conviction, restitution may be sought for losses experienced by a licensee. Each
licensee is responsible for establishing procedures to avoid receiving stolen property.
Prior Code, § 3- 8A- 10) ( Ord. 605, passed 2- 21- 2006) Penalty, see § 10. 99
117.11 RECEIPT.
Every licensee must provide a receipt to the party identified in every reportable transaction
and must maintain a duplicate of that receipt for three years. The receipt must include at least
the following information:
Page 10 of 11
A) The name, address and phone number of the licensee' s business;
B) An accurate description of each item including, but not limited to, any trademark,
identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other identifying mark on
an item;
C) The signature or unique identifier of the licensee or employee that conducted the
transaction; and
D) The amount paid or received.
Prior Code, § 3- 8A- 11) ( Ord. 605, passed 2- 21- 2006) Penalty, see § 10. 99
117.12 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
A) The City Council may suspend or revoke a license upon finding a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter or any state statute regulating precious metal dealers or secondhand
dealers. Any conviction by the precious metal dealer or secondhand dealer for theft, receiving
stolen property or any other crime or violation involving stolen property shall result in the
immediate suspension pending a hearing on revocation of any license issued hereunder.
B) Except in the case of a suspension pending a hearing on revocation, a revocation or
suspension by the City Council shall be preceded by written notice to the licensee and a public
hearing. The written notice shall give at least ten days' notice of the time and place of the
hearing and shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee. The City Council may,
without notice, suspend any license pending a hearing on revocation for a period not exceeding
30 days. The notice may be served upon the licensee by United States mail addressed to the
most recent address of the business on the license application.
Prior Code, § 3- 8A- 12) ( Ord. 605, passed 2- 21- 2006)
Page 11 of 11
CHAPTER 118: LICENSING OF SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
118. 01 Purpose
118. 02 Findings
118. 03 Definitions
118. 04 License required
118. 05 License application
118. 06 Application execution
118. 07 Application verification
118. 08 Application consideration
118. 09 Renewal application
118. 10 Fees
118. 11 Persons and locations ineligible for a license
118. 12 General license restrictions
118. 13 Restrictions regarding license transfers
118. 14 Restrictions regarding hours of operation
118. 15 Restrictions regarding minors
118. 16 Restrictions relating to sanitation and health
118. 17 Civil sanctions for license violations
118. 18 Severability
118. 01 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe licensing requirements for sexually- orientated
businesses in order to protect the general health, safety and welfare and to ensure that the owners
and managers of sexually- orientated businesses are competent and consistently able to operate
the business according to city, state and federal law.
Prior Code, § 3- 9- 1) ( Ord. 401, passed 5- 15- 1995)
118. 02 FINDINGS.
A) Generalfindings. The City Council has made the following findings regarding the need
to license sexually- orientated businesses. These findings are based on the experiences of other
cities where the businesses are located, as studied by a city staff committee.
1) Sexually- oriented businesses can contribute to an increase in criminal activity in
the area in which the businesses are located, taxing city crime-prevention programs and
law-enforcement services.
2) Sexually- oriented businesses can be used as fronts for other criminal activity
including prostitution, illegal gambling, illicit narcotics and sexual activities involving or
Page 1 of 15
including minors. The experience of other cities indicates that the proper management and
operation of the businesses can eliminate this risk, provided the owners and operators of the
facilities are regulated by licensing or other procedures.
3) Sexually- oriented businesses can increase the risk of exposure to communicable
diseases including but not limited to Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) for which
currently there is no cure. Experiences of other cities indicate that the businesses can facilitate
the spread of communicable diseases by virtue of the design and use of the premises, thereby
endangering not only the patrons of the establishments but also the general public.
4) Sexually- oriented businesses can cause or contribute to public health problems by
the presence of live adult entertainment in conjunction with food and/ or drink on the same
premises.
5) The experience of other cities indicates that the proper management and operation
of the businesses can minimize these risks, provided the owners and managers of the facilities
are regulated by licensing or other procedures.
B) Findings specifically related to the presence ofalcohol at sexually-oriented businesses.
In addition to division (A) above, the city finds that the sale and/or presence of alcoholic
beverages and adult entertainment occurring on the same premises increases the potential for acts
o£
1) Disorderly conduct including fighting and damage to private and public property;
2) Incidents of prostitution;
3) Public masturbation;
4) Indecent exposure; and
5) Sexual assault.
Prior Code, § 3- 9- 2) ( Ord. 401, passed 5- 15- 1995)
118. 03 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ADULTBODYPAINTING STUDIO. An establishment or business which provides the
services of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or non- transparent, to or on the
body of a patron when the body is wholly or partially nude in terms of specifically anatomical
areas as defined herein.
ADULTBOOKSTORE. An establishment that has 15% or greater of its retail floor space
Page 2 of 15
utilized for videos, books, items, merchandise or devices that either stimulate human genitals or
are designed for sexual stimulation, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas as defined herein.
ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment
which regularly features:
1) Persons who exhibit any specified anatomical area of the body;
2) Live performances, which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities as defined herein; or
3) Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions
which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
ADULT CAR WASH. A wash facility for any type of motor vehicle that allows employees,
agents, independent actors or persons to appear in a state of partial or total nudity in terms of
specified anatomical areas as defined herein.
ADULTENTERTAINMENT FACILITY. A building or space wherein an admission is
charged for entrance, or food or nonalcoholic beverages are sold or intended for consumption,
and wherein may be observed live presentation of entertainment distinguished or characterized
by any emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas as defined herein.
ADULTMOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or space with a capacity of 50 or
more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas as herein defined, for observation by patrons therein. The phrase " used for" in this
definition shall mean a regular and substantial course of conduct and not a one- time presentation.
ADULTMINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or space with a capacity for
fewer than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas as herein defined, for observation by patrons therein. The phrase " used for" in this
definition shall mean a regular and substantial course of conduct and not a one- time presentation
of the material.
ADULTMODELING STUDIO. An establishment whose major business is the provision to
customers of figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation
or sexual gratification to the customers and who engage in specified sexual activities, as defined
herein, while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed
or otherwise depicted by the customers.
Page 3 of 15
ADULTMOTEL. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten
hours or allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub- rent the room for a period of time
that is less than ten hours.
ADULTSAUNA. A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides a
steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation or reducing, utilizing
steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas as defined herein.
BOOTHS. Booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room or individual room:
1) Enclosures specifically offered to a person for a fee or as incident to performing
high-risk sexual conduct;
2) Enclosures, which are part of a business operated on the premises, which offers
movies or other entertainment to be viewed within the enclosure including enclosures wherein
movies or other entertainment are provided for a fee.
3) The phrase " booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms"
does not mean enclosures which are private offices used by the owners, managers or persons
employed by the premises for attending to the tasks of their employment, and which are not held
out to the public or members of the establishment for hire or for a fee, or for the purpose of
viewing movies or other entertainment for a fee, and are not open to any persons other than
employees.
CLEAN. The absence of dirt, grease, rubbish, garbage, semen, bodily excretions and other
offensive, unsightly or extraneous matter.
DOORS, CURTAINS OR PORTAL PARTITIONS. A full, complete, nontransparent
closure devices through which one cannot see or view activity taking place within the enclosure.
GOOD REPAIR. Being free of corrosion, breaks, cracks, chips, pitting, excessive wear and
tear, leaks, obstructions and similar defects so as to constitute a good and sound condition.
HEALTH INSPECTORS. Inspectors employed by the city or its agents.
INTOXICATED. A person who either:
1) Cannot walk under his or her own power; or
2) Who has difficulty speaking coherently for reason other than a permanent physical
or mental impairment.
ISSUING AUTHORITY. The City Council.
Page 4of15
MANAGER. One or more persons who affect decisions regarding the day to day operations
of the sexually- oriented business.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or
displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of
consideration.
NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area with less than a
fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering
below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or the depiction or showing of covered
male genitals in a discernible turgid state.
PLACE OF WORSHIP. A building or space that is principally used as a place where
people of the same faith or religion regularly assemble for worship.
RAP PARLOR. An establishment or place primarily in the business of providing
nonprofessional conversation or similar service for adults.
SCHOOL. A building or space that is principally used as a place where 25 or more persons
receive a full course of educational instruction. Any post secondary or post high school
educational building, including any college or any vocational technical college shall not be
deemed a school for purposes of this chapter.
SECONDARYEFFECTS. Include but are not limited to: prostitution, public
masturbation, indecent exposure, sexual assault, exposure to communicable diseases including
but not limited to Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) and preservation of the city' s
property value. These secondary effects are based on findings of the City Council as listed in §
152. 003 of the Savage Zoning Code.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Includes the following:
1) Human genitals in a discernible state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
2) Actual or stimulated human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, oral
copulation;
3) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genital, pubic area or pubic hair,
buttock, or female breast or breasts;
4) Excretory functions as part of or in conjunction with any of the activities set forth
in divisions ( 1) through ( 3) above; or
5) Any combination of the foregoing.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Includes:
Page 5 of 15
1) Less than completely and opaquely covered:
a) Human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair;
b) Buttock;
c) Female breast or breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola;
or
d) Any combination of the foregoing.
2) Human male genitals in a discernable turgid state even if completely and opaquely
covered.
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. Includes adult book stores, adult cabaret, adult
motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motel, nude model studio, rap
parlor.
Prior Code, § 3- 9- 3) ( Ord. 401, passed 5- 15- 1995; Ord. 655, passed 7- 20- 2009)
118.04 LICENSE REQUIRED.
No persons shall own or operate a sexually- oriented business without being licensed under
this chapter.
Prior Code, § 3- 9- 4) ( Ord. 401, passed 5- 15- 1995) Penalty, see § 10. 99
118. 05 LICENSE APPLICATION.
The application for a license under this chapter shall be made on a form supplied by the
licensing authority and shall request the following information:
A) For all applicants:
1) Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, partnership or other form of
organization;
2) The legal description of the premises to be licensed, along with the floor plan of the
premises. The floor plan of the premises shall detail all internal operations and activities,
including a statement of the total floor space occupied by the business. The floor plan need not
be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches; and
Page 6 of 15
3) The name and street address of the business. If the business is to be conducted
under a designation, name or style other than the name of the applicant, a certified copy of the
certificate required by M.S. § 333. 01, as it may be amended from time to time, shall be
submitted.
B) If the applicant is a natural person:
1) The name, address, telephone number, driver' s license number and date of birth of
the applicant;
2) Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name other than the
applicant' s name, and if so, the name or names used and information concerning dates and places
where used;
3) The address( es) at which the applicant has lived during the preceding two years;
4) The type, name and location of every business or occupation in which the applicant
has engaged during the preceding two years and the name(s) and address( es) of the applicant' s
employer(s) and partner(s), if any, for the preceding two years; and
5) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, crime or violation of
any ordinance or law other than a petty misdemeanor traffic offense. If so, the applicant shall
furnish information as to the time, place and offense for which convictions were had.
C) If the applicant is a partnership:
1) The names and addresses of all general partners and all of the information
concerning each general partner that is required of applicants in division (B) above;
2) The name( s) of the managing partner( s) and the interest of each partner in the
business; and
3) A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the application. If
the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a trade name pursuant to M.S. § 333. 01, as it
may be amended from time to time, a certified copy of the certificate shall be attached to the
application.
D) If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
1) The name of the corporation or business form and state of organization;
2) A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of incorporation or
association agreement and by- laws shall be attached to the application. If the applicant is a
foreign corporation, a certificate of authority as required by M.S. § 303. 06, as it may be amended
from time to time, shall be attached; and
Page 7 of 15
3) The names of the manager( s), proprietor(s) or other agent( s) in charge of the
business and all of the information concerning each manager, proprietor or agent that is required
of applicants in division (B) above.
Prior Code, § 3- 9- 5) ( Ord. 401, passed 5- 15- 1995) Penalty, see § 10. 99
118.06 APPLICATION EXECUTION.
If the application is that of a natural person, the application shall be signed and sworn to by
that person; if of a corporation, by an officer thereof, if of a partnership, by an officer of the
general partner(s); if of an unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer
thereof.
Prior Code, § 3- 9- 6) ( Ord. 401, passed 5- 15- 1995) Penalty, see § 10. 99
118. 07 APPLICATION VERIFICATION.
Applications for licenses under this chapter shall be submitted to the issuing authority.
Within 20 calendar days of receipt of a completed application form by the issuing authority, the
issuing authority shall verify any and all of the information requested of the applicant in the
application and conduct any necessary investigation to assure compliance with this chapter.
Prior Code, § 3- 9- 7) ( Ord. 401, passed 5- 15- 1995; Ord. 704, passed 8- 6- 2012; Ord. 724, passed
9- 3- 2013)
118. 08 APPLICATION CONSIDERATION.
No later than ten calendar days after the completion of the license application, verification
and investigation by the issuing authority, as prescribed by § 118. 07, the issuing authority shall
accept or deny the license application. If the application is denied, the issuing authority shall
notify the applicant of the determination in writing. The notice shall be mailed by certified and
regular mail to the applicant at the address provided on the application form and it shall inform
the applicant of the applicant' s right, within 20 calendar days of receipt of the notice by
applicant, to request an appeal of the issuing authority' s determination to the City Council or to
immediately challenge the determination in a court of law. If an appeal to the City Council is
timely received by the issuing authority, the hearing before the City Council shall take place
within 20 calendar days of the receipt of the appeal by the issuing authority. The license shall
not be delivered to the applicant until a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the licensed
premises by the city.
Prior Code, § 3- 9- 8) ( Ord. 401, passed 5- 15- 1995)
Page 8 of 15
118. 09 RENEWAL APPLICATION.
A) All licenses issued under this chapter shall be effective for only one year commencing
with the date of approval by the issuing authority or City Council. An application for the
renewal of an existing license shall be submitted to the issuing authority at least 30 days prior to
the expiration date of the license.
B) Within 20 calendar days of receipt by the issuing authority of a fully completed renewal
application, the issuing authority shall verify any and all of the information requested of the
applicant in the renewal application and shall conduct any necessary investigation to assure
compliance with this chapter. No later than ten calendar days after the completion of the renewal
application, verification and investigation by the issuing authority as prescribed herein, the
issuing authority shall issue a renewal license unless one or more of the following conditions
exist:
1) The applicant is a minor at the time the application is submitted;
2) The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested in the renewal
application;
3) The applicant gave false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the renewal
application;
4) The sexually-oriented business was found in the immediately preceding license
year to have violated the license restrictions prescribed in this chapter;
5) The sexually- oriented business does not meet the zoning requirements prescribed in
the Zoning Code;
6) The premises licensed as a sexually- oriented business is currently licensed by the
city as a tanning facility, tattoo establishment, pawnshop, therapeutic massage enterprise, or an
established licensed to sell alcoholic beverages;
7) The applicant or its manager has had a conviction of any crime listed in § 118. 11 of
this chapter; or
8) The applicant has had a sexually- oriented business license revoked within a
one-year period immediately preceding the date the application was submitted.
C) If the issuing authority denies a renewal application, the issuing authority shall notify
the applicant in accordance with § 118. 08 of this chapter and the notice shall, in addition, state
the grounds for the denial.
D) After the denial of a renewal application by the issuing authority, the applicant may
appeal the issuing authority' s determination to the City Council in accordance with § 118. 08 of
Page 9 of 15
this chapter or by immediately challenging the determination in a court of law. If the city denies
the renewal of a license under this chapter, the applicant shall not be issued a license under this
chapter for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the city finds that the basis
for the denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a
license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the denial became final.
Prior Code, § 3- 9- 9) ( Ord. 401, passed 5- 15- 1995; Ord. 704, passed 8- 6- 2012; Ord. 724, passed
9- 3- 2013) Penalty, see § 10. 99
118. 10 FEES.
A) Application fee.
1) The license application fee shall be as determined by the City Council by
ordinance.
2) The application fee shall be paid in full before the application for a license is
requested. All fees shall be paid to the issuing authority for deposit into the General Fund of the
city. Upon rejection of any application for a license or upon withdrawal of an application before
approval by the issuing authority, the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant.
3) When the license is for premises where the building is not ready for occupancy, the
time fixed for computation of the license fee for the initial license period shall be 90 days after
approval of the license by the issuing authority or upon the date an occupancy permit is issued
for the building.
B) Investigationfee. An applicant for any license under this chapter shall deposit a nonrefundable
fee as set by ordinance with the issuing authority, at the time an original application is
submitted to cover the costs involved in verifying the license application and to cover the
expense of any investigation needed to assure compliance with this chapter.
Prior Code, § 3- 9- 10) ( Ord. 401, passed 5- 15- 1995) Penalty, see § 10. 99
118. 11 PERSONS AND LOCATIONS INELIGIBLE FOR A LICENSE.
The issuing authority may issue a license under this chapter to an applicant unless one or
more of the following conditions exist:
A) The applicant is a minor at the time the application is submitted;
B) The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the license
application;
C) The applicant gave false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the license application;
D) The applicant has not paid the license and investigation fees required by § 118. 10;
Page 10 of 15
E) The sexually- oriented business does not meet the zoning requirements prescribed in the
Zoning Code;
F) The sexually-oriented business is to be located in a building, which includes businesses,
organizations or associations that allow the presence of minors;
G) The premises licensed as a sexually- oriented business is currently licensed by the city as
a tanning facility, tattoo establishment, pawnshop, therapeutic massage enterprise, or an
establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages;
H) The applicant or its manager has had a conviction of a felony or gross misdemeanor or
misdemeanor relating to sex offenses, obscenity offenses or adult uses in the past five years; or
I) The applicant has had a sexually- oriented business license revoked within a one-year
period immediately preceding the date the application was submitted.
Prior Code, § 3- 9- 11) ( Ord. 401, passed 5- 15- 1995)
118. 12 GENERAL LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.
A) Posting of license. A license issued under this chapter must be posted in a conspicuous
place in the premises for which it is used.
B) Effect oflicense. A license issued under this chapter is only effective for the compact
and contiguous space specified in the approved license application.
C) Maintenance oforder. A licensee under this chapter shall be responsible for the
conduct of the business being operated and shall not allow any illegal activity to take place on or
near the licenses premises, including but not limited to prostitution, public indecency, indecent
exposure, disorderly conduct, or the sale or use of illegal drugs. Every act or omission by an
employee or independent contractor or the licensee constituting a violation of this chapter shall
be deemed the act or omission of the licensee if the act or omission occurs with or without the
authorization, knowledge or approval of the licensee or as a result of the licensee' s negligent
failure to supervise the employee' s or independent contractor' s conduct.
D) Distance requirementfor live adult entertainment.
1) Generally. All performers, dancers and persons providing live entertainment,
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, in the licensed facility or in areas
adjoining the licensed facility, where the entertainment can be seen by patrons, customers or
spectators, shall remain at all times a minimum distance of six feet from all patrons, customers or
spectators and shall dance or provide the entertainment on a platform intended for that purpose,
which shall be raised at least two feet from the level of the floor on which patrons, customers or
spectators are located.
Page 11 of 15
2) Exception. The spacing shall not be required if the licensee has installed a glass
barrier to sufficiently separate dancers from the audience.
E) Interaction with patrons. No dancer, performer or person providing live entertainment
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas in the licensed facility or in areas
adjoining the licensed facility where the entertainment can be seen by patrons of the licensed
facility shall fondle or caress or shall be fondled or caressed by any customer, patron or
spectator.
F) Gratuity prohibition. No customer, patron or spectator of licensed facility shall directly
pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or performer, and no dancer or performer shall solicit any
pay or gratuity from any customer, patron or spectator.
Prior Code, § 3- 9- 12) ( Ord. 401, passed 5- 15- 1995) Penalty, see § 10. 99
118. 13 RESTRICTIONS REGARDING LICENSE TRANSFERS.
A) The license granted under this chapter is for the person and the premises named on the
approved license application. No transfer of a license shall be permitted from place to place or
from person to person without complying with the requirements of the original application.
B) When a sexually- oriented business licensed under this chapter is sold or transferred, the
existing licensee shall immediately notify the issuing authority of the sale or transfer. If the new
owner or operator is to continue operating the sexually- oriented business, the new owner must
immediately apply for the license under this chapter.
Prior Code, § 3- 9- 13) ( Ord. 401, passed 5- 15- 1995) Penalty, see § 10. 99
118. 14 RESTRICTIONS REGARDING HOURS OF OPERATION.
A licensee shall not be open for business to the public during the following hours on the
following days:
A) Adult body painting studio, adult book stores, adult companionship establishment, adult
modeling studio, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini motion picture theaters, adult sauna
and adult car wash. Monday through Sunday, not open before 6: 00 a.m. or after 11: 00 p.m.
B) Adult entertainmentfacilities. Monday through Sunday, not open before 6: 00 a.m. or
after 1: 00 a.m.
Prior Code, § 3- 9- 14) ( Ord. 401, passed 5- 15- 1995) Penalty, see § 10. 99
118. 15 RESTRICTIONS REGARDING MINORS.
Page 12 of 15
No licensee shall allow minors to enter the licensed premises. The licensee shall request
proof of age of all persons the licensee believes to be under the age of 18 years. Proof of age
may be established only by: a valid driver' s license or identification card issued by the state,
another state or a province of Canada and including the photograph and date of birth of the
licensed person; a valid military identification card issued by the United States Department of
Defense; or in the case of a foreign national from a nation other than Canada, a valid passport.
Prior Code, § 3- 9- 15) ( Ord. 401, passed 5- 15- 1995) Penalty, see § 10. 99
118. 16 RESTRICTIONS RELATING TO SANITATION AND HEALTH.
A) Licensee restrictions. A licensee of a sexually- oriented business shall not permit:
1) Anyone to encourage or permit any person on the licensed premises to touch,
caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any other person; or
2) Any person displaying specified anatomical areas from being present in areas other
than entertainment areas.
B) Licensee prohibitions. A licensee under this section shall not:
1) Allow any partition between a subdivision, portion, or part of the licensed premises
having any aperture which is designed or constructed to facilitate sexual intercourse, sodomy, or
fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttocks, or
female breast between persons on either side of the partition; or
2) Allow or have on the licensed premises or adjoining areas any booths, stalls or
partitions used for the viewing of motion pictures or other forms of entertainment that have
doors, curtains, or portal partitions, unless the booths, stalls or partitions have at least one side
open to an adjacent public room so that the areas inside is visible to persons in the adjacent
public room. The areas shall be lighted in a manner that the persons in the area used for viewing
motion pictures or other forms of entertainment are visible from the adjacent public rooms.
C) Authority to inspect. The issuing authority shall have the authority to inspect or cause
to be inspected the licensed premises and adjoining areas in order to ascertain the source of
infection or reduce the spread of communicable diseases. The officials shall have the authority
to issue appropriate orders to the licensee regarding health and sanitation.
D) Limitation on number ofpersons in partitioned areas. Any booths, stalls or partitioned
portions of a room or individual rooms used for the viewing of motion pictures or other forms of
entertainment including but not limited to live entertainment shall not be occupied by more than
one person at a time.
E) Adult sauna regulations. Adult saunas shall comply with health requirements set forth
by § 114. 08 of the city code.
Page 13 of 15
F) General sanitation requirements. All sexually- oriented businesses shall at all times be
kept clean as defined herein and in a state of good repair as defined herein.
G) Duty or supervise. The licensee shall not permit specified sexual activities as defined
herein to take place on the premises and shall have an affirmative duty to supervise the licensed
premises and prevent the activities.
Prior Code, § 3- 9- 16) ( Ord. 401, passed 5- 15- 1995) Penalty, see § 10. 99
118. 17 CIVIL SANCTIONS FOR LICENSE VIOLATIONS.
A) Suspension. The City Council may suspend a license for up to 60 days if the City
Council determines that a licensee has:
1) Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this chapter; or
2) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the licensed premises.
B) Revocation. The City Council may revoke a license if the City Council determines that:
1) The licensee' s license was suspended in the preceding 14 months and an additional
cause for suspension as detailed in division (A) above is found by the City Council to have
occurred within the 14- month period;
2) The licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the
city during the application process;
3) A licensee or an employee or independent contractor of the licensee has knowingly
allowed possession, use or sale of a controlled substance on the premises;
4) A licensee or an employee or independent contractor has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises;
5) A licensee violated any of the provisions of M.S. §§ 617.241 to 617.299, as it may
be amended from time to time, relating to the illegal distribution, possession or sale of obscene
materials;
6) A licensee or employee knowingly operated the sexually- oriented business during a
period of time when the licensee' s license was suspended;
7) A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in § 118. 11 of this chapter for
which the time period required has not elapsed;
8) On two or more occasions within a 12- month period, a person or persons
committed an offense in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in § 118. 11 of this chapter
for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees or
Page 14 of 15
independent contractors of the licensee at the time the offenses were committed;
9) A licensee, an employee and/ or independent contractor of the licensee has
knowingly allowed specific sexual activities to occur in or on the licenses premises; or
10) A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city, county, state or federal government
for real estate taxes, special assessments, ad valorem taxes, sales taxes, or other financial
obligations.
C) Hearing procedures. A revocation or suspension shall be preceded by written notice to
the licensee and a public hearing. The notice shall give at least eight days notice of the time and
place of the public hearing and shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee. The
notice shall be mailed to the licensee at the most recent address listed on the application.
Prior Code, § 3- 9- 17) ( Ord. 401, passed 5- 15- 1995)
118. 18 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, division, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid,
the decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City
Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the chapter and each section, division,
sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
divisions, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid.
Prior Code, § 3- 9- 19) ( Ord. 401, passed 5- 15- 1995)
Page 15 of 15
CHAPTER 119: TOBACCO
Section
119. 01 Definitions
119. 02 License required
119. 03 Display of license and admonition
119. 04 License restrictions
119. 05 Prohibited sales
119. 06 Sale of tobacco or tobacco-related devices by minors prohibited
119. 07 Self-service merchandising prohibited
119. 08 Vending machine sales
119. 09 Appeal
119. 10 Responsibility for agents and employees
119. 11 Sampling Prohibited
119. 99 Penalty
119. 01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
TOBACCO. Cigarettes and any product containing, made or derived from
tobacco that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved,
inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, or any component, part, or accessory of
a tobacco product; cigars, cheroots; stogies, perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready
rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff, snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine
cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of
tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco. Tobacco also includes electronic cigarettes
defined as any electronic- smoking device that can be used to deliver nicotine or any other
substances to the person inhaling from the device, including but not limited to electronic
cigarettes, electronic cigars, electronic pipes or any other similar device. Tobacco excludes any
tobacco product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for
sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical
purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose.
TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICE. Cigarette papers or pipes for smoking and electronic
cigarettes.
VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electrical or electronic device, appliance or any
other medium or object designated or used for vending purposes which upon insertion of money,
tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses tobacco products.
Prior Code, § 3- 10- 1) ( Ord. 397, passed 5- 1- 1995; Ord. 676, passed 11- 1- 10; Ord. 725, passed
10- 21- 13)
Pagel of 8
119. 02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
No persons shall keep for retail sale, sell at retail or otherwise dispose of any tobacco or
tobacco-related devices as defined in this chapter at any place in the city without a license issued
hereunder.
A) Application and issuance. Application for a license, together with the appropriate fee,
shall be submitted to the City Clerk on a form supplied by the city. The form shall disclose the
name and address of the applicant and the information deemed necessary by the city for the
proper administration of this section and all other requirements of law. The applicant shall be
specifically required by sworn statement to declare whether it will utilize age verification
technology and must submit verification of the establishment and utilization of a training
program for clerks responsible for the sale of tobacco. The application shall be presented to the
City Council and, if approved, the City Clerk shall issue a license.
B) License fees. Fees for a tobacco license shall be set by ordinance. The City Council
may establish a two-tier license fee structure whereby incentive is provided to a license holder to
utilize age verification technology that meets performance requirements determined by the city,
including the capability of recording when and how often vendor personnel utilize the
technology. If the license is purchased subsequent to October 1, the fees established herein shall
be one-half of the annual fees.
C) Term of license. Each license shall expire on March 31 following its issuance. Each
license not renewed on or before April 1 of each year shall be subject to a$ 10 late fee. Licenses
are not transferable from one person to another.
Prior Code, § 3- 10- 2) ( Ord. 397, passed 5- 1- 1995; Ord. 531, passed 4- 16- 2001; Ord. 563,
passed 10- 6- 2003; Ord. 676, passed 11- 1- 10; Ord. 704, passed 8- 6- 2012; Ord. 724, passed 9- 3-
2013) Penalty, see § 119. 99
119. 03 DISPLAY OF LICENSE AND ADMONITION.
A) Display of license. Every license shall be conspicuously displayed to the general public
or inspecting authority at the place for which the license is issued and shall be exhibited to any
person upon request.
B) Admonition. Every licensee shall conspicuously display in the licensed premises and
upon any vending machine used to dispense tobacco within a licensed premises, a written
statement that the sale of tobacco or tobacco-related devices to a person under the age of 18 is
unlawful and may be punished by fine or imprisonment or both; that furnishing tobacco or
tobacco- related devices to a person under the age of 18 is unlawful and may be punished by fine
or imprisonment or both; that the possession or use of tobacco by a person under the age of 18 is
unlawful and may be punished by the imposition of a fine. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
cigarette vending machines shall display the warning required by M.S. § 325E.07, as it may be
amended from time to time.
Page 2 of 8
C) Clerk training. All licensees shall arrange for training of all employees engaged in the
sale of tobacco within 30 days of their employment.
Prior Code, § 3- 10- 3) ( Ord. 397, passed 5- 1- 1995; Ord. 563, passed 10- 6- 2003; Ord. 676,
passed 11- 1- 10) Penalty, see § 119. 99
119.04 LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.
A) No license shall be issued except to a person of good moral character.
B) No license shall be issued for the sale of tobacco at a moveable place of business.
C) A license may not be issued to a person having three or more violations of this chapter
for one 12-month period preceding the most recent violation.
Prior Code, § 3- 10- 4) ( Ord. 397, passed 5- 1- 1995; Ord. 676, passed 11- 1- 10) Penalty, see §
119. 99
119. 05 PROHIBITED SALES.
No person shall sell or give away any tobacco or tobacco- related device to any person under
the age of 18 years. Any tobacco except pipe tobacco offered for sale must be wrapped in a
sealed package provided by the manufacturer and must contain the Surgeon General' s health
warning.
A) Affirmative defense. It is an affirmative defense to the charge of selling tobacco or
tobacco-related devices to a person under the age of 18 years in violation of this chapter that the
licensee or individual making the sale relied in good faith upon proof of age as follows:
1) A valid driver' s license or identification card issued by the state, another state or a
province of Canada and including the photograph and date of birth of the licensed person;
2) A valid military identification card issued by the United States Department of
Defense; or
3) In the case of a foreign national from a nation other than Canada, by a valid
passport.
B) Compliance check. The city shall conduct unannounced checks at least once each
calendar year at each location where tobacco or tobacco- related devices are sold to test
compliance with M.S. § 609. 685, as it may be amended from time to time. Compliance checks
shall utilize minors over the age of 15, but under the age of 18 whom, with the prior written
consent of a parent or guardian, attempt to purchase tobacco under the direct supervision of a law
enforcement officer or an employee of the licensing authority.
Prior Code, § 3- 10- 5) ( Ord. 397, passed 5- 1- 1995; Ord. 473, passed 3- 2- 1998; Ord. 676, passed
Page 3 of 8
11- 1- 10)
119.06 SALE OF TOBACCO OR TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICES BY MINORS
PROHIBITED.
No person under the age of 18 shall sell tobacco or tobacco- related products.
Prior Code, § 3- 10- 6) ( Ord. 397, passed 5- 1- 1995; Ord. 676, passed 11- 1- 10) Penalty, see §
119. 99
119. 07 SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING PROHIBITED.
A) Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale any tobacco or
tobacco- related devices in open displays which are accessible to the public without the
intervention of a store employee.
B) Exception. This section does not apply to retail stores which derive at least 90% of their
revenue from tobacco and tobacco- related products and where the retailer ensures that no person
younger than 18 years of age is present, or permitted to enter, at any time.
Prior Code, § 3- 10- 7) ( Ord. 397, passed 5- 1- 1995; Ord. 473, passed 3- 2- 1998; Ord. 676, passed
11- 1- 10) Penalty, see § 119. 99
119. 08 VENDING MACHINE SALES.
A) No person shall sell tobacco products from vending machines.
B) This section does not apply to vending machines in facilities that cannot be entered at
any time by persons younger than 18 years of age.
Prior Code, § 3- 10- 8) ( Ord. 397, passed 5- 1- 1995; Ord. 473, passed 3- 2- 1998) Penalty, see §
119. 99
119.09 APPEAL.
A) Notice. A person violating this chapter may be issued, either personally or by mail, a
written notice of violation that sets forth the alleged violation and that informs the alleged
violator of his or her right to a hearing on the matter. The notice of violation shall provide notice
that a hearing may be requested within ten ( 10) business days of receipt and that the right to a
hearing is waived if a hearing is not promptly requested. The notice of violation shall provide
information on how and where a hearing may be requested, including a contact address and
phone number.
B) Hearings. The city clerk or other designated city officer shall set the time and place for
Page 4 of 8
the hearing. Written notice of the hearing time and place shall be mailed or delivered to the
accused violator at least fifteen ( 15) business days but not more than thirty (30) business days
prior to the hearing. The City Council shall conduct the hearing.
C) Decision.
1) A decision shall be issued by the City Council within ten ( 10) business days of the
hearing. If the hearing officer determines that a violation of this chapter did occur, that decision,
along with the City Council's reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed, shall
be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the accused violator by in person
delivery or mail as soon as practicable. The City Council may impose a penalty different from
what is provided in Section 119. 99( C), but the penalty selected shall be the same as or greater
than the penalties set forth in Minn. Stat. § 461. 12, Subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to
time. If the City Council finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any
penalty, those findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted accused violator by
in person delivery or mail as soon as practicable.
2) The decision of the City Council is final.
D) Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the City Council shall be filed in the district
court for the county in which the alleged violation occurred pursuant to the provisions of Minn.
Stat. § 461. 12, Subd. 7, as it may be amended from time to time.
E) Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs or
continues, shall constitute a separate offense."
Prior Code, § 3- 10- 10) ( Ord. 397, passed 5- 1- 1995; Ord. 447, passed 3- 3- 1997; Ord. 680,
passed 3- 7- 10)
119. 10 RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES.
Every act or omission constituting a violation of any of the provision of this chapter by an
officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held
punishable in the same manner as if the licensee personally committed the act or omission.
Prior Code, § 3- 10- 11) ( Ord. 397, passed 5- 1- 1995)
119. 11 SAMPLING PROHIBITED.
Smoking for the purposes of sampling tobacco and tobacco- related devices is prohibited. It
shall be unlawful for any person to light, inhale, or exhale tobacco or tobacco-related devices
within the indoor area of any establishment with a tobacco license under this Chapter, or for any
person to allow the same.
Ord. 744, passed 11- 3- 2014)
Page 5 of 8
119.99 PENALTY.
A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a standard amount of fine, length of
license suspensions and the propriety of revocations applicable to tobacco licensed premises.
These penalties are presumed to be appropriate for every case.
B) Definition. Best Practices Business means a licensee that is certified in the City' s
Server Awareness Program. To be certified a licensee' s managers and or owners shall have
attended the Server Awareness Program and at all times have provided the Server awareness
Program training to no less than 75% of its employees. A licensee shall document the training it
provides to its employees and have these records available for review upon request by the
Savage Police Department.
C) Penalties for Violations. Penalties for convictions or violations must be presumed as
follows:
1) Revocation on First Violation. The following violations require revocation of the
license on the first violation:
a) Sale of tobacco while license is under suspension.
2) Underage Sales and Compliance Check Failures: The penalties set forth below
apply to the following violations:
a) Licensee failure of an underage compliance check.
b) Sale of tobacco to under age person.
Violation Best Practices Business Non-Best Practices Business
500 fine, 3- day consecutive
First violation $ 250. 00 fine. suspension of license and mandatory
training of all staff
Second violation $
400. 00 fine and mandatory training. suspension of
750.00 and 5- dday consecuttiive
within 24 months
s' license.
Third violation $750 00 nddday consecutive
1, 000. 00 fine and 10- da
suspensionen and
withinoof y
consecutive suspension of license.
months recommendations of review panel.
Fourth violation $
1, 000.00 fine and 7- day consecutive $
2, 000. 00 fine and 12- day
within 36 months
suspension of license and
consecutive suspension of license.
recommendations of review panel.
Fifth violation $ 2, 000 fine and revocation. Minimum $ 2, 000. 00 fine and revocation.
within 36 revocation period will be 1 year from Minimum revocation period will be
months the revocation date. 1 year from the revocation date.
Page 6 of 8
All A civil penalty of$ 50 shall be imposed upon the clerk found guilty of the
violation.
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiillillillillillillilliillillillillillilliillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillilI
3) Penalties for Other Violations. The penalties set forth below apply to violations
not contained in subsections ( C) 1 and ( C) 2 of this section. The Council may in its discretion
impose a civil fine of$500. 00 in lieu of a suspension on the first appearance for violation
numbers 2 and 3.
Appearance
Type Of Violation lst 2nd 3rd 4th
1. Sale of tobacco while license is under
Revocation n/a n/ a n/ a
suspension.
2. Refusal to all... y p.... o c
5- day.... l5- da
ow cit ins ectors or police
y
admission to inspect premises.
consecutive consecutive Revocation n/ a
suspension suspension
3. Failure to make application for 1'
consecutive
6
license y day 18- day
renewal prior to license expiration date.
consecutive consecutive Revocation
suspension suspension suspension
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiillillillillillillilliillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillilliillillillillillillillillillillilliillillilillillillillillllllllllllliiI
D) Multiple Violations. At a licensees first appearance before the Council, the Council
must act upon all of the violations that have been alleged in the notice sent to the licensee. The
Council in that case must consider the penalty for each violation under the first appearance
column in subsection (A) of this section. The occurrence of multiple violations is grounds for
deviation from the presumed penalties in the Council's discretion.
E) Subsequent Violations. Violations' occurring after the notice of hearing has been
mailed, but prior to the hearing, must be treated as a separate violation and dealt with as a second
appearance before the Council, unless the city manager and licensee agree in writing to add the
violation to the first appearance. The same procedure applies to a second, third or fourth
appearance before the Council.
F) Subsequent Appearance. Upon a second, third or fourth appearance before the Council
by the same licensee, the Council must impose the penalty for the violation or violations giving
rise to the subsequent appearance without regard to the particular violation or violations that
were the subject of the first or prior appearance. However, the Council may consider the amount
of time elapsed between appearances as a basis for deviating from the penalty imposed by this
section.
G) Computation ofAppearances. After the first appearance, a subsequent appearance by
the same licensee will be determined as follows:
Page 7 of 8
1) If the first appearance was within eighteen ( 18) months of the current violation,
the current appearance will be treated as a second appearance.
2) If a licensee has appeared before the Council on two (2) previous occasions, and
the current violation occurred within thirty (30) months of the first appearance, the current
appearance will be treated as a third appearance.
3) If a licensee has appeared before the Council on three ( 3) previous occasions, and
the current violation occurred within forty eight ( 48) months of the first appearance, the current
appearance will be treated as a fourth appearance.
4) Any appearance not covered by subsection ( E) 1, ( E)2 or( E)3 of this section will
be treated as a first appearance.
H) No suspension or revocation may take effect until the licensee has received notice,
served personally or by mail, of the alleged violation and an opportunity for a hearing before the
City Council or an independent hearing officer appointed by the Council to hear the matter,
report findings of fact and a recommendation for disposition to the Council. Such hearing shall
be requested in writing by the licensee no later than 10 days after receipt of the notice of the
alleged violation. The City Clerk shall cause written notice of the date, time and place of the
hearing to be served upon the licensee at the address indicated on the license application, in
person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, not less than fifteen ( 15) nor more than
thirty (30) days prior to the hearing date, . The Council may delegate to the City Administrator
the authority to select the hearing officer.
I) Reinstatement Conditions. The City Council may attach conditions to the reinstatement
of a suspended or revoked license. Any licensee whose license is revoked under this Section
shall not be eligible for renewal for a period of at least one license year after the revocation.
J) Review Panel. The Review Panel will consist of the Chief of Police or his/ her designee
and the City Clerk. For third and fourth violations by a licensee certified as a Best Practice
Business at the time of violation the Review Panel will convene and make appropriate
recommendations.
K) Tobacco Compliance Training Program. Licensees may become a Best Practices
Business by completing and being certified in the City' s " Tobacco Compliance Training
Program." The program is voluntary and offered by the City with the intent to eliminate sale of
tobacco to persons under the age of 18. A licensee must send the managers and or owners to the
program to be certified. Licensees are required to document the training provided to their
employees and shall have these records available for inspection upon request by the Savage
Police Department. The training is conducted at the time of license renewal and as needed.
Prior Code, § 3- 10- 9) ( Ord. 397, passed 5- 1- 1995; Ord. 473, passed 3- 2- 1998; Ord. 563, passed
10- 6- 2003; Ord. 655, passed 8- 03- 2009; Ord. 680, passed 11- 1- 10; Ord. 707, passed 8- 6- 2012)
Page 8 of 8
CHAPTER 120: SIDEWALK CAFES
Section
120. 01 Definitions
120. 02 Permitted uses
120. 03 Conditional use permit required
120. 04 Application for permit
120. 05 Permit requirements
120. 06 Insurance
120. 07 Reservation of rights
120. 08 Permit suspension and revocation
120. 01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
OUTDOOR SEATING AREA. An area with tables and chairs or benches allowed
temporarily in a sidewalk for use by patrons that are not served food and/ or beverages by staff
from an adjoining cafe, restaurant or other eating and drinking establishment.
SIDEWALK An improved thoroughfare located on a public right-of-way or public
easement limited to usage by pedestrians and non- motorized vehicles.
SIDEWALK CAFE. A permitted area within a sidewalk consisting of tables and chairs or
benches where patrons are served food and/ or beverages by staff from an adjoining cafe,
restaurant or other eating and drinking establishment.
Ord. 646, passed 9- 8- 2008)
120. 02 PERMITTED USES.
A) Sidewalk cafes may be located on sidewalks subject to an annual sidewalk cafe permit
issued by the Planning Department. No person shall operate any restaurant or cafe, to provide
food or beverage, on any sidewalk unless the person has obtained a valid sidewalk cafe permit
from the city.
B) An outdoor seating area limited to no more than ten seats may be allowed without a
conditional use permit on the sidewalk immediately adjacent to a restaurant, cafe, or any related
signage shall maintain six- foot clearance for passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk, shall not
block access to building entrances or exits and shall be kept neat, sanitary and litter free at all
times. An outdoor seating area with more than ten seats located on a sidewalk shall require a
sidewalk cafe permit.
Page 1 of 5
Ord. 646, passed 9- 8- 2008) Penalty, see § 10. 99
120. 03 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall operate any sidewalk cafe or outdoor seating area with more than ten seats
unless a conditional use permit for outdoor dining has been issued according to § 152.097.
Ord. 646, passed 9- 8- 2008) Penalty, see § 10. 99
120. 04 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
Applications for a sidewalk cafe permit shall be made on forms supplied by the city and
shall include the application fee as established by ordinance and a plan drawn to scale which
illustrates the following information:
A) Exact location of the proposed sidewalk cafe together with distances and dimensions of
adjoining buildings, the sidewalk, the distance to and location of the traveled portion of the street
and distances to all obstructions in the vicinity (planters, boulevard trees, and the like).
B) Location of all proposed tables, chairs, benches and any other fixtures.
C) Location and description of proposed temporary fence material.
D) Entrances and exits of the adjoining premises.
E) Entrances and exits of the proposed sidewalk cafe if the area is to be enclosed with
temporary fencing.
Ord. 646, passed 9- 8- 2008)
120.05 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
No permit shall be issued or renewed for a sidewalk cafe unless the following requirements
are met:
A) A distance of at least 200 feet shall be maintained between the nearest point of the
sidewalk cafe to the nearest point of property zoned for single-family residential.
B) The area occupied as a sidewalk cafe shall abut and shall be operated as part of the
premises operated by the applicant. No part of the sidewalk cafe shall adjoin or otherwise
interfere with any premises other than the premises for which the sidewalk cafe permit is issued.
C) A pedestrian pathway of not less than six feet shall be kept free and clear for pedestrians
at all times. In no case will the sidewalk cafe or related signage extend into an alley or sidewalk
intersection.
Page 2 of 5
D) Only food or beverage for immediate consumption may be offered for sale.
E) Intoxicating liquor, beer or wine may be consumed only if the premises occupied by the
applicant is licensed pursuant to Chapter 111.
F) The Public Works Superintendent shall find that the sidewalk cafe will not unduly
restrict the safe usage of the sidewalk by the public after taking into consideration the location of
obstructions, vehicular traffic and other impediments to the passage of pedestrians.
G) The applicant shall maintain the sidewalk cafe in a neat, clean and sanitary condition at
all times and shall be responsible for keeping the area litter free.
H) Furnishing the sidewalk shall not result in the permanent alteration within the public
right-of-way. The applicant shall promptly replace or repair to the satisfaction of the Public
Works Superintendent, any damage to the sidewalk or other public property caused by the
applicant' s use of the sidewalk as a sidewalk cafe.
I) The sidewalk cafe shall be handicap accessible and not restrict accessibility in other
areas inside or outside the premises or adjoining premises.
J) Appropriate refuse receptacles shall be readily available to the patrons of the sidewalk
cafe.
K) No expansion of the area occupied by the sidewalk cafe from that shown on the permit
application shall be made.
L) In the event that any local, state or federal law requires the sidewalk cafe area to be
physically separated by way of a barricade, then the barricade must be constructed out of
materials of a finished quality, including but not limited to wrought iron, decorative planters or
picket fences.
M) No signage shall be placed in the sidewalk cafe area.
N) The requirements of Chapter 95 shall apply to the permit holder.
0) The applicant shall indemnify and hold the city and the city' s officials and employees
harmless from any loss, cost, damage and expenses arising out of the use, design, operation, or
maintenance of the sidewalk cafe.
P) The sidewalk cafe must conform to all fire and building codes related to the number and
types of exits that are required and shall not interfere with required exits from the premises or the
adjoining premises.
Q) No sidewalk cafe permit can be transferred to new permit holder.
Page 3 of 5
R) Permits for sidewalk cafes shall be allowed from April 1 until November 1 of each year.
S) If the sidewalk cafe is not enclosed, tables, benches and chairs shall not be left out when
the premises is closed.
Ord. 646, passed 9- 8- 2008; Ord. 759, passed 10- 05- 2015) Penalty, see § 10. 99
120.06 INSURANCE.
No permit issued shall be effective until the applicant has filed with the city evidence of
insurance insuring the applicant against liability imposed by law arising out of the ownership,
maintenance or operation of such sidewalk cafe in amounts of at least $ 50, 000 for the injury or
death of one person, $ 300,000 for the injury or death of two or more persons, and $ 50, 000 for
damage to property. The city shall be named as an additional named insured in the policy
providing such insurance, and such policy shall further provide that it may not be canceled
except upon ten days' written notice filed with the City Clerk. No permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be valid at any time the insurance required herein is not
maintained and evidence of its continuance filed with the city.
Ord. 646, passed 9- 8- 2008)
120. 07 RESERVATION OF RIGHTS.
The city reserves the right to require any sidewalk cafe or outdoor seating area established
pursuant to this chapter to cease part or all of its operation in order to allow for the construction,
maintenance or repair of any street, sidewalk, utility or public building by the city, its agents or
employees or by any other governmental entity or public utility; to allow for use the street or
sidewalk in connection with parades, civic festivals and other events on a temporary nature as
allowed by the city; and to remedy a public nuisance or protect the public health, safety or
welfare.
Ord. 646, passed 9- 8- 2008)
120. 08 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
A) The city may deny, revoke or suspend a sidewalk cafe permit if it is found that:
1) The provisions of this chapter have been violated.
2) The permittee does not have insurance which is correct and effective in the
minimum amount prescribed in § 120. 06.
B) Upon denial or revocation, the city shall give notice of such action to the applicant or
permittee in writing stating the action which has been taken and the reason. If the action of the
city is based upon
120. 07, the action shall be effective immediately upon giving such notice to the permittee;
Page 4 of 5
otherwise, such notice shall become effective within ten days unless appealed to the City Council
by filing a written notice of appeal with the city. Any revocation effective immediately may also
be appealed to the Council by such filing within ten days of revocation.
Ord. 646, passed 9- 8- 2008)
Page 5 of 5
CHAPTER 121: RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY
Section
121. 01 Purpose
121. 02 Definitions
121. 03 Applicability and Scope
121. 04 Rental Manager Required
121. 05 Registration
121. 06 Minnesota Crime Free Multi-Housing Program
121. 07 Violation
121. 01 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the
community at large, and the residents of residential rental properties in the City of Savage. It is
also to ensure that rental housing in the City is decent, safe and sanitary, and is operated and
maintained as not to become a nuisance to the neighborhood or an influence that fosters blight
and deterioration, or does not create a disincentive to reinvest in the community. The operation
of residential rental properties is a business enterprise that entails responsibilities. Owners and
operators are responsible for taking such reasonable steps as are necessary to ensure that the
residents of the City who occupy such rental properties may pursue the quiet environment of the
normal activities of life in their surroundings that are safe, secure and sanitary; free from noise,
nuisances; and free from conditions that endanger the health or safety of persons, and the
security of the property.
Ord. 762, passed 11- 16- 2015)
121. 02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
APARTMENTBUILDING. A building containing multiple dwelling units in a stacked
configuration, having common walls, floors, and/ or ceilings.
APPLICANT. A person completing the registration form prescribed by this Chapter.
DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms physically arranged so as to create a sleeping
place or an independent housekeeping unit for one or more occupants.
LODGING HOUSE. A building, structure, enclosure, or any part thereof used as,
maintained as, advertised as, or held out to be a place where dwelling units are furnished to the
public as regular roomers, for periods of one week or more.
Page 1 of 5
MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. A building with one or more dwelling units
joined to another dwelling unit at one or more sides by a wall(s), including but not limited to an
apartment building, lodging house, townhome, twin home, duplex, triplex, or quad home.
RENTAL MANAGER. Any person who has been delegated by a residential rental
property owner to provide day- to- day care or control of the residential rental property and who is
able to respond in person to issues related to the residential rental property. The owner is the
Rental Manager in the absence of the delegation referred to above.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY. Any building with one or more dwelling units
that are occupied or intended to be occupied for residential purposes by a residential tenant. The
term " residential rental property" shall include a lodging house, multiple residential building, and
single- family home occupied for residential purposes by a residential tenant.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY OWNER. Any person or entity owning
residential rental property within the City of Savage.
RESIDENTIAL TENANT. A person who is occupying a dwelling unit in a residential
rental property under a lease or contract, whether oral or written, that requires the payment of
money or exchange of services and all other regular occupants of that dwelling unit.
Ord. 762, passed 11- 16- 2015)
121. 03 APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE.
This Chapter applies to all residential rental property located in the City of Savage. This
Chapter does not apply to homes or facilities licensed by the Minnesota Department of Health,
hotels and motels where dwelling units are typically furnished to the public for periods of less
than one week, or owner- occupied dwelling units.
Ord. 762, passed 11- 16- 2015)
121. 04 RENTAL MANAGER REQUIRED.
A) Each residential rental property owner shall appoint a rental manager upon whom
the City may lawfully serve notices pertaining to the administration of this or any other chapter
of the City Code or state or federal law. Service upon the rental manager shall be effective as
service upon the residential rental property owner.
B) A residential rental property owner may serve as the rental manager if the
residential rental property owner is able to provide day-to- day care or control of the residential
rental property and is able to respond in person to issues related to the residential rental property.
Ord. 762, passed 11- 16- 2015)
Page 2 of 5
121. 05 REGISTRATION.
A) All residential rental properties shall be registered with the City by either the
residential rental property owner or rental manager. Registration of each residential rental
property shall be made on a form provided by the City and shall include:
1) Name, address, telephone number and email address of the residential
rental property owner and rental manager, if any;
2) The name, address, telephone number and email address of the applicant;
3) The address of the residential rental property. In the case of an apartment
building or lodging house, the applicant shall provide the address and name for the building, as
well as the number of dwelling units contained therein;
4) Verification that either the residential rental property owner or rental
manager conducts a criminal background check on every residential tenant over the age of 18.
The residential rental property owner or rental manager must have written guidelines defining
what behaviors fail the criminal background check;
5) Verification that either the residential rental property owner or rental
manager conducts criminal background checks before hiring a manager as required by Minn.
Stat. §§ 299C.66- 299C.71. For purposes of this subsection ( 5), the term " manager" has the
meaning given in Minn. Stat. § 299C.67, subd. 1( 4);
6) Verification that a written lease exists for each dwelling unit in the
residential rental property;
7) Verification that a written lease addendum commonly known as a" Drug-
Free, Crime Free Lease Addendum" exists for every written lease entered into or renewed after
the effective date of this Chapter; and
8) Verification that the residential rental property owner or rental manager
has either: ( 1) attended Phase One of the Crime Free Multi-Housing Program in the City of
Savage or elsewhere in the State of Minnesota within the five years preceding the application; or
2) will complete Phase One of the Crime Free Multi-Housing Program within two years after
issuance of a Certificate of Registration for the residential rental property.
B) Upon the receipt of a fully completed registration form, the City shall issue to the
applicant a Certificate of Registration as proof of the registration. Certificates of Registration
shall be non-transferable.
C) The residential rental property owner or rental manager shall complete and submit
a new registration form for each affected residential rental property within 30 days of any of the
following occurrences:
Page 3 of 5
1) A transfer of ownership of the residential rental property;
2) A change in rental manager;
3) A change in the number of dwelling units contained in the residential
rental property.
D) A residential rental property owner owning residential rental property at the time
of the adoption of this Chapter shall have 180 days after its effective date to comply with the
registration provisions contained herein.
E) No fee shall be required for registration pursuant to this Chapter.
Ord. 762, passed 11- 16- 2015)
121. 06 MINNESOTA CRIME FREE MULTI-HOUSING PROGRAM
A) The City has established a rental owner educational program consistent with the
Minnesota Crime Free Multi-Housing Program (" CFMH"). CFMH consists of three phases,
generally described as follows:
1) Phase One— Management Training. Phase One consists of an eight-hour
training seminar for residential rental property owners/ rental managers covering a variety of
topics, including but not limited to the following: applicant screening, rental agreements,
identification of illegal activity, the eviction process, working with the police, crime prevention,
code enforcement, public health, and active property management. Phase One training will be
conducted by the City on a regular basis. Program attendees shall pay a training fee in an amount
determined to cover the cost of the training. The City will recognize proof of completion of
Phase One training from other Minnesota entities that participate in CFMH.
2) Phase Two— Security Assessment. Phase Two consists of evaluation by
the City of certain security measures for resident safety, including but not limited to the
following: dead bolt locks, high security strike plates, auxiliary locks on sliding glass doors and
windows, 180- degree view finder on front doors, visible addresses, adequate lighting, trimming
of bushes and trees, and smoke and carbon monoxide detectors.
3) Phase Three— Resident Training. Phase Three consists of an annual
meeting between residential rental property owners/rental managers, law enforcement, and
residential tenants where crime watch and crime prevention techniques are discussed. Night to
Unite gatherings shall qualify for Phase Three of CFMH.
B) Completion of CFMH Training:
1) Except as provided below in (2) and ( 3) the rental manager of a residential
rental property within the City must complete CFMH training, as specified below in
subsection ( C), within two years after the City' s issuance of a Certificate of Registration
Page 4 of 5
for the residential rental property pursuant to this Chapter.
2) Properties that become residential rental properties after the effective date of
this chapter shall have 180 days to comply with the training requirement set forth in
Chapter 121. 06 ( A) ( 1).
3) Residential rental properties that change ownership or management after the
effective date of this adoption of this chapter shall have 180 days to comply with the
training requirement set forth in Chapter 121. 06 ( A) ( 1).
C) A residential rental property owner or rental manager operating a single-family
home or a property with three or fewer dwelling units need only complete Phases One and Two
of CFMH. All other residential rental property owners and rental managers shall complete
Phases One, Two, and Three of CFMH.
D) A residential rental property owner whose only property is a single-family home
occupied by a relative of the residential rental property owner is exempt from the requirements
of this Section 121. 06. For purposes of this subsection (D), a" relative" includes the owner' s
child, stepchild, foster child, or a descendant of any of them; the owner' s brother, sister, half
brother, half sister, stepbrother or stepsister; the owner' s father, mother, grandparent, or other
direct ancestor; the owner' s stepfather or stepmother; a son or daughter of the owner' s brother,
sister, half brother, or half sister; a brother or sister of the owner' s mother or father; and the
owner' s son-in-law, daughter-in-law, father- in-law, mother-in-law, brother- in-law, or sister-inlaw.
Ord. 762, passed 11- 16- 2015)
121. 07 VIOLATION
A) Any person or entity who does the following is guilty of a misdemeanor:
1) Provides false information on the registration form required by Section
121. 05.
2) Operates or causes a property to be operated as a residential rental
property without a valid Certificate of Registration issued by the City pursuant to this Chapter.
3) Fails to complete CFMH training as required by Section 121. 06.
B) Nothing in this Chapter shall operate to relieve a residential rental property owner
or rental manager from the obligation to comply with other provisions of the City Code or
federal or state law, including but not limited to Minnesota Statutes Chapter 504B.
Ord. 762, passed 11- 16- 201
Page 5 of 5
CHAPTER 130: MINORS
Section
130. 01 Curfew for minors
130. 01 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
A) Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is maintained for four
primary reasons:
1) To protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed during the curfew
hours;
2) To protect minors from improper influences that prevail during the curfew hours,
including involvement with gangs;
3) To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs during the curfew hours; and
4) To help parents control their minor children.
B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
EMERGENCYERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly threatens the health,
safety, or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor' s household. The term shall include,
but shall not be limited to, seeking urgent medical treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law
enforcement or fire department personnel, and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent
assistance from a utility company due to a natural or human-made calamity.
OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by reference to the master
clock contained at Scott County Dispatch Center.
PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT. Those
places that include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping malls,
nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants and pool halls.
PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY. The person who is responsible for
providing food, clothing, shelter and other basic necessities to the minor. The person providing
primary care or custody to the minor shall not be another minor.
SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school calendar by public
or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.
Page 1 of 4
C) Hours.
1) Minors under the age of 12 years. No minor under the age of 12 years shall be in
or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places,
public buildings nor in or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment nor in or
upon any vacant lot, between the hours:
a) Any time between 9: 00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or
Thursday and 5: 00 a.m. the following day, official city time;
b) Any time between 10: 00 p.m. on any Friday or Saturday and 5: 00 a.m. on the
following day, official city time.
2) Minors ages of12, 13 or 14 years. No minor of the ages of 12, 13 or 14 shall be in
or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places,
public buildings nor in or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment nor in or
upon any vacant lot, between the hours:
a) Any time between 10: 00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
or Thursday and 5: 00 a.m. the following day, official city time;
b) Any time between 11: 00 p.m. on any Friday or Saturday and 5: 00 a.m. on the
following day, official city time.
3) Minors ages 15, 16 or 17 years. No minor of the ages of 15, 16 or 17 shall be in or
upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public
buildings nor in or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment nor in or upon any
vacant lot, between the hours:
a) Any time between 11: 00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
or Thursday and 5: 00 a.m. the following day, official city time;
b) Any time between 12: 01 a.m. and 5 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday, official
city time.
D) Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to give a minor the right to stay out until the curfew hours designated in this section if
otherwise directed by a parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and
custody of the minor; nor shall this section be construed to diminish or impair the control of the
adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.
E) Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the following situations:
1) To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or other adult person
having the primary care and custody of the minor;
Page 2 of 4
2) To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the direction of his or her parent,
guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;
3) To a minor who is in any of the places described in this section if in connection
with or as required by an employer engaged in a lawful business, trade, profession, or
occupation; or to a minor traveling directly to or from the location of such business trade,
profession, or occupation and the minor' s residence. Minors who fall within the scope of this
exception shall carry written proof of employment and proof of the hours the employer requires
the minor' s presence at work;
4) To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly to or from an event which
has been officially designated as a school activity by public or parochial school authorities; or
who is participating in or traveling directly to or from an official activity supervised by adults
and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, school, religious institution, or similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor and with the permission of the minor' s parent, guardian, or
other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;
5) To a minor who is passing through the city in the course of interstate travel during
the hours of curfew;
6) To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving
the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or freedom of
religion;
7) To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence or abutting the residence of
a next- door neighbor if the neighbor does not complain to the city' s designated law enforcement
provider about the minor' s presence;
8) To a minor who is married or has been married, or is otherwise legally
emancipated; or
9) To a minor who is on an errand at the direction of a parent or guardian.
F) Duties ofperson legally responsible for minor. No parent, guardian, or other adult
having the primary care or custody of any minor shall permit any violation of the requirements of
this section by the minor.
G) Duties of other persons. No person operating or in charge of any place of amusement,
entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor to enter or remain in his or her place of
business during the hours prohibited by this section unless the minor is accompanied by his or
her parent, guardian or other adult person having primary care or custody of the minor, or unless
one of the exceptions to this section apply.
H) Penalties.
1) Minors. Any minor found to be in violation of this section may be adjudicated
Page 3 of 4
delinquent and shall be subject to the dispositional alternatives set forth in M.S. Ch. 26013, as it
may be amended from time to time.
2) Adults. Any adult person found to be in violation of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and may be sentenced up to the maximum penalty authorized by state law for a
misdemeanor.
I) Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that:
1) The owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the city' s
designated law enforcement provider that a minor was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours; and
2) The owner, operator or employee reasonably and in good faith relied upon a
juvenile' s representations of proof of age. Proof of age may be established pursuant to M.S. §
340A.503, Subd. 6 or other verifiable means, including, but not limited to, school identification
cards and birth certificates.
Penalty, see § 10. 99
Page 4 of 4
CHAPTER 131: DISPLAY OF SEXUALLY-ORIENTED MATERIALS
Section
131. 01 Purpose
131. 02 Definitions
131. 03 Display restriction
131. 04 Severability
131. 01 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect minors in public accommodations from exposure to
materials that are harmful to children, thereby protecting the health, safety and welfare of the
community.
Prior Code, § 5- 2- 1) ( Ord. 399, passed 5- 15- 1995)
131. 02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
HARMFUL TO MINORS. That quality of any description or representation, in whatever
form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse, when it:
1) Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of minors;
2) Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with
respect to what is suitable material for minors; and
3) Is utterly without redeeming social importance for minors.
KNOWINGLY. Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for
belief, which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:
1) The character and content of any material which is reasonably susceptible of
examination by the defendant; and
2) The age of the minor, provided that an honest mistake, shall constitute an excuse
from liability hereunder if the defendant made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true
age of the minor.
MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.
Page 1 of 3
NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area with less than a
fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of
any portion thereof below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or the depiction or
showing of covered male genitals in a discernible turbid state.
PUBLICACCOMMODATION. A business, accommodation, refreshment, entertainment,
recreation or transportation facility of any kind, whether licensed or not, whose goods, services,
facilities, privileges, advantages or accommodations are extended, offered, sold or otherwise
made available to the public.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in
undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise
physically restrained on the part of one so clothed.
SEXUAL CONDUCT. Acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse, or physical
contact with a persons unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if the a person be a female, her
breast.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when in a state
of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Prior Code, § 5- 2-2) ( Ord. 399, passed 5- 15- 1995)
131. 03 DISPLAY RESTRICTION.
A) Sealed wrapper. No person shall commercially and knowingly exhibit or display any
material which is harmful to minors in its content in any public accommodation where minors are
or may be present and where minors are able to view the material unless each item is kept in a
sealed wrapper at all times.
B) Opaque cover. No person shall commercially and knowingly exhibit or display any
material, the cover, or packaging of which, standing alone, is harmful to minors in any public
accommodation where minors are or may be present, or allowed to be present, and where minors
are able to view the material unless each item is blocked from view by an opaque cover. The
opaque cover requirement is satisfied if those portions of the cover or packaging containing the
material harmful to minors are blocked from view by an opaque cover.
C) Segregation ofmaterials. Divisions (A) and ( B) of this section shall not apply to the
exhibition of display of materials harmful to minors under circumstances where minors are not
present or are not able to view the materials or the material' s cover or packaging. A person may
comply with the requirements of this division (C) by:
1) Physically segregating the material in a manner that physically prohibits access to
and view of the material by minors;
2) Prominently posting at the entrance to the restricted area: " Adults only-- you must
Page 2 of 3
be 18 to enter;" and
3) Enforcing the restriction.
Prior Code, § 5- 2- 3) ( Ord. 399, passed 5- 15- 1995) Penalty, see § 10. 99
131. 04 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, division, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid,
the decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City
Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the chapter and each section, division, clause
or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, divisions, sentences,
clauses or phrases be declared invalid.
Prior Code, § 5- 2- 5) ( Ord. 399, passed 5- 15- 1995)
Page 3 of 3
CHAPTER 132: FIREARMS
Section
132.01 Intent
132.02 Definitions
132.03 Permitted use of firearms
132.04 Prohibited actions
132.05 Seizing, impounding and destroying firearms and dangerous weapons
132.06 Violations
132. 01 INTENT.
It is the intent of this chapter to regulate the carrying and shooting of firearms and other
dangerous weapons in order to safeguard residents of this community. It is not the intent of the
chapter to regulate ownership of firearms and other dangerous weapons by law-abiding citizens.
Prior Code, § 5- 5- 1) ( Ord. 304, passed 5- 10- 1990)
132. 02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CARRYING. The handling or physical transportation of a firearm concealed or otherwise.
DISMANTLED FIREARM. Any weapon included in the above definition of firearm which
is dismantled in a manner as to make shooting impossible, or any weapon with vital parts missing
so as to render it inoperable.
ENCASED FIREARM. Any weapon included in the above definition of firearm placed in a
case and unloaded in both chambers and magazines so as to make the shooting of the cased
firearm impossible, except a handgun when contained in a holster.
EXPRESSED INVITATION. Actual written notice signed by the landowner with the
landowner' s name, address and telephone number clearly imprinted on same and carried on the
person of at least one specifically named individual on the notice in any group or party on the
lands; the notice to also include an effective date and date of expiration.
FIREARM. Shotgun, rifles, air rifles, BB guns, handguns, bow and pointed-tip arrows; all
instruments used to expel a high velocity pellet of any kind.
LANDOWNER. Any person, group, partnership, association, firm or corporation owning,
leasing, or legally controlling any lands within the corporate or geographical boundaries of the
Page 1 of 3
city.
PERSON. Any individual regardless of age or residence.
SHOOTING. The firing of firearms of any kind whatsoever regardless of the method of the
propulsion of the ammunition and shall include but shall not be limited to the firing of shotguns,
handguns, air guns, pellet guns, BB guns and rifles.
Prior Code, § 5- 5- 2) ( Ord. 304, passed 5- 10- 1990)
132. 03 PERMITTED USE OF FIREARMS.
The shooting or carrying of firearms, which are not encased or dismantled, is permitted under
the following circumstances within the corporate or geographical limits of the city, unless
prohibited by state or federal law:
A) By law enforcement officers in the line of duty or military personnel in the line of duty;
B) By a person discharging any firearm when done in the lawful defense ofperson,
property or family or the necessary enforcement of the law, which that person reasonably believes
exposes himself, herself or another in great bodily harm or death;
C) By any property owner or his or her guest engaged in target shooting with inanimate
objects as targets within the basement or cellar of an enclosed structure owned by the property
owner, provided that no shooting shall be allowed under this section unless suitable measures
have been taken to assure health and safety of those in and around the structure, is inspected by
the City Building Inspector and complies with the inspection, and is in accordance with the
Zoning Code;
D) By any person on a game farm, licensed rifle, trap, archery or target range within the
city, as established in accordance with the Savage Zoning Code;
E) A person upon express permission of the landowner may upon the landowner' s property
use a bow and pointed-tip arrow, provided that no arrow used shall pass beyond the boundaries of
his or her property, nor shall any shooting of arrows occur within 500 feet of any building on
adjoining property or occupied residence without the permission of that landowner, nor in any
event create a nuisance or danger to other persons;
F) A person upon express permission of the landowner may upon the landowner' s
property shoot or carry a firearm other than a rifle or handgun provided that no shot,
bullet or ammunition component used shall pass beyond the boundaries of his or her
property, nor shall any discharge of a firearm occur within 750 feet of any building on
adjoining property or occupied residence, without the permission of that landowner, nor in
any event create a nuisance or danger to other persons;
G) By a certified firearms safety instructor in connection with a Department of Natural
Page 2 of 3
Resources approved firearms safety program;
H) By any person in connection with a Department of Natural Resources approved firearms
safety program;
I) The possession, transportation or carrying of handguns as specifically allowed by state
law; and
J) For the reduction of an animal population, destruction of diseased, injured or dangerous
birds, animals or reptiles by persons authorized to do so in writing by the Chief of Police in
compliance with published state and local regulations.
Prior Code, § 5- 5- 3) ( Ord. 304, passed 5- 10- 1990; Ord. 689, passed 10- 17- 2011) Penalty, see §
10. 99
132. 04 PROHIBITED ACTIONS.
The following is prohibited:
A) Except as herein specifically permitted and authorized, all discharging and use of
firearms and dangerous weapons are hereby prohibited; or
B) Recklessly handles or uses a firearm so as to endanger the safety of another.
Prior Code, § 5- 5- 4) ( Ord. 304, passed 5- 10- 1990; Ord. 457, passed 8- 4- 1997) Penalty, see §
10. 99
132. 05 SEIZING, IMPOUNDING AND DESTROYING FIREARMS AND
DANGEROUS WEAPONS.
Any person violating this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor; and, in addition thereto, any
firearm or dangerous weapon used or carried shall be seized and impounded and destroyed on
order of any court of competent jurisdiction.
Prior Code, § 5- 5- 5) ( Ord. 304, passed 5- 10- 1990) Penalty, see § 10. 99
132. 06 VIOLATIONS.
All shooting and use of firearms and other dangerous weapons within the city, except as
herein provided is prohibited, any person who shall violate any provisions of this part shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Prior Code, § 5- 5- 6) ( Ord. 304, passed 5- 10- 1990) Penalty, see § 10. 99
Page 3 of 3
CHAPTER 133: SOCIAL HOST
Section
133. 01 Social Host
133. 02 Declaration of Policy
133. 03 Definitions
133. 04 Prohibited Acts
133. 05 Exceptions
133. 06 Enforcement
133. 07 Severability
133. 08 Penalty
133. 01 SOCIAL HOST.
The Savage City Council desires to protect the health, safety and welfare of all persons living
in and visiting the City. The use of alcohol by persons under the age of twenty-one ( 21) is
prohibited by State Statute. This ordinance prohibits, and establishes penalties for, any person
hosting an event or gathering where alcohol is present and being possessed or consumed by
persons under twenty- one ( 21) years of age.
133. 02 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
The Savage City Council intends to discourage underage possession and consumption of
alcohol, even if done within the confines of a private residence, and intends to hold persons
criminally responsible who host events or gatherings where persons under the age of twenty-one
21) possess or consume alcohol regardless of whether the person hosting the event or gathering
supplied the alcohol. The Savage City Council finds that:
A) Events and gatherings held on private or public property where alcohol is possessed or
consumed by persons under the age of twenty-one constitute a threat to public health requiring
prevention or abatement.
B) Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect underage persons, as well as the
general public, from injuries related to alcohol consumption, such as alcohol overdose, loud,
lewd and lascivious behavior that disrupts the use and enjoyment of real property or
alcohol-related traffic collisions.
C) Alcohol is an addictive drug which, if used irresponsibly, could have drastic effects on
those who use it as well as those who are affected by the actions of an irresponsible use.
Page 1 of 4
D) Events or gatherings involving underage possession and consumption occur outside the
presence of parents. However, there are times when the parent( s) is/ are present and condone the
activity and, in some circumstances, provide the alcohol.
E) Even though giving or furnishing alcohol to an underage person is a crime, it is difficult
to prove, and an ordinance is necessary to help further combat underage consumption.
F) A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person criminally responsible for hosting
an event or gathering where underage possession or consumption occurs.
133. 03 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Alcohol. "Alcohol" means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine,
whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions and mixtures thereof
from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
Alcoholic beverage. " Alcoholic beverage" means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and
every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of
one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or
when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.
Event or Gathering. "Event or gathering" means any group of three or more persons who
have assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
Host. "Host" means to aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control, or permit a
gathering or event, whether that host is present or not.
Parent. "Parent" means any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
A. As natural, adoptive parent, or step- parent;
B. As a legal guardian; or
C. As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
Person. " Person" means any individual, partnership, co- partnership, corporation, or any
association of one or more individuals.
Residence or Premises. " Residence" or "premises" means any home, yard, farm, field, land,
apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room,
park, or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied on a temporary or
permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically for a party or other social
function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without permission or
compensation.
Page 2 of 4
Underage person. "Underage person" is any individual under twenty-one ( 21) years of age.
133. 04 PROHIBITED ACTS.
A) It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to host an event or gathering at any residence,
premise or public or private property where alcoholic beverages are present and underage
persons may also be present if:
1) The person hosting the event or gathering knows or reasonably should know that
the underage person( s)
a) may or does consume alcohol or an alcoholic beverage; or
b) possesses alcohol or an alcoholic beverage with the intent to consume it; and
2) The person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption
by the underage person( s).
B) A person is criminally responsible for violating Subsection ( a) above if the person
intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, or conspires or otherwise procures another to commit
the prohibited act.
C) A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present at the event or
gathering to be criminally responsible.
133. 05 EXCEPTIONS.
A) This ordinance does not apply to conduct solely between an underage person and his or
her parents while present in the parent' s household.
B) This ordinance does not apply to legally protected religious observances.
C) This ordinance does not apply to retail intoxicating liquor or 3. 2 percent malt liquor
licensees, municipal liquor stores, or bottle club permit holders who are regulated by Minn. Stat.
340A.503 Subd. 1( a)( 1).
D) This ordinance does not apply to situations where underage persons are lawfully in
possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course and scope of employment.
133. 06 ENFORCEMENT.
This ordinance can be enforced by any police officer or sheriff' s deputy in the county.
Page 3 of 4
133. 07 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, word, or other portion of this ordinance
is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or invalid, in whole, or in part, by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed severable, and such unconstitutionality or
invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this law, which remaining
portions shall continue in full force and effect.
133. 08 PENALTY.
Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor.
Ord. 654, passed 7- 06- 2009
Page 4 of 4
CHAPTER 134: SMOKING PROHIBITED
Section
134. 01 Smoking Prohibited
134. 02 Penalty
134. 01 SMOKING PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to light, inhale, or exhale tobacco or tobacco- related
devices, as defined in City Code Section 119. 01, in any location where smoking is prohibited by
the Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act, or for any person to allow the same.
Ord. 744, passed 11- 3- 2014)
134. 02 PENALTY.
Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor.
Ord. 744, passed 11- 3- 2014)
Page 1 of 1
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING CODES
Section
BuildingCodes
150.001 StateBuildingCode
150.002 Plumbingandmechanicalpermits
150.003 FireCode
150.004 Environmentalreviewprogram
GeneralBuildingRegulations
150.015 Openflameregulations – repealed9-4-12
150.016 Litteronprivateandpublicproperty
150.017 BurningPermits
SwimmingPools
150.030 Definitions
150.031 Permitrequirements
150.032 Minimumrequirements
150.033 Prohibitedactsandconditions
150.034 Variances
150.035 Liabilityofowner
150.036 Violations
ExteriorStructureMaintenance
150.050 Purpose
150.051 Applicability
150.052 DeclarationofNuisance
150.053 Standards
150.054 Enforcement
BUILDINGCODES
150.001 STATEBUILDINGCODE.
A) StateBuildingCodeadopted. ThefollowingchaptersoftheMinnesotaStateBuilding
Code, establishedpursuanttoM.S. §3 26B.101through326B.16,a stheymaybeamendedfrom
timetotime, onecopyofwhichisonfileintheofficeoftheCityClerk, areherebyadoptedas
Page1of15
thebuildingcodeforthecityandareherebyincorporatedinthissectionofthiscode, asifsetout
infull:
1) Chapter1300MinnesotaBuildingCodeAdministration;
2) Chapter1301BuildingOfficialCertification;
3) Chapter1302StateBuildingCodeConstructionApprovals;
4) Chapter1303SpecialProvisions;
5) Chapter1305MinnesotaBuildingCode;
6) Chapter1307ElevatorsandRelatedDevices;
7) Chapter1309MinnesotaResidentialCode;
8) Chapter1311MinnesotaConservationCodeforExistingBuildings;
9) Chapter1315MinnesotaElectricalCode;
10) Chapter1322MinnesotaResidentialEnergyCode;
11) Chapter1323MinnesotaCommercialEnergyCode;
12) Chapter1325SolarEnergySystems;
13) Chapter1335FloodproofingRegulations;
14) Chapter1341MinnesotaAccessibilityCode;
15) Chapter1346MinnesotaMechanicalCode;
16) Chapter1350ManufacturedHomes;
17) Chapter1360PrefabricatedBuildings;
18) Chapter1361Industrialized/ModularBuildings;
19) Chapter1370StormShelters (ManufacturedHomeParks); and
20) Chapter4714MinnesotaPlumbingCode.
B) Application, administrationandenforcement. Theapplication, administrationand
enforcementofthissectionshallbeinaccordancewithM.S. Chapter326B. TheBuilding
Officialisherebydesignatedtoadministerthecode.
Page2of15
C) Permitsandfees. Theissuanceofpermitsandthecollectionoffeesshallbeas
authorizedinM.S. Chapter326B, asitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime, andtheamounts
thereofshallbeestablishedbyordinance. Thetotalvalueoflaborandmaterialsuponwhichthe
feesarebasedshallbedeterminedbybuildingvaluationdata, assetforthandfromtimetotime
revisedbythestate, DepartmentofAdministration. Inaddition, asurchargefeeshallbe
collectedonallpermitsissuedforworkgovernedbythissectioninaccordancewithM.S.
Chapter326B, asitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime.
D) Violationsandpenalties. Aviolationofthiscodeisamisdemeanorasprovidedby
M.S. §3 26B.082, asitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime.
PriorCode, § 8-1-1) ( Ord. 388, passed2-21-1995; Ord. 496, passed3-1-1999; Ord. 569, passed
1-5-2004; Ord. 795, passed4-2-2018) Penalty, see § 10.99
150.002 PLUMBINGANDMECHANICALPERMITS.
A) Permitrequired. Apermitshallberequiredforallplumbing, heating, airconditioning
andventilation (HVAC) workperformedwithinthecity.
1) Commercial/industrialplumbingandHVACpermitsshallbeissuedseparately
fromthegeneralbuildingpermitandshallbeappliedforbythecontractororsubcontractor
responsibleforthecompletionofthework.
2) ResidentialplumbingandHVACpermitsmaybeissuedwiththebuildingpermit.
Inaccordancethereof, thegeneralcontractorshalldisclosewithapplicationtheplumbingand
HVACcontractorsandsubcontractorsresponsibleforcompletionofthework.
3) FeesforplumbingandHVACpermitsshallbeestablishedbyordinance.
B) Enforcement. TheCityBuildingOfficialand/orcityplumbinginspector, asappointed
bytheCityCouncil, shallenforcetheprovisionsofthissection. Allworkhereafterinstalled
shallbeinspectedasprovidedhereinandviolationsofthesectionshallbecorrected. Written
noticestatingthecorrectionstobemadeshallbeservedupontheinstallerorownerofthe
propertyand, ifthecorrectionsarenotdulymade, thecitymaycausetohaveremovedthework
andchargethecostthereoftothepersoninstallingthesameortotheowneroftheaffected
property.
C) Penalty. Anypersonwhocoversaplumbinginstallationbeforeitisinspectedor
otherwiserefusestocomplywiththecorrectionorderorinanyotherwayisfoundinviolationof
thissectionshallbe, uponconvictionthereof, foundguiltyofamisdemeanor.
PriorCode, § 8-1-2) ( Ord. 46, passed9-9-1971; Ord. 301, passed2-22-1990; Ord. 388, passed
2-21-1995; Ord. 538, passed12-17-2001; Ord. 795, passed4-2-2018) Penalty, see § 10.99
Page3of15
150.003 FIRECODE.
A) AdoptionofMinnesotaStateFireCode.
1) PursuanttoMinnesotaStatutes, Section299F.011andMinnesotaRules
7511.0010to7511.8040, theMinnesotaStateFireCode, (the “MSFC”), isherebyadoptedas
thefirecodefortheCity. EveryprovisioncontainedintheMSFC, exceptashereinafter
amended, isherebyadoptedandmadeapartofthisSection150.003asiffullysetforthherein.
TheaforesaidfirecodeoftheCityshallbeknownasandmaybecitedasthe “FireCode”. One
copyoftheMinnesotaStateFireCodeshallbemarkedastheofficialcopyandwillbekepton
fileintheofficeoftheCityClerk.
2) AnyandallfutureamendmentsormodificationstotheMSFCareherebyadopted
andmadeapartofthissectionasiffullysetforthherein, andacopyoftheamendmentsshallbe
markedastheofficialcopyandkeptonfileintheofficeoftheCityClerk.
3) AllappendicesoftheMSFC, asadoptedand/oramendedbyMinn. RuleChapter
7511, areherebydeemedapartoftheFireCodeandmaybeenforcedassuch.
B) Definitions. Forthepurposesofthissection, thefollowingdefinitionsshallapply
unlessthecontextclearlyindicatesorrequiresadifferentmeaning.
CORPORATECOUNSEL. WheneverthetermisusedintheMSFC, itshallbeheldto
meantheCityAttorneyforthecity.
JURISDICTION. WheneverthetermisusedintheMSFC, itshallbeheldtomeanthe
city.
C) Enforcement. TheChiefoftheFireDepartment (hereinreferredtoasChief) servingthe
cityorarepresentativeauthorizedbytheFireChiefand/ortheFireMarshal, ifthepositionhas
beenfilledbytheCityCouncil, shallenforcetheprovisionsofthissection. TheChiefmay
assignmembersoftheFireDepartmentasinspectorsasshallfromtimetotimebenecessary.
D) Appeals. WhenevertheChiefshalldisapproveanapplicationorrefusetograntapermit
appliedfororwhenitisclaimedthattheprovisionsofthecodedonotapplyorthatthetrue
intentandmeaningofthecodehavebeenmisconstruedorwronglyinterpreted, theapplicant
mayappealfromthedecisionoftheChieftotheCityCouncilwithin30daysfromthedateof
thedecisionappealed.
E) Violationsandpenalties. Anyperson, whoshallviolateanyoftheprovisionsofthe
FireCodeherebyadoptedorfailtocomplytherewith; orwhoshallviolateorfailtocomplywith
anyordermadethereunder; orwhoshallbuildinviolationofanydetailedstatementof
specificationsorplanssubmittedandapprovedthereunderoranycertificateorpermitissued
thereunderandfromwhichnoappealhasbeentaken; orwhoshallfailtocomplywithanorder
asaffirmedormodifiedbytheCityCouncilorbyacourtofcompetentjurisdictionwithinthe
timefixedtherein, shall, severallyforeachandeveryviolationandnoncompliancerespectively,
Page4of15
beguiltyofamisdemeanor.
1) Theimpositionofonepenaltyforanyviolationshallnotexcusetheviolationor
permitittocontinue; andallpersonsshallberequiredtocorrectorremedytheviolationsor
defectswithinareasonabletime; and, whennototherwisespecified, eachdaythatprohibited
conditionsaremaintainedshallconstituteaseparateoffense.
2) Theapplicationoftheabovepenaltyshallnotbeheldtopreventtheenforced
removaloftheprohibitedconditions.
PriorCode, § 8-1-3) ( Ord. 76, passed9-9-1976; Ord. 569, passed1-5-2004; Ord. 709, passed9-
4-2012; Ord. 794, passed6-4-2018) Penalty, see § 10.99
150.004 ENVIRONMENTALREVIEWPROGRAM.
A) Operatingprocedures. Theprovisionsoftherulesfortheenvironmentalreview
program, MinnesotaRules4410.0200to4410.6500, astheymaybeamendedfromtimetotime,
onecopyofwhichisonfileintheofficeoftheCityClerk, areherebyadoptedandshallbethe
environmentalreviewoperatingproceduresthecityshallfollowinimplementingtheprovisions
ofM.S. Chapter116D, asitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime, relatingtotheenvironmental
ReviewProgramandanyrulesadoptedthereunderbytheMinnesotaEnvironmentalQuality
Board.
B) Costresponsibility. Allcostsrelatingtothepreparation, reviewanddistributionofan
EnvironmentalAssessmentWorksheetorEnvironmentalImpactStatementshallbethe
responsibilityoftheapplicants.
PriorCode, § 8-1-4) ( Ord. 87, passed10-27-1977; Ord. 795, passed4-2-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
GENERALBUILDINGREGULATIONS
150.015 OPENFLAMEREGULATIONS.
Repealed9-4-2012.
PriorCode, § 8-3-1) ( Ord. 252, passed7-9-1987; Ord. 709, passed9-4-2012) Penalty, see §
10.99
150.016 LITTERONPRIVATEANDPUBLICPROPERTY.
A) Truckloadscausinglitter. Nopersonshalldriveormoveanytruckorothervehicle
withinthecityunlessthevehicleisequippedwithcoversorsoconstructedorloadedasto
preventanyload, contentsorlitterfrombeingblownordepositeduponanystreet, alleyorany
otherpublicplace. Norshallanypersondriveormove, norshallanypersonpermitavehicleto
bedrivenormovedwithinthecitywhichcarriesontoordepositsinanystreet, alleyorother
Page5of15
publicplacemud, dirt, stickysubstances, litterorforeignmatterwhichcausesahazardor
obstructionortheaccumulationofwhichmaycauseahazardorobstruction.
B) Litteronprivateproperty. Theownerorpersonincontrolofprivatepropertyshall
maintainthereonprivatereceptaclesforcollectioninamannerthatlitterwillbepreventedfrom
beingcarriedordepositedbytheelementsuponanystreet, sidewalkorotherpublicplace, orto
preventlitterfrombecominganuisance, sourceoffilthorcauseofsicknessontheprivate
property.
C) Penalty. Anypersonviolatingthissectionshall, uponconviction, beguiltyofa
misdemeanorunderMinnesotalawandshallpaythecostofprosecution.
PriorCode, § 8-3-2) ( Ord. 273, passed9-22-1988) Penalty, see § 10.99
150.017BURNINGPERMITS.
A) E x ceptasprovidedbelow, apersonmustnotsetonfire,o rcauseorpermittobeset
onfire, anycombustiblematerialwithinthecity, includinggrass, weeds, trees, othervegetation,
wood, buildingmaterialsoranystructure, withoutfirstobtainingaburningpermitfromthe
City. ApplicantsforaburningpermitshallfilewiththeCityanapplicationinwritingonaform
tobefurnishedbytheCity.
B) Permitsmaybegrantedforthefollowing:
1) Recreationalfires. Recreationalfiresmustbenolargerthan3feetindiameterby
3feethigh, containedinafirepitnottallerthan3feethighandmadeofnoncombustible
materials. Recreationalfiresmayburnonlyclean, drywood.
2) Pileburning. Apileburnistheburningofdeadgrass, leaves, branches, trees,
weeds, vegetationandsimilartypematerials. TheFireChiefshallmakethefinaldetermination
astowhattypesofmaterialsareallowedinapileburn. Pileburnsmustbeaminimumof100
feetfromanystructure, unlessadifferentdistanceisestablishedbytheFireChieforhis/her
designeeforaparticularpileburn.
3) Restorationburns. Arestorationburnistheburningoflivegrassesorprairieto
maintainthehealthofthegrassesorprairie.
C) TheFireChieforhis/herdesigneeshallberesponsiblefortheissuanceand
revocationofburningpermits. TheFireChiefmaydenyanypermitapplication, includingone
forasmallrecreationalfire, whendoingsoisinthebestinterestsofthepublichealth, safety, and
welfare. TheFireChiefmayconsidersuchfactorsasatmosphericconditions, proximityof
structuresandothercombustibles, thepotentialoffirespreading, andairquality. Anypermit
maybesubjecttoconditionsdeemedappropriatebytheFireChieftoprotectthepublichealth,
safety, andwelfare.
Page6of15
D) ThepermitshallrequirethatthepermitteecomplywithallapplicableFederal,
StateandCitylaws, ordinancesandregulations. Failuretofollowtheconditionsofthepermit
mayresultintheCitytakingactiontoextinguishthefireand/orrevokeaburningpermit. Ifany
regulationsareviolatedandtheCityincurscostsintherelationtotheenforcementofsuch
regulationstheholderoftheburningpermitmaybechargedforallsuchcosts.
E) Aburningpermitisnotrequiredforwoodburningfireplacesandstovesthatare
locatedinbuildingsorforcharcoalfiresusedsolelyforthepreparationoffood. Aburning
permitisalsonotrequiredfortheburningoftobaccoincigars, cigarettes, andpipes.
F) AburningpermitgrantedbytheFireChiefdoesnotrelievethepermitteefrom
anyliabilityfordamagearisingoutoforresultingfromthefire.
Ord. 716, passed5-20-2013) Penalty, see § 10.99
SWIMMINGPOOLS
150.030 DEFINITIONS.
Forthepurposeofthissubchapter, thefollowingdefinitionsshallapplyunlessthecontext
clearlyindicatesorrequiresadifferentmeaning.
STORABLESWIMMINGORWADINGPOOL. Apoolwithnonmetallic, molded
polymericwallsorinflatablefabricwalls, constructedonorabovethegroundandisso
constructedthatitmaybereadilydisassembledforstorageandreassembledtoitsoriginal
integrity.
SWIMMINGPOOLBARRIER. Afence, wall, buildingwallorcombinationthereofwhich
completelysurroundstheswimmingpoolandobstructsaccesstotheswimmingpool.
SWIMMINGPOOL, HOTTUBORSPA. Anyoutdoorstructurewhichisintendedfor
swimming, wadingorrecreationalbathingandcontainsoriscapableofcontainingwaterover24
inchesdeep. Thestructuremaybeconstrued, installedorlocatedin-ground, above-ground, oron
on-groundandmay
includepermanentortemporaryswimmingpools, hottubsandspas. Anyregulationapplication
orwithreferencetothetermSWIMMINGPOOLwithinthissubchaptershallalsoincludeand
beapplicabletoanoutdoorhottuborspa.
PriorCode, § 8-2-1) ( Ord. 591, passed5-16-2005)
150.031 PERMITREQUIREMENTS.
A) Permitrequired. Abuildingpermitshallberequiredbeforeworkiscommencedonthe
construction, alteration, additionto, orremodelofaswimmingpool.
Page7of15
B) Applicationforpermit. AnapplicationforpermitshallbesubmittedtotheBuilding
Officialonformsprovidedbythecityandshallincludethefollowing:
1) Twosetsofplansandspecificationsandpertinentexplanatorydatarelativeto
design, operationandmaintenance;
2) Thelength, depthandwidthofthepool, theswimmingpooldeckand
appurtenances; and
3) Asiteplanofthesubjectparcelshowingthefollowing:
a) Locationoftheswimmingpool, thepumps, filter, wiring, protectivefencing,
backflushanddrainageoutlets;
b) Locationofallstructuresonthebuildinglotincludinghouse, garage, fencing
orotherimprovements;
c) Locationofexistingundergroundoroverheadutilities (electric, telephone, gas
andthelike), utilityeasements, watersystems, buriedsewagedisposalsystems, treesandother
similarfeatures;
d) Gradingplansandfinishedelevationsaroundthepool; and
e) Locationsofstructuresonadjacentlots.
C) Fees. Buildingpermitfeesforaswimmingpoolshallbethesameasthosechargedfor
abuildingpermitasestablishedfromtimetotimebytheCityCouncil.
D) Storableswimmingandwadingpools. Storableswimmingandwadingpoolsmustbe
disassembledandstoredbetweenthedatesofOctober15andApril15eachyear.
PriorCode, § 8-2-2) ( Ord. 591, passed5-16-2005) Penalty, see § 10.99
150.032 MINIMUMREQUIREMENTS.
Allpoolsconstructedwithinthecityshallmeetthefollowingrequirements. (A)
Constructiongenerally.
1) Constructionofpoolsshallbeundertakensoastoavoidhazard, damageor
considerableinconveniencetoadjacentproperty.
2) Allwiring, installationofheatingunits, grading, installationofpipeorother
constructionshallbesubjecttoinspection.
3) Backflushwaterorwaterfromthepoolshallbedirectedontotheowner’sproperty
orontoapprovedpublicdrainagewaysandshallnotdrainontoadjacentprivateland. Drainage
Page8of15
ontopublicstreetsorotherpublicdrainagewaysshallrequirewrittenapprovalofthePublic
WorksSuperintendent.
4) Allswimmingpoollightingshallbedirectedtowardthepoolandnottoward
adjacentproperty.
5) Fillingofpoolsfromfirehydrantsorotherpublicfacilitiesshallrequireapprovalof
theUtilityServicesSuperintendent.
6) Swimmingpoolheatersshallhaveapprovedpressurereliefvalves.
7) GaspipingshallmeetS.B.C. 1345-2620.
8) OverheadwiresorserviceshallmeetrequirementsofArticle680oftheNational
ElectricalCode.
B) Fencing.
1) Fencingrequirements. Theswimmingpool, hottuborspaareasshallbe
surroundedwithabarrierconsistingoffencing, screeningorotherenclosureoranycombination
thereof, ofsufficientdensitytopreventchildfromgaininguncontrolledaccess. Iffencesare
used, theyshallbeatleastfourfeetinheight. Thebottomsofthefencesshallnotbemorethan
fourinchesfromthegroundandnoopeninginthefenceshallbelargerthanfourinches. Only
noncorrosivematerialandverticalslatsmaybeusedasfencingorscreening.
2) Gatesordoors. Allfenceopeningsorpointsofentryintothepoolshallbe
equippedwithgatesordoors. Thegatesanddoorsshallbeequippedwithself-closingand
self-latchingdevicesplacedataheightandlocationsoastobeinaccessibletosmallchildren.
Thefencemustbecompletelyinstalled, lessa16-footsection (orlarger, ifapprovedbythe
BuildingOfficial) forconstructionaccess, priortothefootingsinspection. Theconstruction
accessmustbeblockedoffwithtemporaryfencingduringperiodswhenconstructionhasceased.
Theconstructionopeningmustbeenclosedwithpermanentfencingpriortothefinalinspection.
3) Exceptions. Thefollowingsituationsareexceptionstothefencingrequirementsof
divisions (B)(1) and (2) above.
a) Fencingisonlyrequiredaroundtheladderorentrancetoanaboveground
swimmingpoolthat:
1. Isatleastfourfeetabovegroundaroundtheentireperimeterofthepool;
and
2. Hasexteriorwallsthatarenonclimbable.
b) Storingswimmingorwadingpoolsareexemptfromthefencingrequirements
providedallmeansofaccessintothepoolareremovedandthepooliscoveredwhenitisnotin
Page9of15
use.
c) HottubsorspaswithalockingsafetycoverwhichcomplieswithASTM
StandardF1346-91shallbeexemptfromthesefencingrequirements, providedthecoveris
lockedatalltimeswhenthehottuborspaisnotinuse.
C) Location.
1) Utilities. Poolsshallnotbelocatedwithintenfeet (measuredhorizontally) from
undergroundorabovegroundutilityline. Swimmingpoolsandperimeterwalksshallnotbe
locatedwithinanyprivateorpublicutility, drainage, walkwayorothereasement.
2) Single-familyresidentiallots.
a) Forswimmingpoolsconstructedonsingle-familyresidentiallots, swimming
poolsshallnotbelocatedwithineightfeetofanyrearlotlinenorwithinfivefeetofanysidelot
linenorwithinsixfeetofanyprincipalstructureorfrostfooting.
b) Swimmingpoolsshallnotbelocatedwithinanyrequiredfrontyard. Thefilter
unit, pump, heatingunitandanyothernoise-makingmechanicalequipmentshallbelocatedat
least25feetfromanyresidentialstructureonadjacentpropertyandnotcloserthaneightfeetto
anylotline.
3) Multi-familyresidentiallots.
a) Publicswimmingpoolsandswimmingpoolsconstructedforuseformorethan
onefamilyaresubjecttorulesandregulationsoftheStateHealthDepartment. Forswimming
poolsconstructedonmulti-familylotsintendedforandusedbyoccupantsandguestsof
occupantsofmulti-familydwellings, nopartofthewatersurfaceoftheswimmingpoolshallbe
closerthan50feettoanylotlineandnopumps, filterorotherapparatususedinconnectionwith
thepoolshallbelocatedcloserthan50feettoanylotline.
b) Theswimmingpoolshallbeadequatelyfencedtopreventuncontrolledaccess
fromthestreetoradjacentpropertyandcontainthesamefeaturesforaccessassetforthin
division (B)(2) above. Adequatescreening, includingbutnotlimitedtolandscape, shallbe
placedbetweenthepoolareaandanyadjoiningsingle-familydistrictlotlines. Alldeckareas,
adjoiningpatiosorotherareasusedinconjunctionwiththepool, shallbelocatedatleast15feet
fromanylotlineinanadjoiningsingle-familydistrict.
PriorCode, § 8-2-3) ( Ord. 481, passed6-1-1998; Ord. 591, passed5-16-2005; Ord. 759, passed
10-05-2015) Penalty, see § 10.99
150.033 PROHIBITEDACTSANDCONDITIONS.
Duringanyuseofapool, nuisancessuchasunduenoise, lightingofadjacentproperty,
healthandsafetyhazards, damagetovegetationonadjoiningpropertyandthelikeshallnotbe
Page10of15
permitted.
PriorCode, § 8-2-4) ( Ord. 591, passed5-16-2005) Penalty, see § 10.99
150.034 VARIANCES.
A) AnyvariancedeemedreasonablemaybegrantedbytheCityCounciltoavoid
unnecessaryhardshiporunnecessaryexpenseinthecompliancewiththissubchapter.
B) Thevariancesshallbeappliedforonanapplicationformprescribedbythecityand
uponpaymentofthefeesetforthbyordinance.
PriorCode, § 8-2-5) ( Ord. 591, passed5-16-2005)
150.035 LIABILITYOFOWNER.
Thelotowneruponwhichanyswimmingpoolisconstructedwithinthecityshallbeliable
fordamagestoanybusinessorprivatepropertycausedduringpoolconstruction.
PriorCode, § 8-2-6) ( Ord. 591, passed5-16-2005) Penalty, see § 10.99
150.036 VIOLATIONS.
Anypersonviolatingtheprovisionsofthissubchaptershallbeguiltyofamisdemeanor.
Eachdayofcontinuingviolationshallconstituteaseparateoffense.
PriorCode, § 8-2-7) ( Ord. 591, passed5-16-2005) Penalty, see § 10.99
EXTERIORSTRUCTUREMAINTENANCE
150.050 PURPOSE.
Thepurposeofthisordinanceistoprotectpublichealth, safetyandwelfarebyestablishing
minimumstandardsformaintenance, repairandoccupancystandardsofallbuildingsand
structureswithinthecity.
150.051 APPLICABILITY.
Theregulationssetforthinthisordinanceshallapplytoallstructuresandbuildingswithin
thecity. Additions, alterationsorrepairs, shallbedoneincompliancewiththeStateBuilding
Code, StateFireCodeandotherapplicablestateandcitylawsandregulationsorotherprovisions
oftheCityCodeincludingobtainingsuchpermitsasmayberequired. Wheretermsarenot
definedinthissectionandaredefinedintheSavageCityCodeorStateBuildingCode, such
termsshallbethemeaningascribedtotheminthosecodes.
Page11of15
150.052 DECLARATIONOFNUISANCE.
Buildingsandotherstructures, whichhavebeensopoorlymaintainedthattheirphysical
conditionandappearancedetractfromthesurroundingneighborhood, aredeclaredtobepublic
nuisances. Suchstructures (a) areunsightly, (b) decreaseadjoininglandowners’ andoccupants’
enjoymentoftheirpropertyandneighborhood, and (c) adverselyaffectpropertyvaluesand
neighborhoodpatterns.
150.053 STANDARDS.
Allstructuresshallbemaintainedandkeptingoodrepair, bestructurallysoundandshall
meetthefollowingstandards:
A) Allsurfacesingeneral.
1) Exteriorsurfacesshallbemaintainedandkeptfreefromdecay, cracks, rot, tears,
holes, gaps, orbreaksfromdeterioratedplaster, stucco, brick, wood, vinyl, aluminum, steeland
cementboardsiding, orothermaterialthatshowsevidenceofneglect.
2) Exteriorsurfacesshallbeofmaterialsmanufacturedorprocessedspecificallyfor
itsintendeduseandshallbekeptweathertightandrodentproof.
3) Everyexteriorsurfacethatcontainsaprotectivesurfacefinishsuchaspaint, stain,
orothersimilarfinishshallbemaintainedtoavoidnoticeabledeteriorationofthefinish. A
structureshallbeconsideredoutofrepairiftheexteriorsurfacehaspeeling, blistering, cracked,
chipped, orflakedsurfaceareasof25% ormoreofanyonewallorotherflatsurfacearea
includingwindows, doors, trim, molding, cornice, eaves, siding, fascia, soffit, guttersorother
similarprojectionsonanyoneside. Protectivefinishesshallbematchedinmaterialandcoloras
closeaspossible.
4) Astructureshallbeconsideredoutofrepairifmorethan25% ofthefinishcoatof
astuccowalliswornthrough, chippedaway, broken, damaged, revealingthemetallatheorany
partoftheunderlyingstructureor25% ofabrickorstonewallislooseorhasfallenout.
B) Roofs.
1) Roofsshallbemaintainedinaweathertightandwaterproofcondition.
2) Loose, broken, deterioratedandmissingroofingmaterialsshallberepairedor
replacedaspermanufacturer’srecommendations. Allrepairsshallmatchoriginalcolor, style
andapplicationascloseaspossible.
3) Allroofingmaterialsshallbeappliedtosuitablebaseorsheathingasaccordingto
manufacturer’sinstructions. Rottedordeterioratedstructuralmembersandsheathingshallbe
replacedpriortoinstallationofroofingmaterials.
Page12of15
C) Foundations.
1) Foundationsshallbekeptinsoundconditionandrepairandmustadequately
supportthebuildingatallpoints.
2) Foundationsshallbeconstructedofmaterialsthatareresistanttorotincluding
concrete, stone, brickorFDN .60CCAretentionpreservativetreatedlumbertoapoint6inches
abovethefinishedgrade.
3) Foundationsshallbemaintainedtosupporttheintendedloads.
4) Foundationsshallberepairedifanybrick, stone, blockorothercomponenthas
fallenoutorhasdeteriorated.
5) Foundationsshallbedeemedoutofrepairifmorethan25% ofmortarislooseor
hasfallenoutonanyonewallsection.
6) Foundationsshallberodentproofandshallnothavecracksmorethan ¼ inchin
width.
D) Chimneysandtowers.
1) Allchimneys, coolingtowers, smokestacks, ventsandsimilarappurtenances
shallbemaintainedstructurallysoundandingoodrepair.
2) Nomorethan25% ofthepointing, perside, ofanychimneyshallbelooseor
missing.
E) Overhangextensions.
1) Alloverhangextensionsincluding, butnotlimitedtocanopies, marquees, signs,
metalsawnings, fireescapes, lightfixtures, standpipes, gutters, antennas, andexhaustductsshall
bemaintainedstructurallysafeandingoodrepair.
F) Exteriorwalls, soffit, fascia, trim, eavesandgutters.
1) Shallbefreefromrot, damagedormissingpiecesandshallprovidecomplete
weatherprotection.
2) Missingtrimpiecesshallbereplacedtomatchexistingtrim.
3) Roofdrainagesystemsandguttersshallbehungandsecuredproperly.
G) Exteriordoorsandwindows.
Page13of15
1) Exteriordoorsandwindowsshallbesetsquareinsecuredframes, weathertight
andfullyoperable. Doorsmaybesecuredinaclosedpositionifnotnecessaryforegressorfire
escape.
2) Exteriordoorsmustbeingoodrepairandkeptfreefromrot, decay, rips, holes,
cracks, anddilapidation.
3) Brokenormissingglassshallbereplacedindoorsandwindowswithnewglass.
Allbrokenormissingglassindoorsorareassubjecttohumanimpactshallbereplacedwith
safetyglasspursuanttotherequirementsoftheStateBuildingCode.
H) Steps, porches, decksandbalconies
1) Allexteriorsteps, porches, decks, balconiesandsimilarstructuresshallbe
maintainedingoodrepairandbestructurallysound.
2) Allrottedormissingmaterialsshallberepairedwithdecayresistantmaterialsas
pursuanttotherequirementsoftheStateBuildingCode.
3) Handrailsandguardsshallbemaintainedingoodrepairandfastenedfirmlyto
supporttheintendedload.
I) Pools.
1) Allpools, spasandhottubsshallbemaintainedinacleanandsanitarycondition
andshallbeingoodrepair.
J) DefacementofProperty.
1) Theexteriorsurfaceofanystructuredefacedbygraffitishallberemovedwithina
reasonabletime.
K) PremiseIdentification.
1) Structuresshallhaveaddressnumbersplacedinapositiontobevisiblefromthe
streetfrontingtheproperty. Residentialdwellingunitsshallhaveminimum4inchheight
addressnumbersandcommercialandotherusesshallhave12inchheightaddressnumberswith
individualtenantshavingminimum6inchheightaddressnumbersfortenantorsuite
identification. Alladdressnumbersshallcontrastwiththeirbackground.
150.054 ENFORCEMENT.
A) NoticeofViolation.
Page14of15
1) Whenaproperty, structureorbuildingisinviolationofSection150.050to
150.053, thecityofficialsSection10.26(B) mayissuethepropertyownera “NoticeofViolation
andComplianceOrder” whichshallincludethefollowinginformation:
a) Descriptionofthepropertyforsufficientidentification;
b) Descriptionoftheviolation(s);
c) Theactionrequiredtoremedytheviolation(s);
d) Thetimewithinwhichtheremedymustbecompleted;
e) ActionsthatmaybetakenbytheCityifrepairsarenotmadeinthetimeperiod
specifiedintheNoticeofViolationandComplianceOrder; and
f) Noticeofrightofappeal.
2) Theaffectedpropertyownershallbegivenwrittennoticebydeliveryinpersonor
servicebymail. Ifthepremisesarenotoccupiedorthemailingaddressoftheownerisnot
known, serviceontheownermaybehadbypostingacopyofnoticeonthepremises.
3) AnypersonaggrievedbyaNoticeofViolationandComplianceOrdershallhave
therighttoappealtotheCityCouncil. Anappealshallbeinwriting, shallspecifythegrounds
fortheappealandshallbefiledwiththeCityAdministratorwithin10businessdaysfromthe
dateofNoticeofViolationandComplianceOrder. TheCouncilmayupholdtheviolation, void
allviolations, orchangeanydescribedviolationbyaddingviolations, removingviolationsor
changingtheordertorepair.
Ord. 737, passed6-14-2014) Penalty, see § 10.99
Page15of15
CHAPTER 151: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
151. 01 Title
151. 02 Purpose
151. 03 Scope
151. 04 Definitions
151. 05 Application of regulations
151. 06 Sketch plan
151. 07 Preliminary plat
151. 08 Final plat
151. 09 Premature subdivision
151. 10 Administrative subdivisions/ consolidations
151. 11 Design standards
151. 12 Required improvements
151. 13 Park dedication
151. 14 Miscellaneous provisions
151. 15 Administration and enforcement
151. 01 TITLE.
This title shall be known as the " Subdivision Code of the City of Savage, Minnesota," may
be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as " this title."
Prior Code, § 10- 1- 1) ( Ord. 573, passed 2- 17- 2004)
151. 02 PURPOSE.
This chapter is adopted in order to safeguard the interests of the city and to assist developers
and subdividers of land in harmonizing their interests with those of the city, including but not
limited to the following:
A) To guide the future growth and development of the city in accordance with its adopted
comprehensive plan and capital improvement program;
B) To provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and to encourage orderly,
efficient and attractive subdivisions by establishing standards for design and construction of
public improvements;
C) To preserve and protect areas of significant environmental value, including wetlands,
forested areas, bluffs and other similar natural features and to provide for open space through the
efficient design layout of the land;
Page 1 of 27
D) To protect and conserve the value of land and land improvements and to promote
adequate vehicle and pedestrian traffic movements;
E) To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate and efficient
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, trails and other public facilities; and
F) To ensure that public and private improvements are paid for by those benefitting from
their construction.
Prior Code, § 10- 1- 2) ( Ord. 573, passed 2- 17- 2004)
151. 03 SCOPE.
This chapter is established pursuant to the authority granted by M.S. §§ 462.351 through
462.365, as they may be amended from time to time, and shall apply to subdivision activity
occurring within the city after the effective date of this chapter.
A) Interpretation. The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum standards
for the promotion of the public health, safety and welfare.
B) Conflict with other provisions. These regulations are not intended to interfere with,
abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, regulation, statute or provision of law, or to abrogate any
easement, covenant or other private agreement or restriction. Where any provision of these
regulations imposes a restriction or requirement that differs from any other applicable public or
private restriction, the more restrictive provision shall control.
C) Severability. If any portion of this chapter is determined to be invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, that portion shall be deemed severed from
this chapter, and the determination shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the chapter.
D) Additional provisions. In addition to the authority otherwise provided under this
chapter, the City Council is empowered to exercise its full statutory authority under M.S.
462.358, Subd. la and 2a, as it may be amended from time to time, to establish standards,
requirements and procedures for the review and approval of subdivisions. The authority
possessed by the City Council under this chapter specifically includes the authority to condition
subdivision approval on compliance with other requirements reasonably related to the provisions
of this chapter, and the authority to execute development agreements embodying the terms and
conditions of the approval. For purposes of this chapter, these powers specifically include the
power to impose conditions upon subdivision approval necessary for the subdivision to comply
with resolutions previously adopted and remaining effect in whole or in part at the time of
adoption of this chapter.(Prior Code, § 10- 1- 3) ( Ord. 573, passed 2- 17- 2004)
Page 2 of 27
151. 04 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All words and phrases not defined herein, or
within the definitions section of the Zoning Code, shall have their common meaning.
ALLEY. A minor public right-of-way that affords a secondary means of vehicular access to
abutting property.
BLOCK An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, or by a
combination of streets, exterior boundary lines of the subdivision, bodies of water or other
topographic features.
BOULEVARD. The portion of the street right- of-way between the curb line and the
property line.
BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals,
chattels or moveable property of any kind, and includes any structure.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM. A proposed city schedule of future projects or
capital purchases listed in order of priority together with cost estimates and the anticipated means
of financing each project.
CITY. The City of Savage.
CITYATTORNEY. The City Attorney of the city.
CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the city.
CITYENGINEER. The City Engineer of the city or his or her authorized representative.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The duly adopted plan guiding the land use development of
the city.
CUL-DE-SAC. A local street having but one end open to traffic and the other end being
permanently terminated with a vehicular turn around.
DESIGN STANDARDS. Specifications for the preparation of plats, both preliminary and
final, indicating among other things, the optimum, minimum and maximum dimensions of items
such as rights- of-way, blocks, easements and lots.
DEVELOPER. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association undertaking the
subdivision or resubdivision of a tract or parcel of land, which shall include the legal owner of
the premises or a person, or persons, with an option or contract to purchase the land.
Page 3 of 27
EASEMENT. Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a specified
purpose, of any designated part of his or her property.
FLOOD PLAIN. The areas adjoining a watercourse that have been or may be covered by
the regional flood.
FRONTAGE. The side of a lot abutting on a public street right- of-way.
GRADE. The slope specified in percentage terms.
IMPROVEMENTS. Pavement, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, sewer and water facilities, storm
sewers, grading, street signs, plantings and other items for the welfare of property owners and/ or
the general public.
LOT. A piece, parcel or plot of land intended for building development as a unit for transfer
of ownership.
MODEL HOME. A dwelling unit used initially for display purposes that typify the type of
units that will be constructed in the subdivision.
OUTLOT. A platted lot to be developed for a use that will not involve a building or be
reserved for future replatting before development.
PARCEL. Any unit of land, platted or described by metes and bounds or combination
thereof, subject to this chapter and other city ordinances.
PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the city.
PLAT. Any document that results in the subdivision of land.
PLAT, FINAL. A drawing or map of a subdivision prepared for filing of record pursuant to
M.S. Chapter 505, as it may be amended from time to time, and containing all elements and
requirements set forth in this chapter.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY. A drawing showing the proposed layout of a subdivision in
sufficient detail to indicate its workability in all aspects, but not in final form for recording and
not completely computed.
REPLAT. The platting or an area that was previously platted.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a road,
crosswalk, utility line, railroad, electric transmission line or other similar use.
SETBACK The minimum separation in linear feet, measured on a horizontal plane,
required between the wall of a building or structure and each of the lot lines, between the walls
of buildings located on the same zoning lot or from the back of a parking or driveway curb to the
Page 4 of 27
lot line.
STREET. A public right- of-way which affords a primary means of access to abutting
property.
STREET, ARTERIAL. A street which provides for traffic movement to and from
municipalities and the surrounding areas, to and from freeways/ expressways and collector streets
and between major parts of an urban area. Intersections are at grade and direct access to abutting
property is intentionally limited.
STREET, COLLECTOR. A street which collects and distributes the internal traffic within
an area of a community such as a residential neighborhood or industrial district and between
arterial and local streets. It provides some access to abutting property.
STREET, HALF. A street having only one- half of its intended right- of-way width platted
and/ or developed to accommodate traffic.
STREET, LOCAL. A street of little or no continuity, designed to provide access to abutting
property and ideally leading into collector streets.
STREET WIDTH. The street right- of-way width measured at right angles to the centerline
of the street.
SUBDIVISION. The division of any parcel of land into two or more lots, blocks or parcels,
including the resubdivision of land and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of
subdividing.
TRAILWAY. An area so designated on a plat for public trail use in a manner regulated by
the city.
TRUNK FACILITIES. Those utilities specifically including sewer and water lines of a size
ordinarily larger than that necessary to serve the subdivision or immediately abutting property.
WETLANDS. Transitional land between terrestrial and aquatic systems, where the water
table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow water. Wetlands must
have a predominance of hydric soils; be inundated or saturated with surface water or ground
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and under normal circumstances, support a
prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation.
Prior Code, § 10- 1- 4) ( Ord. 573, passed 2- 17- 2004; Ord. 718, passed 05- 20- 2013, Ord. 747,
passed 04- 20- 2015)
151. 05 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
A) In general. Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any binding contract
Page 5 of 27
is made for the sale of any part thereof, before the subdivision is recorded with the county, and
before any permit for the erection of a structure in the proposed subdivision shall be granted, the
subdividing owner or his or her authorized agent, shall apply for and secure approval of the
proposed subdivision in accordance with the procedures outlined within this chapter.
B) Restrictions on filing and recording conveyances. No conveyance of land to which
these regulations apply shall be filed or recorded with the County Recorder' s office if the land is
described by metes and bounds, by reference to an unapproved registered land survey made after
April 21, 1961, or to an unapproved plat made after the regulations became effective. The
foregoing provision does not apply to a conveyance if the land described:
1) Was a separate parcel of record on or before November 14, 1974, or was the
subject of a written agreement to convey entered into prior to the date;
2) Was a separate parcel of not less than two and one-half acres in area and 150 feet in
width on or before January 1, 1966;
3) Was a separate parcel of not less than five acres in area and 300 feet in width on or
before July 1, 1980;
4) Is a single parcel of commercial or industrial land of not less than five acres and
having a width of not less than 300 feet and its conveyance will not result in the division of land
into two or more parcels, either of which is less than five acres in area and 300 feet in width; or
5) Is a single parcel of residential or agricultural land of not less than 20 acres and
having a width of not less than 500 feet and its conveyance will not result in the division of land
into two or more parcels, either of which is less than 20 acres in area and 500 feet in width.
C) Effect ofapproval. For one year following preliminary plat approval and two years
following final plat approval, unless the developer and the city agree otherwise, no amendment
to the comprehensive plan, Zoning Code or city code shall apply to or affect the use,
development density, lot size, lot layout or dedication or platting required or permitted by the
approved application.
D) Planned unit developments. Required conformance with the regulations established
within this chapter shall not be interpreted as limiting the City Council' s authority to allow
flexibility as part of a planned unit development approved in accordance with the provisions of
152.420 through 152.431 of the Zoning Code.
Prior Code, § 10- 1- 5) ( Ord. 573, passed 2- 17- 2004) Penalty, see § 10. 99
151. 06 SKETCH PLAN.
A) In general. In order to insure that the developer is informed of the procedural
requirements and minimum standards of this chapter and the requirements or limitations imposed
by other city code provisions or plans, the developer shall present a sketch plan to the city for
Page 6 of 27
review prior to submittal of a preliminary plat. Review of the sketch plan further provides city
staff the opportunity to determine whether the proposed subdivision is premature, based upon
criteria established in § 151. 09.
B) Planning Commission review. At the request of an developer and at the discretion of
Zoning Administrator, the subdivision sketch plan may be forwarded to the Planning
Commission for informal discussion. The submittal shall not constitute formal filing of a plan
with the city, but rather shall allow for a non-binding review of the proposal to ensure
compliance with design standards and to identify possible modifications necessary to secure
approval.
C) Required information. To facilitate review by city staff and/ or the Planning
Commission, the sketch plan shall include the following minimum information:
1) Plat boundary;
2) North arrow;
3) Scale;
4) Street layout on and adjacent to plat;
5) Designation of land use and current or proposed zoning;
6) Significant topographical or physical features, including wetland boundaries and
vegetated areas;
7) General lot locations and layout; and
8) Potential park or ponding sites.
Prior Code, § 10- 1- 6) ( Ord. 573, passed 2- 17- 2004) Penalty, see § 10. 99
151. 07 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
A) Purpose ofpreliminary plat. Preliminary plats are intended to illustrate proposed
subdivision of properties within the city. The approval shall be required for all subdivisions of
land not specifically exempted elsewhere in this chapter.
B) Application for preliminary plat. Any person having a legal or equitable interest in a
property may file an application for a preliminary plat. An application for a preliminary plat
shall be filed on an approved form and shall be accompanied by the following:
1) Eight full-sized sets and one set of 11- inch by 17- inch reductions of the preliminary
plat and accompanying plans. The plans shall be executed by a qualified land planner or
registered land surveyor or engineer;
Page 7 of 27
2) Fees as established by ordinance;
3) Abstractor' s certificate of property owners within 350 feet; and
4) Exact legal description of the property.
C) Review procedures. General review and application procedures shall be in accordance
with the provisions described in § 152.027 of the city' s Zoning Code, except that the required
time frame for city action shall be as specified in division (D) below.
D) Hearing on application for preliminary plat. The Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing on each complete application for preliminary plat approval, as provided in
152.028 of the city' s Zoning Code.
E) Action by City Council on preliminary plat. The City Council shall make the final
decision regarding all applications for preliminary plat approval, with approval requiring a
majority vote. If approved, the design is thereby accepted as the basis for preparation of a final
plat in accordance with § 151. 08. If disapproved, the City Council shall set forth findings for the
disapproval in its proceedings and shall transmit them to the applicant. The City Council shall
approve or deny the preliminary plat within the time period established by state law.
F) Requiredfindings for preliminary plat. The Planning Commission and City Council
shall make each of the following findings before granting preliminary plat approval.
1) The proposed preliminary plat conforms to the requirements of this chapter and the
applicable zoning district regulations.
2) The proposed subdivision is consistent with the city' s comprehensive plan and any
other adopted land use studies and is compatible with the platting or approved preliminary plat
on adjoining lands.
3) The physical characteristics of the site, including but not limited to topography,
vegetation, wetlands, susceptibility to erosion and siltation, susceptibility to flooding, water
storage and retention, are so that the site is suitable for the type of development or use
contemplated.
4) The design or improvement of the proposed subdivision complies with applicable
plans of the county and the state.
5) The design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not likely to cause
environmental damage or health problems.
6) The completion of the proposed development of the subdivision can be completed
in a timely manner so as not to cause an undue economic burden upon the city for maintenance,
repayment of bonds or similar burden.
Page 8 of 27
G) Expiration ofpreliminary plat. An approved preliminary plat shall be valid for a period
not to exceed one year from the date of approval by the City Council. In the event that a final
plat is not submitted within the time, the preliminary plat will become void unless an extension is
requested in writing by the developer and for good cause granted by the City Council.
H) Required information and contents. The preliminary plat, at a minimum, shall contain
the information identified below unless specifically waived by the Zoning Administrator prior to
submittal:
1) Proposed name of subdivision, with the name not to duplicate or too closely
resemble the name of an existing subdivision located within the county;
2) Location by section, township, range or by other legal description;
3) Vicinity sketch, at a legible scale, illustrating the relation of the plat to its
surroundings;
4) Names and addresses of all persons having property interest, the developer,
designer and surveyor together with his or her registration number;
5) Graphic scale of plat, not less than one inch to 100 feet;
6) Date of preparation and north point;
7) Location of boundary lines in relation to known section, quarter- section or
quarter-quarter section lines and total acreage of proposed plat, clearly indicated;
8) Existing zoning classifications for land within and abutting the subdivision and any
proposed zoning changes associated with the proposed plat;
9) Location, widths and names of all existing or previously platted streets or other
public ways, showing type, width and condition of improvements, if any, railroad and utility
rights- of-way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, power
transmission poles and lines, easements and section and corporate lines within the tract and to a
distance of 200 feet beyond the tract;
10) Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground
facilities within the tract and to a distance of 200 feet beyond the tract. The data as grades, invert
elevations and locations of catch basins, manholes and hydrants shall also be shown;
11) Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land, within 200 feet
beyond the tract, identified by name and ownership, including all contiguous land owned or
controlled by the developer;
12) Wetland location, type and number as designated within the city' s comprehensive
Page 9 of 27
wetland protection and management plan, along with depiction of the required buffer;
13) Topographic data of the site and area within 200 feet, including contours at vertical
intervals of not more than two feet. Watercourses, flood plain areas, significant slopes and other
significant natural features shall also be shown;
14) Layout of proposed streets showing the right- of-way widths, centerline gradients,
typical cross- sections and proposed names of streets;
15) A grading plan to indicate the approximate gradients of streets and lots, proposed
grading and drainage of the site and the anticipated garage floor or basement elevations of all
structures;
16) Preliminary plans for surface water management and erosion control;
17) Locations and widths of proposed alleys and pedestrian ways;
18) Locations and size of proposed sewer lines and water mains;
19) Location, dimension and purpose of all easements;
20) Layout, numbers, lot areas and preliminary dimensions of lots and blocks,
including illustration of proposed house pads and driveway locations;
21) Minimum front and side street building setback lines;
22) When lots are located on a curve, the width of the lot at the building setback line;
and
23) Areas, other than streets, alleys, pedestrian ways and utility easements, intended to
be dedicated or reserved for public use, including the size of the area or areas in acres.
I) Supplemental information. Any or all of the supplementary information requirements
listed below shall be submitted when deemed necessary by city staff, consultants, advisory
bodies or the City Council:
1) Proposed protective covenants or restrictions;
2) A plat overlay on an aerial photo, illustrating the relationship of the proposed
subdivision to the surrounding area;
3) An accurate soil survey of the subdivision prepared by a qualified person;
4) A tree preservation plan as required under Chapter 102 of this code;
5) If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning plan for the areas,
Page 10 of 27
including dimensions. The proposed zoning plan shall be for information only and shall not vest
any rights in the developer;
6) Where the developer owns property adjacent to that which is being proposed for the
subdivision, it shall be required that the developer submit a sketch plan of the remainder of the
property so as to show the possible relationships between the proposed subdivision and the future
subdivision. In any event, all subdivisions shall be required to relate well with existing or
potential adjacent subdivisions;
7) Where structures are to be placed on large or excessively deep lots that are subject
to potential replat, the preliminary plat shall indicate a logical way in which the lots could
possibly be resubdivided in the future;
8) When the city has agreed to install improvements in a development, the developer
may be required to furnish a financial statement satisfactory to the city indicating the developer' s
ability to develop the plat; and/ or
9) Any other information as may be required in writing.
Prior Code, § 10- 1- 7) ( Ord. 573, passed 2- 17- 2004; Ord. 617, passed 11- 20- 2006; Ord. 718,
passed 05- 20-2013) Penalty, see § 10. 99
151. 08 FINAL PLAT.
A) Purpose offinal plat. A final plat is a drawing representing the proposed subdivision of
land within the city and serves as the document for recording purposes, as required by the
County Recorder' s office. Once a preliminary plat has been approved by the City Council, the
developer may submit a request for final plat approval. In certain cases, the city may allow a
final plat to be submitted concurrent with a request for preliminary plat approval.
B) Application forfinal plat. Any person having a legal or equitable interest in a property
may file an application for a final plat. An application for a final plat shall be filed on an
approved form and shall be accompanied by the following:
1) Eight full-sized sets and one set of 11- inch by 17- inch reductions of the final plat
and accompanying engineering plans. The plans shall be executed by a qualified land planner or
registered land surveyor or engineer;
2) A current abstract of title, registered property abstract or title insurance policy for
the property;
3) Fees as established by ordinance; and
4) The developer shall also be required to submit a copy of the plat to the county
surveyor for purposes of mathematical checking and compliance with state and county law.
C) Review procedures. General review and application procedures shall be in accordance
Page 11 of 27
with the provisions described in § 152.027 of the city' s Zoning Code.
D) Planning Commission review. The Planning Commission shall review each complete
application for final plat approval and submit their recommendation to the City Council.
E) Action by City Council onfinal plat. The City Council shall make the final decision
regarding all applications for final plat. The City Council shall approve or deny the final plat
within the time period established by state law with or without Planning Commission action.
F) Platting additions. Prior to granting final plat approval, the City Council may permit or
require the plat to be divided into two or more additions or may impose conditions upon the filing
of the additions as it may deem necessary to ensure the orderly development of the plat. The city
may also require the developer to plat all areas not developed at the time of platting the first
addition into outlots and require that all streets therein be dedicated at the time the final plat is
approved for the first addition in order to ensure continuity of a public street system.
G) Requiredfindings forfinalplat. The Planning Commission and City Council shall make
each of the following findings before granting final plat approval.
1) The final plat substantially conforms to the approved preliminary plat.
2) The plat conforms to all applicable requirements of this chapter, subject only to
approved rule exceptions.
3) All submission requirements have been satisfied.
H) Required information and contents. The final plat, at a minimum, shall contain the
information identified below unless specifically waived by the Zoning Administrator prior to
submittal:
1) Name of subdivision, with the name not to duplicate or too closely resemble the
name of an existing subdivision located within the county;
2) Graphic scale of plat, not less than one inch to 100 feet;
3) Date of preparation and north point;
4) Location by section, township, range, county and state, and including descriptive
boundaries of the subdivision, based on an accurate traverse, giving angular and linear
dimensions that must mathematically close;
5) The exact location of existing and proposed monuments shown in reference to
existing official monuments on the nearest established street lines, including true angles and
distances to the reference points or monuments;
6) Location of lots, streets, public highways, alleys, parks and other features, with
Page 12 of 27
accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, with the length of radii and/ or arcs of all curves,
and with all other information necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground;
7) An identification system for all lots and blocks;
8) The exact locations, widths and names of all streets to be dedicated;
9) Location and width of all easements to be dedicated;
10) Certification by registered land surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a
survey made by him or her and that monuments and markers shown thereon exist as located and
that all dimensional and geodetic details are correct;
11) Certification showing that all taxes currently due on the property to be subdivided
have been paid in full;
12) Notarized certification by owner and mortgage holder of record of the adoption of
the plat and the dedication of streets and other public areas;
13) Engineering plans illustrating compliance with design standards established in this
chapter and all pertinent city specifications; and
14) A developer' s agreement, drafted by city staff, for consideration by the City Council
when taking action on the final plat.
I) Signing of the plat. The following signatures shall be recorded upon the final plat:
1) The signatures of the Chairperson of the Planning Commission, or in his or her
absence, the Vice-Chairperson or secretary, attesting to the date upon which the Planning
Commission made a recommendation on the preliminary plat after a public hearing;
2) The signature of the Mayor, or in his or her absence, the acting Mayor, attesting to
the date upon which the City Council approved the final plat; and
3) The signature of the City Administrator, or in his or her absence, the acting City
Administrator, and seal of the city attesting to the above referenced actions by the city and valid
signatures.
J) Release ofplatfor recording. The final plat shall not be released by the City Clerk for
recording with the County Recorder' s office until the following has been completed:
1) The recording of signatures upon the final plat as specified in division (I) above;
2) The recording of signatures upon the developer' s agreement;
3) The submittal of necessary financial guarantees and development fees to the city;
Page 13 of 27
4) A copy of the final plat in digital format, compatible with the county coordinate
system; and
5) The provision of easements or deeds as may be required by the city for trailways,
ponding, parks, utilities or similar purposes in a form prescribed by the City Attorney.
K) Recording offinal plats. Upon approval of the final plat, it shall be the responsibility of
the developer to file the plat with the Scott County Recorder' s office within 90 days after the
date of
approval. If the plat is not filed within the specified time, the City Council may, upon ten days
written notice to the developer, consider a resolution revoking the approval. Upon recording, the
developer shall furnish the City Clerk with one Mylar reproducible, one paper print and one copy
of the final plat in digital format.
Prior Code, § 10- 1- 8) ( Ord. 573, passed 2- 17- 2004; Ord. 617, passed 11- 20-2006) Penalty, see
10. 99
151. 09 PREMATURE SUBDIVISION.
Any preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision deemed premature for development shall be
denied by the City Council. A subdivision may be deemed premature should any of the
conditions which follow be shown to exist.
A) Lack ofadequate drainage. A condition of inadequate drainage shall be deemed to
exist if surface or subsurface water retention and runoff is so that it constitutes a danger to the
structural security of the proposed structures, the proposed subdivision will cause damage from
erosion and siltation on downhill or downstream land or waters, or the proposed site grading and
development will cause harmful and irreparable damage from erosion and siltation on
downstream land or waters.
B) Lack ofadequate roads or highways to serve the subdivision. A proposed subdivision
shall be deemed to lack adequate roads or highways to serve the subdivision when roads which
serve the proposed subdivision are of a width, grade, stability, vertical and horizontal alignment,
site distance and surface condition that an increase in traffic volume generated by the proposed
subdivision would create a hazard to public safety and general welfare, or seriously aggravate an
already hazardous condition.
C) Lack ofmunicipal sanitary sewer and water availability. A proposed subdivision shall
be deemed premature if the extension of municipal sanitary sewer or water facilities is not
feasible or is not proposed as part of subdivision improvements or if existing facilities are
inadequate to support the subdivision if developed to its maximum permissible density.
D) Inconsistency with comprehensive plan. The proposed subdivision is inconsistent with
the purposes, objectives and recommendations of the duly adopted comprehensive plan of the
Page 14 of 27
city, as may be amended.
E) City service capacity. A proposed subdivision shall be determined to lack necessary
city service capacity when services such as recreational facilities, police and fire protection and
other city services, which must be provided at public expense, cannot reasonably be provided for
within the next two years.
F) Inconsistency with capital improvementplans. A proposed subdivision shall be deemed
inconsistent with capital improvement plans when improvements and/ or services necessary to
accommodate the proposed subdivision have not been programmed in the city or other regional
capital improvement plans. The City Council may waive this criterion when it can be
demonstrated that a revision to capital improvement programs can be accommodated.
Prior Code, § 10- 1- 9) ( Ord. 573, passed 2- 17- 2004; Ord. 718, passed 5- 20-2013) Penalty, see §
10. 99
151. 10 ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISIONS/ CONSOLIDATIONS.
A) Purpose. This section is established to provide for administrative approval of
subdivisions that meet specified criteria and for the waiver of standard platting requirements
specified elsewhere in this chapter. It is intended largely to facilitate the further division of
previously platted lots, the combination of previously platted lots into fewer lots, or for the
adjustment of a lot line by relocation of a common boundary.
B) Application for administrative subdivision. Any person having a legal or equitable
interest in a property may file an application for administrative subdivision. An application for
minor subdivision shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an approved form and shall be
accompanied by an accurate boundary survey and legal description of the parent parcel and a
survey and legal description identifying the resulting parcels after subdivision.
C) Review ofadministrative subdivision. The Zoning Administrator shall review all
applications for administrative subdivision to determine compliance with the standards identified
in this section and all other pertinent requirements of this chapter. Upon written approval of the
request, the developer shall be responsible for filing the subdivision survey with the County
Recorder' s office. Should the request be denied, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the
developer, in writing, of the reasons for the denial. Any appeal of city staff s decision shall be
made to the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedures specified in § 152.029( A).
D) Findings requiredfor approval. In order for the Zoning Administrator to grant
approval for a proposed administrative subdivision, each of the provisions shown below must be
met.
1) The proposed subdivision of land will not result in more than two lots.
2) All necessary utility and drainage easements are provided for.
Page 15 of 27
3) All lots to be created by the subdivision conform to lot area and width requirements
established for the zoning district in which the property is located.
4) The subdivision does not require dedication of public right- of-way for the purpose
of gaining access to the property.
5) The property has not been divided through the provisions of this section within the
previous five years.
6) The subdivision meets all design standards as specified elsewhere in this chapter.
E) Conditions ofapproval. The city may impose the conditions on any proposed
administrative subdivision that are deemed reasonable and necessary to protect the public interest
and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter including, but not limited to, the
following:
1) The developer shall provide required utility and drainage easements for all newly
created lots and be responsible for the cost of filing and recording written easements with the
County Recorder' s office; and
2) The developer shall pay parkland dedication fees for each lot created beyond the
original number of lots existing prior to subdivision, except when the fees have been applied to
the property as part of a previous subdivision.
Prior Code, § 10- 1- 10) ( Ord. 573, passed 2- 17- 2004) Penalty, see § 10. 99
151. 11 DESIGN STANDARDS.
A) In general. Design standards shall assure that the layout of the subdivision harmonizes
with existing plans affecting the development and its surroundings and shall be in conformity
with the city' s development objectives for the entire area. All sketch plans and preliminary and
final plats shall provide as a minimum the following data and shall conform to the standards set
forth in this section, except where deviations are approved by the City Council or where a
specific variance is granted in accordance with the provisions of§ 151. 15( B).
B) Street design. The following standards are to be followed unless the City Council shall
permit a variance or deviation due to unusual circumstances caused by topography, building
placement or other factors.
1) The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall
conform to the comprehensive plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and
planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety and in their
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by the streets.
2) Where not specifically illustrated in the comprehensive plan, the arrangement of
streets in the subdivision shall either:
Page 16 of 27
a) Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal
streets in surrounding areas; or
b) Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the City
Council to meet a particular situation where topography or other conditions make continuance or
conformance to existing streets impractical.
3) Local streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be
discouraged and so that they will not tend to function as collector streets.
4) ( a) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street,
the City Council may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen plantings
contained in a non- access reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service
alleys or other treatment
as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential property and to afford separation of
through and local traffic.
b) There shall be no direct vehicular access from residential lots to arterial streets
and the direct access to collector streets shall be avoided.
5) Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their
control is placed under specific conditions approved by the City Council.
6) Street intersections with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided.
7) A tangent at least 100 feet in length shall be introduced between curves of reverse
direction on arterial major and collector streets and 50 feet on lesser streets.
8) When connecting street lines of the same street deflect from each other at any one
point by more than ten degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to
ensure a sight distance of not less than 150 feet for minor arterials and collector streets and of the
greater radii as the City Engineer shall determine for special cases.
9) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect, as nearly as possible, at right angles and
no street shall intersect any other street at less than 60 degrees.
10) Curb lines at street intersections shall be rounded at a radius of not less than 15
feet.
11) ( a) Right- of-way and pavement widths, grades and load bearing capacity shall be
as shown in the following chart.
b) It is noted that the City Council may require additional right- of-way and street
width, above the minimum standards, in consideration of factors such as area land use density
patterns, on- street parking needs and other similar factors.
Page 17 of 27
Street Type Minimum Minimum Maximum Minimum
Right-of-Way Pavement Width Grade Strength
Width
Arterial 150 feet 70 feet 4% 9 tons
Major collector 80 feet 48 feet 6% 9 tons
Minor collector 70 feet 36 feet 6% 7 tons
Local 60 feet 28 feet 6% 7 tons
Frontage 60 feet 28 feet 6% 7 tons
12) No street grade shall be less than 0. 5%. At intersections, the street grade shall not
exceed 2% for the first 100 feet approaching the intersection.
13) Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable
development of the subdivision in conformance with the other requirements of these regulations
and where the City Council finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the remaining
half when the adjoining property is subdivided. In the event, access to the half street shall be
prohibited until the time that the adjoining property is subdivided.
14) Cul-de- sacs shall only be developed where justified by irregular topography or
where adjacent to limited access streets and shall meet the following standards:
a) The maximum length shall not exceed 650 feet, as measured from the
centerline of the connecting street to the center of the cul-de- sac.
b) The closed end shall include a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter
of at least 100 feet and street property line diameter of at least 120 feet.
c) Islands shall be required in all residential subdivisions except in eyebrows or
half cul-de- sacs. Policy regarding maintenance of cul-de- sac islands shall be as adopted, and
from time to time amended, by the City Council.
d) The City Engineer shall establish standard plates and design criteria for
cul-de- sacs and islands.
15) Proposed streets obviously in alignment with existing and named streets shall bear
the names of the existing streets. All streets shall be named in accordance with the city system
as established by ordinance.
Page 18 of 27
16) No plat containing proposed private streets shall be approved by the Planning
Commission unless the proposal to utilize private streets has been previously approved by the
City Council and adequate assurances are provided for maintenance of the streets. Private streets
shall be designed and constructed as approved by the City Engineer, and shall be designated as a
separate tract or tracts under common ownership on the plat and inspected by the city. Minimum
street width shall be 28 feet except in cases where the City Council has approved a narrower
street as part of a planned unit development. In addition, public access easements shall be
dedicated to assure adequate access to all adjacent property owners and the general public being
served by the private street for government agencies and public utilities consistent with access
provided elsewhere by public streets.
17) Where a proposed plat fronts or is adjacent to an arterial or collector roadway as
designated by the comprehensive plan, minimum spacing between access points to the
thoroughfares shall be as follows except where impractical or impossible due to existing property
divisions or topography.
Street Type
Distance
Principal arterial 1/ 2- mile (2, 640 feet)
Minor arterial ( T.H. 13, C.R. 27 & 42) 1/ 4- mile ( 1, 320 feet)
Collectors 1/ 16- mile (330 feet)
18) Alleys shall be generally be prohibited in residential areas, except within the
Hamilton Overlay District as defined within §§ 152.380 through 152.389 of the city' s Zoning
Code, unless special permission is granted by the City Council for their provision.
C) Pedestrian walkways. The City Council may require the provision of sidewalks, trails or
pathways in proximity to public service areas such as parks, schools, shopping facilities or in
other appropriate locations of a similar nature. All facilities shall conform to city design
standards and ADA guidelines and shall be constructed at the sole expense of the developer.
1) The location of all trails and sidewalks shall conform to the park and trail corridor
master plan, as outlined in the comprehensive plan, and shall be considered in their relation to
existing and planned walkways, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety
and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land.
2) Where not specifically illustrated in the comprehensive plan, or similar
city-approved trail/sidewalk plan, the arrangement of walkways in the subdivision shall either:
a) Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing walkways in
surrounding areas; or
Page 19 of 27
b) Conform to a specific pedestrian plan for the neighborhood approved or
adopted by the City Council to meet a particular situation.
D) Easements.
1) Drainage and utility easements at least ten feet wide, centered on front, rear and side
lot lines and ten feet wide abutting street right- of-way shall be provided and shall be dedicated by
appropriate language. The easements shall further connect with easements established on
adjoining properties to ensure continuity. If necessary for the extension of water or sewer lines or
similar utilities, easements of greater width may be required along lot lines or across lots.
2) Where a subdivision is traversed by a stormwater management area, watercourse,
wetland, drainage way, channel or stream ( collectively " waterway"), there shall be provided a
stormwater easement, conservation easement, drainage right-of-way or park dedication,
conforming substantially with the lines of the waterway, and with the further width or
construction the city determines to be necessary for the purposes of this chapter. The easements
shall be laid out and located in a manner as to provide
reasonable access for maintenance and dredging purposes without undue infringement upon the
property over which access is taken.
3) Trails or pedestrian ways shall be shown as trailways on the final plat or as separate
easements as the city may direct.
4) All easements shall be kept free of structures, landscaping and improvements that
interfere with the operation, maintenance, repair and/ or intended use of the easement.
E) Block dimensions.
1) The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
a) Provisions of adequate building sites suitable to the needs of the type of use
contemplated;
b) Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions;
c) Needs for convenient access, circulation control and safety of street traffic; and
d) Limitations and opportunities of topography.
2) Block lengths shall not exceed 1, 320 feet nor be less than 400 feet.
F) Lot standards.
1) The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and the minimum building setback
lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and
use contemplated and in accordance with the Zoning Code, except where deviations are
Page 20 of 27
approved by the City Council.
2) All lots shall be required to have direct access to a public street, except where
specifically allowed as part of a planned unit development in accordance with §§ 152.420
through 152.431 of the Zoning Code or in the following instances.
a) The lot is designated as an outlot intended for use as public open space or for
ponding purposes and will be accessible by easement.
b) The lot is located within an area subject to an approved urban overlay plan and
its subdivision will not hinder future development in accordance with the plan. In that case, an
access easement must be provided until a public street is constructed to serve the property.
3) Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to the right-of-way line of the
abutting street.
4) Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential
to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries, or to overcome specific
disadvantages of topography and orientation.
5) Corner lots shall be platted at least 10% wider than the minimum lot width required
unless this requirement results in corner lot widths in excess of 100 feet, in which case the
requirement shall not apply.
6) Lot remnants that are below the minimum lot size must be added to adjacent or
surrounding lots rather than be allowed to remain as an unusable outlot or parcel, unless the
owner can show plans for the future use of the remnant.
G) Building locations.
1) Buildings shall be located on each lot in conformance with the minimum required
setbacks established for the zoning district in which the parcel is located or to the setbacks as
specifically allowed under a planned unit development.
2) Buildings shall not be permitted on outlots, except where the lot is replatted for the
purpose of creating additional buildable lots.
3) Buildings shall not be permitted on publicly-dedicated easements.
4) In the subdividing of any land which, through the establishment of new lot lines,
has the effect of splitting a lot with an existing structure, the following criteria shall be satisfied:
a) Each lot, with its portion of the original structure, shall have a separate sanitary
sewer and water service with curb box; and
b) Each portion of the original structure to be associated with a separate lot shall
Page 21 of 27
meet the applicable building codes for occupancy separation as stipulated by the State Building
Code.
H) Naturalfeatures. In the subdivision of land, due regard shall be shown to preserve all
natural features that add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development and which may
alter normal lot platting. All subdivisions shall further meet the flood plain standards described
in §§ 152.355 through 152. 366 of the Zoning Code, the applicable standards identified in §§
152.400 through 152.408 of the Zoning Code pertaining to shoreland, wetland and bluff overlay
districts, and the provisions of the Tree Preservation Chapter described in Chapter 102 of the city
code.
Prior Code, § 10- 1- 11) ( Ord. 573, passed 2- 17- 2004) Penalty, see § 10. 99
151. 12 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
The developer shall be required to provide the following improvements for subdivisions
unless the city elects to do so under terms of the developer' s agreement. Unless otherwise stated,
all of the required improvements shall be installed in accordance with the engineering policy,
standards and specifications that have been or may in the future be adopted by the City Council.
Where standards and specifications have not been adopted, the improvements shall be made in
accordance with good engineering practices.
A) Monuments. Monuments shall be placed at all block and lot corners, angle points,
points of curves in streets and at intermediate points as shall be required by the city. The
monuments shall be of a material, size and length as may be approved by the city. It shall be the
developer' s responsibility to ensure that monuments are maintained in good order during
construction and development.
B) Streets.
1) Streets shall be graded to the full width of the right- of-way in accordance with
street grades submitted to and approved by the City Engineer. Grading shall be complete prior to
installation of applicable underground utilities, either private or public in nature. Gravel base
construction shall be undertaken after installation of underground utilities in those instances
where utilities shall be required as part of the project.
2) Following the City Engineer' s recommendation and City Council' s approval of
street grading and after utility installation, in those projects then requiring such, street surfaces
shall be brought up to standards and provided with curbs and gutters in accordance with the latest
standards and specifications as approved by the City Council. Surmountable curbs may be used
in residential areas and Type B curbing will be used in established areas where driveway
locations are established by approved plan.
3) Sodding shall be required in all street boulevard areas and on lot areas adjacent to
collector and arterial streets from a distance of 25 feet from street right-of-way or 50% of the
rear yard, whichever is greater.
Page 22 of 27
4) The developer shall be responsible for the cost of city-installed street signs.
5) All developments increase the need for additional collector streets to provide access
to their development, and therefore are responsible for construction of, or contribution toward
construction of collector streets in the city. The city has estimated the increased need for
collector streets for each residential, commercial and industrial unit. Each developer shall pay an
assessment for the increased costs of added width or structure required for collector streets less
credit for any collector streets constructed by the developer pursuant to city policy and
resolution.
C) Sanitary sewer systems.
1) When connection to the municipal sanitary sewer system is available, the
connection shall be made and sanitary sewer facilities adequate to serve the subdivision shall be
installed. Minimum size sanitary sewer in any street or easement shall be eight inches in
diameter. The developer must pay the total cost of sanitary sewer through ten inches diameter
size if required by the City Engineer.
2) Trunk sanitary sewer facilities larger than ten inches diameter- size pipe, when
required, may at the discretion of the City Council be assessed over the area benefitted that may
include land outside of the subdivision under consideration or construction. Sanitary sewers and
services may be of PVC construction.
D) Water systems.
1) When connection to the municipal water supply system is available, the connection
shall be made and water distribution facilities adequate to serve the subdivision including pipe,
fittings, hydrants and valves shall be installed. Minimum size watermain in any street shall be
eight inches in diameter, with the developer responsible for the cost of the installation.
2) Trunk water supply facilities, larger than eight inches in diameter, when required,
may in the discretion of the City Council be assessed over the area benefitted that may include
land outside of the subdivision under construction or consideration.
3) Single- family dwellings shall have a minimum one- inch diameter water service.
E) Drainage and erosion control. Storm sewer and/ or other surface drainage facilities
shall be installed as determined to be necessary by the City Engineer for the proper drainage of
surface waters. All properties shall be liable for storm drainage assessment in accordance with
the criteria, policies and square footage rate established by the City Council. In areas susceptible
to erosion hazard or sedimentation damage such as drainage swales and steep slopes, sod, riprap
or other erosion control measures shall be required subject to City Engineer' s review and
approval.
Page 23 of 27
F) Sidewalks and driveways. Sidewalks, where provided or required, shall be at least five
feet in width, with greater widths as may be required by the City Council. Driveways shall be
constructed from the curb and gutter or pavement edge to the property line or property side of the
sidewalk. In cases where driveways are constructed after curbing and sidewalk are in place, the
sidewalk shall be reconstructed in accordance with driveway specifications for the width of the
driveway. Concrete driveway entrances, as approved by the city, shall be constructed. All
platted lots on paved streets shall provide driveways ( either asphalt or concrete) within one year
from the date the building permit is issued.
G) Streetlights. Any person, firm, corporation, subdivider, developer or owner who is
responsible for any new public street construction within the city shall also be responsible for the
procurement and installation of street lighting. Street lighting shall be installed as approved by
the City Engineer.
H) Financing. Prior to final plat approval by the City Council, the subdivider shall enter
into a developer' s agreement, as prepared by the City Engineer, and submit a letter of credit or
cash escrow agreement to ensure the following.
1) The developer shall pay for all required improvements including the subdivision' s
share of costs for trunk facilities, stormwater drainage, collector streets and any other
infrastructure reasonably related to the service of the subdivision.
2) All required improvements shall be completed within two years after
commencement of any construction in the subdivision, or within the portion thereof that may be
approved by the City Council for development at any time, provided however, that the City
Council for good cause may extend the period of time in which the improvements must be
completed. The City Council may elect to install any of the required improvements under the
terms of a letter of credit or cash escrow agreement.
3) If the required improvements are not completed within the two years or the
extended period, all amounts held under the escrow agreement or letter of credit shall be turned
over and delivered to the city and applied to the cost of the required improvements under the
terms of a cash escrow agreement. Any balance remaining after the improvements have been
made shall be returned to the owner or developer.
4) The letter of credit or cash escrow agreement shall be equal to the City Engineer' s
estimated cost of the required improvements. The city may, on a case by case basis and in its
sole discretion, permit a developer to submit a phased letter of credit or cash escrow in the
amount of the City Engineer' s estimated cost of the improvements in progress, instead of the cost
for the full improvements. The developer shall pay for all costs incurred by the city for review
and inspection including preparation and/ or review of plans and specifications by the City
Engineer, Zoning Administrator and City Attorney, as well as other costs of a similar nature.
Prior Code, § 10- 1- 12) ( Ord. 573, passed 2- 17- 2004; Ord. 747, passed 04- 20-2015) Penalty,
see § 10. 99
Page 24 of 27
151. 13 PARK DEDICATION.
A) Authority. In accordance with M.S. § 462.358, Subd. 2b, as it may be amended from
time to time, the city may require that a reasonable portion of any proposed subdivision be
dedicated to the public or preserved for conservation purposes or for public use as parks,
playgrounds, trails, wetlands or open space or that an equivalent cash amount be paid in lieu of
land dedication.
B) Land dedication. At the time of subdivision, the developer shall be required to dedicate
for public use as parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, trails or public open space, a suitable
tract of land containing 10% of the net developable area within the boundaries of the subdivision
for residential plats or 7% of the net developable area within the boundaries of the subdivision
for commercial and industrial plats.
C) Land suitability. Land to be dedicated shall be in a location and of a character
consistent with and suitable for meeting the needs identified by the comprehensive plan or other
pertinent study adopted by the City Council. In evaluating the adequacy of proposed park and
recreation areas, the city shall consider factors including size, shape, topography, geology,
hydrology, tree cover, access and location. Generally, land located within wetlands, flood plain
areas, drainage ways and pond areas shall not be accepted to meet dedication requirements,
except at the discretion of the City Council.
D) Terms of dedication. Dedication of land for public use shall be without restrictions or
reservations and shall be designated as an outlot on the plat. The developer shall be responsible
to grade the land to the contours shown on the approved preliminary plat and to leave the
dedicated land in a condition suitable to the city.
E) Payment in lieu of land. If, in the judgment of the City Council, the area proposed to be
dedicated is not desirable or necessary for public purposes due to location, size or any other
reason, the city may require, in lieu of land dedication, a payment for park proposes. The
amount shall be based on a per dwelling unit rate for residential uses and a per acre basis for
non-residential uses, as established by ordinance. Planned developments with mixed land uses
shall make cash and/ or land contributions based upon the percentage of land devoted to the
various uses.
F) Combined land and cash donations. The city may elect, at the discretion of the City
Council, to require a combination of cash and land dedication to satisfy the requirements of this
section. In these cases, the percentage of land dedicated shall reduce the required fee percentage
by an equivalent amount. ( Prior Code, § 10- 1- 13) ( Ord. 573, passed 2- 17- 2004) Penalty, see §
10. 99
151. 14 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
A) Grading prior to final plat. Subsequent to preliminary plat approval, the developer may
apply for a subdivision grading permit and, upon approval by the City Engineer and receipt of
Page 25 of 27
required security deposit, may commence construction to the grades and elevations required by
the approved preliminary plat. Approval of a subdivision grading permit shall not, however,
obligate the City Council in any manner to approve a final plat.
B) Building permits. Issuance of building permits within any subdivision shall be done in
accordance with the current building permit/ occupancy permit policy, as may be amended from
time to time.
C) Model homes. Model homes or dwelling units may be permitted in any residential
subdivision subject to the current building permit/ occupancy permit policy and the following
conditions.
1) The model home area shall be specifically identified as part of the final plat and
shall be located in a manner as to minimize conflict with construction access and traffic and to
ensure adequate parking for customers and emergency vehicle access.
2) The number of model homes shall generally be limited to one per project phase,
except as may be specifically approved by the City Council for larger projects.
3) The model home area shall exist until the project is 90% sold out or rented out,
whichever shall be sooner. At the end of the time period, the developer shall be required to
restore the area to a normal residential character.
4) The city may require a letter of credit or cash escrow to ensure restoration of a
model home area.
5) Signs in a model home area shall be subject to the standards set forth in §§ 152.460
through 152.476 of the Zoning Code.
Prior Code, § 10- 1- 14) ( Ord. 573, passed 2- 17- 2004; Ord. 747, passed 04- 20-2015) Penalty,
see § 10. 99
151. 15 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
A) Responsible official. It shall be the duty of the City Council to see that the provisions of
this chapter are properly enforced.
B) Variances. All requests to vary from the standards established within this chapter shall
be processed and reviewed in accordance with the provisions of§ 152. 033 of the Zoning Code.
C) Violation. Any persons violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $ 1, 000, or by imprisonment not exceeding
90 days, or both. Each day a violation is allowed to continue, it shall be construed as a separate
offense. Compliance with the terms of this chapter may be obtained by injunctive relief in
proceedings instituted by the city in a court of competent jurisdiction.
Page 26 of 27
D) Amendments. The provisions of this chapter as a whole or any portion of it may be
amended, changed or altered only by a favorable majority of the City Council after a public
hearing has been duly advertised and held by the Planning Commission.
E) Effective date. This chapter shall take effect and be in full force upon its passage and
publication.
Prior Code, § 10- 1- 15) ( Ord. 573, passed 2- 17- 2004) Penalty, see § 10. 9
Page 27 of 27
GENERALPROVISIONS
152.001 Title
152.002 Authority
152.003 Purpose
152.004 Scopeofregulations
152.005 Relationshiptoothercity, county, stateandfederalregulations
152.006 Essentialservices
152.007 Privateeasementsorprotectivecovenants
152.008 Severability
152.009 Rulesofconstruction
152.010 Usesnotprovidedforwithinzoningdistricts
152.011 Illustrations
152.012 Definitions
152.001 TITLE.
Thistitleshallbeknownandcitedasthe “ZoningCodeoftheCityofSavage, Minnesota”
andshallbereferredtohereinas “thistitle.”
PriorCode, § 9-1-1) ( Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001)
152.002AUTHORITY.
ThischapterisenactedpursuanttotheauthoritygrantedbytheMunicipalPlanningAct,
M.S. §§4 62.351through462.363, astheymaybeamendedfromtimetotime.
PriorCode, § 9-1-2) ( Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001)
152.003 PURPOSE.
Thebasicpurposeofthischapteristoensurepublichealth, safetyandgeneralwelfarein
accordancewiththeofficialcomprehensiveplanofthecityandwithadopteddevelopmentgoals,
policiesandproposalscontainedtherein. Towardthisend, thischaptershalldividethe
geographicareawithinthecorporatelimitsofthecityintodistrictsandshallestablishregulations
pertainingtotheuseandlocationofstructuresandtotheuseoflandwithinthedistricts. More
specifically, theregulationsshallbedesignedtoachievethefollowingobjectives:
A) Toprotectexistingurbandevelopmentfrompotentialnegativeeffectsofconflicting
uses, butalsotopermitbroaddevelopmentopportunitieswithinthesubstantialundeveloped
portionsofthecommunity;
B) Tofosterastrongandbalancedtaxbaseinresponsetomunicipalandschooldistrict
financialrequirements;
Page1of25
C) Toachieveanequitablebalancebetweentherateandintensityoflanddevelopmentand
thefinancialcapabilityofthecityandschooldistrictstoprovidenecessaryanddesirablepublic
facilitiesandservices;
D) Topreventexcessivepopulationdensitiesandovercrowdingofland;
E) Toprovideforthesafeandefficientcirculationofallmodesoftransportation, with
particularregardtotheavoidanceofcongestionwithinthepublicright-of-way;
F) Topreservethearea’ssubstantialnaturalamenitiessuchasrivers, lakes, bluffs, hills,
valleysandwoodland;
G) Topromoteavisuallypleasingenvironmentthroughoutthecommunitywithinurbanas
wellasruralareas, withincommercialandindustrialaswellaspublicandresidentialareas;
H) Toconservethevalueoflandandbuildings;
I) Topromoteorderlydevelopmentandtoregulatetheuseoflandfortrade, industry,
residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, soilconservation, watersupplyconservationand
conservationofshoreland;
J) Toprovideandprotectadequatelight, air, privacyandconvenienceofaccessto
property, andtosecurefromfire, floodandotherdangers;
K) Toprovideaccesstodirectsunlightforsolarenergysystemsasdefinedhereinandin
M.S. §2 16C.06,a sitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime;
L) Toprovidefortheadministrationofthischapterincludingpowersanddutiesofthe
administrativeofficersandbodies, proceduresandstandardsforlanduseapprovals, and
proceduresforenforcement; and
M) Inthecaseofsexually-orientedbusinesses, tominimizethesecondaryeffectsduetothe
operationofthebusinessesonthesurroundingresidentialandcommercialzones.
PriorCode, § 9-1-3) ( Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001)
152.004 SCOPEOFREGULATIONS.
Allusesoflandorstructures, subdivisionofland, structuralalterationsorrelocationof
existingbuildings, andenlargementsof, additionstoorintensificationofexistingusesshallbe
subjecttoallapplicableregulationsofthischapter. Theapplicationoftheprovisionsofthis
chaptershallbeheldtobeminimumrequirementsforthepromotionandprotectionofthepublic
health, safety, aesthetics, economicviabilityandgeneralwelfare. Thischapterisnotintendedto
abrogateorannulanyvariance, conditionalusepermit, plannedunitdevelopmentorother
zoningpermitlawfullyissuedbeforetheeffectivedateofthischapter.
PriorCode, § 9-1-4) ( Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001)
Page2of25
152.005 RELATIONSHIPTOOTHERCITY, COUNTY, STATEANDFEDERAL
REGULATIONS.
A) Compliancerequired. Inadditiontotherequirementsofthischapter, allusesand
developmentshallcomplywithallotherapplicablecity, county, stateandfederalregulations. If
aprovisionofthischapterconflictswithanyotherprovisionofthischapter, theSavageCity
Codeorwithanyotherprovisionoflaw, themorerestrictiveprovisionshallapply, exceptas
otherwiseprovided.
B) Referencestootherregulations. Allreferenceswithinthischaptertoothercity, county,
stateandfederalregulationsareforinformationalpurposesonlyanddonotconstituteacomplete
listoftheregulations. Thesereferencesdonotimplyanyresponsibilitybythecityfor
enforcementofcounty, stateorfederalregulations.
C) Currentversionsandcitations. Allreferencestoothercity, county, stateandfederal
regulationswithinthischapterareintendedtorefertothemostcurrentversionandcitationfor
thoseregulations. Ifthereferencesareinvalidduetorepealorrenumbering, thenewregulations
intendedtoreplacethosecited, regardlessofthecitation, shallgovernunlessotherwisespecified.
D) Comprehensiverevision. ThischapterisacomprehensiverevisiontoTitleIXofthecity
code. Anyactdone, offensecommitted, orrightsaccruingoraccrued, orliability, orpenalty
incurredorimposedpriortotheeffectivedateofthischapter (September22, 2001) isnot
affectedbyitsenactment.
PriorCode, § 9-1-5) ( Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001)
152.006 ESSENTIALSERVICES.
Essentialservicesshallbesubdividedintothefollowingtwoclassesforconsiderationunder
thischapter.
A) Publicessentialservices. Governmentally-operatedandownedessentialservices,
includingbutnotlimitedtosewerandwater, shallbepermittedasauthorizedandregulatedby
statelawandtitlesofthecity. Itistheintentionthattheseessentialservicesareexemptfromthe
applicationofthischapter.
B) Privateessentialservices. Privatelyownedandoperatedessentialservices (electric, gas,
communicationsandsimilarservices) aresubjecttoprovisionsofthischapter, unlessspecifically
exemptedbyaprovisionhereof. Theseessentialservicesarealsosubjecttoothertitlesofthecity
asapplicable. Above-groundstructuresforprivateessentialservicessuchassubstationsor
receivingandtransmittingtowers/antennasshallbeclassifiedasaconditionaluseinallzoning
districts. Theplacement, height, designandtypeofconstructionandbuildingmaterialofthe
structuresshallbesothatanypotentialnegativeeffectuponproximatepropertieswillbe
minimized. TheCityCouncilmayrequirecertainconditionsofapprovaltoensureenvironmental
Page3of25
compatibility.
PriorCode, § 9-1-6) ( Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001)
152.007 PRIVATEEASEMENTSORPROTECTIVECOVENANTS.
Thischapterisnotmeanttoinvalidateanyeasement, covenantorotherprivateagreement,
providedthatwheretheregulationsofthischapteraremorerestrictiveorimposehigher
standards, theregulationsofthischaptershallprevail.
PriorCode, § 9-1-7) ( Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001)
152.008 SEVERABILITY.
A) Severabilityoftext. Ifanyportionofthischapterisdeterminedtobeinvalidor
unconstitutionalbyacourtofcompetentjurisdiction, thatportionshallbedeemedseveredfrom
thischapterandthedeterminationshallnotaffectthevalidityoftheremainderofthechapter.
B) Severabilityofapplication. Iftheapplicationofanyprovisionofthischaptertoa
particularpropertyisdeterminedtobeinvalidorunconstitutionalbyacourtofcompetent
jurisdiction, thedeterminationshallnotaffecttheapplicationoftheprovisiontoanyother
property.
PriorCode, § 9-1-8) ( Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001)
152.009 RULESOFCONSTRUCTION.
Thelanguagesetforthinthetextofthischaptershallbeinterpretedinaccordancewiththe
followingrulesofconstruction.
A) Thesingularnumberincludestheplural, andthepluralthesingular.
B) Thepresenttenseincludesthepastandthefuturetenses, andthefuturethepresent.
C) Theword “shall” ismandatorywhiletheword “may” ispermissible.
D) Theword “person” includes, butisnotlimitedto, individuals, partnerships,
corporations, clubs, associations, andotherbusiness, social, religiousorcharitableentities.
E) Distanceshallbemeasuredinastraightline, fromlotlinetolotline, exceptas
otherwiseprovidedinthischapter.
PriorCode, § 9-1-9) ( Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001)
Page4of25
152.010 USESNOTPROVIDEDFORWITHINZONINGDISTRICTS.
A) Substantiallysimilaruses. Wheneveranapplicationcontainsausenotspecifically
includedinthischapter, theZoningAdministrator, afterreviewbytheDevelopmentReview
Committee, shallissueastatementofclarification, findingthattheuseeitherissubstantially
similarincharacterandimpacttoauseregulatedhereinorthattheuseisnotsufficientlysimilar
toanyotheruseregulatedinthischapter. Thestatementofclarificationshallincludethefindings
thatledtotheconclusionandshallbefiledintheofficeoftheZoningAdministrator. Iftheuseis
notsufficientlysimilartoanyotheruseregulatedinthischapter,
theuseshallbeprohibited.
B) Textamendment. TheCityCouncilorthePlanningCommission, ontheirowninitiative
oruponrequest, mayconductastudytodetermineifaprohibiteduseisacceptableandifso,
whatzoningdistrictwouldbemostappropriateandtheconditionsandstandardsrelatingto
developmentoftheuse. TheCityCouncil, PlanningCommissionorpropertyowner, if
appropriate, shallinitiateanamendmenttothischapter, inaccordancewith § 152.030, toprovide
fortheparticularuseunderconsiderationorshallfindthattheuseisnotcompatiblefor
developmentwithinthecity.
PriorCode, § 9-1-10) (Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001)
152.011 ILLUSTRATIONS.
Illustrationsinthischapterareprovidedforthepurposeofclarifying, describingor
providingexamples. Theillustrationsarenottoscale, anddonotreplace, limitorexpandthe
meaningofthetext.
PriorCode, § 9-1-11) (Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001)
152.012 DEFINITIONS.
Forthepurposeofthischapter, thefollowingdefinitionsshallapplyunlessthecontext
clearlyindicatesorrequiresadifferentmeaning. Allwordsandphrasesnotdefinedshallhave
theircommonmeaning.
AGRICULTURALUSE. Theuseoflandwherethelandisdevotedtotheproductionof
plants, animalsorhorticulturalproducts, includingbutnotlimitedto: forages, grainsandfeed
crops; dairyanimalsanddairyproducts; poultryandpoultryproducts; beefcattle, sheep, swine
andhorses; beesandapiaryproducts; treesandforestproducts; fruits, nutsandberries;
vegetables; ornursery, floral, ornamentalandgreenhouseproducts. AGRICULTURALUSE
shallnotincludeuseoflandforrecreationalpurposes, suburbanresidentialacreages, ruralhome
sitesorfarmhomesitesandyardplotswhoseprimaryfunctionisforresidentialorrecreational
purposeseventhoughthepropertiesmayproduceormaintainsomeofthoseplantsoranimals
listedintheforegoingdefinition.
ALKALINEHYDROLYSIS. Thereductionofadeadhumanbodytoessentialelements
Page5of25
throughawater-baseddissolutionprocessusingalkalinechemicals, heat, agitation, andpressure
toacceleratenaturalcomposition; theprocessingofthehydrolyzedremainsafterremovalfrom
thealkalinehydrolysisvessel; placementoftheprocessedremainsinahydrolyzedremains
container; andreleaseofthehydrolyzedremainstoanappropriateparty. Alkalinehydrolysisisa
formoffinaldisposition
ALLEY. Aserviceroadwaywithinaright-of-wayprovidingasecondarymeansofmotor
vehicleaccesstoabuttingpropertyandnotintendedforgeneraltrafficcirculation.
ANTENNA. Anystructureordeviceusedforthepurposeofcollectingortransmitting
electromagneticwaves, includingbutnotlimitedtodirectionalantennassuchaspanels,
microwavedishes, satellitedishesandomni-directionalantennas, suchaswhipantennas.
APARTMENT. Aroomorsuiteofroomslocatedinaone- ortwo-familystructureora
multiple-familydwelling, whichshallincludeabathandkitchenaccommodations, intendedor
designedforuseasanindependentresidencebyasinglefamilyorbyindividuals.
APPLICANT. Anypersonwhowishestoobtainabuildingpermit, zoningorsubdivision
approval.
AS-GRADED. Theextentofsurfaceconditionsoncompletionofgrading.
AUTOMOBILECONVENIENCEFACILITY. Anestablishmentwheretheprincipaluse
isthesaleofgasolineoranyotherautomobileenginefuel (storedonlyinundergroundtanks),
kerosene, motoroil, lubricants, greaseorminoraccessories, directlytothepubliconthe
premises. Inaddition, householdandconvenienceitems, foodorothermiscellaneousretailgoods
commonlyassociatedwiththesamealsomaybesold.
AUTOMOBILEREPAIR- MAJOR. Enginerebuildingormajorreconditioningofwornor
damagedmotorvehiclesortrailers; collisionservicesincludingbody, frameorfender
straighteningorrepairs; andoverallpaintingofvehicles.
AUTOMOBILEREPAIR- MINOR. Thereplacementofanypartorrepairofanypart
whichdoesnotrequiretheremovaloftheengineheadorpan, engine, transmissionor
differential, incidentalbodyandfenderwork, minorpaintingandupholsteringservicewhenthe
serviceabovestatedisappliedtopassengerautomobilesandtrucksnotinexcessof12,000
poundsgrossweight.
BASEMENT. Thatportionofabuildingbetweenfloorandceiling, whichispartlybelow
andpartlyabovegrade, butsolocatedthattheverticaldistancefromgradetothefloorbelowis
lessthantheverticaldistancefromgradetoceiling.
BEDROCK. In-placesolidrock.
BENCH. Arelativelylevelstepexcavatedintoearthmaterialonwhichfillistobeplaced.
Page6of25
BERM. Alandscapedandcontouredformationoflandthatisraisedfromnaturalgrade.
BLOCK. Atractoflandboundedbystreetsoracombinationofstreetsandpublicparks,
cemeteries, railroadright-of-way, shorelines, waterways, orboundarylinesofthecorporate
limitsofthecity.
BLUFFIMPACTZONE. Abluffandlandlocatedwith20feetfromthetopofabluff.
BOARDOFAPPEALSANDADJUSTMENTS. TheCityCouncilofthecity.
BORROW. Earthmaterialacquiredfromanoff-sitelocationforuseingradingonasite.
BUFFERSTRIP. Anareaofnon-disturbedgroundcoverabuttingawetlandthatmaynot
bemowed, cutorfertilized, whichisleftundisturbedtofiltersediment, materialsandchemicals.
BUILD-OUT. Theportionoftheprimarystreetfrontagewhichmustbeoccupiedbythe
primarystructureatthebuild-to-lineorwhichmusthaveaportionofanybuildingthatmeetsthe
setbackline.
BUILD-TO-LINE. Alinewithinalotparalleltothestreetcurblinealongwhichaportion
ofthebuilding’soutsidewallmustbebuilt. Lotsfrontingonmorethanonestreetshallcontaina
build-to-linealongeachofthestreetsonwhichthelotsfronts.
BUILDABLEAREA. Thespaceremainingonazoninglotaftertheminimumyardand
openspacerequirementsofthischapterhavebeenmet.
BUILDING. Astructurehavingaroofsupportedbycolumnsorwalls. Whenseparatedby
partywallswithoutopenings, eachportionofthebuildingshallbedeemedaseparatebuilding.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY. Anysubordinatebuildingorusewhichiscustomarilyincident
totheprincipalbuildingoruseandwhichislocatedonthesamelotastheprincipalbuildingor
use.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. Anon-accessorybuildinginwhichtheprimaryuseofalotis
conducted.
BUILDINGACTIVITYAREA. Theareaonthelotwherebuildingactivityshalltakeplace,
includingtheentireareaaffectedbybuildingandgradingactivitiesrelatedtotheapproved
construction.
BUILDINGFOOTPRINT. Thegroundfloorareaofanybuilding, excludingresidential
garagesandaccessorysheds, measuredfromtheoutsideoftheexteriorwalls.
Page7of25
BUILDINGHEIGHT. Theverticaldistancemeasuredfromthecurbleveltothehighest
pointoftheroofsurfaceinaflatroof; tothedecklineofmansardroofs; andtothemeanheight
levelbetweeneavesandridgeofgable, hipandgambrelroofs. Forbuildingssetbackfromthe
streetline, theheightofthebuildingshallbemeasuredfromtheaverageelevationofthefinished
gradealongthefrontofthebuilding, provideditssetbackfromthestreetlineisnotlessthanthe
heightofthefinishedgradeabovetheestablishedcurblevel.
BUILDINGLINE. Thelinemeasuredacrossthewidthofthelotatthepointwherethe
principalstructureisplacedinaccordancewithsetbackprovisions.
BUILDINGOFFICIAL. TheBuildingOfficialofthecityorhisorherauthorized
representative.
CELLAR. Theportionofabuildingbetweenfloorandceilingwhichiswhollyorpartly
belowgradeandsolocatedthattheverticaldistancefromgradetothefloorbelowisequaltoor
greaterthantheverticaldistancefromgradetoceiling.
CENTERLINE. Alinerepresentingthemidpointofroadwaypavement, asmeasuredfrom
backofcurbtobackofcurb. Whentheinformationisnotavailable, theCENTERLINEshallbe
determinedbasedonone-halfthewidthoftheright-of-way.
CERTIFICATEOFOCCUPANCY. AdocumentissuedbytheBuildingOfficialallowing
fortheoccupancyoruseofabuilding, andcertifyingthatthestructureorusehasbeen
constructedorwillbeusedincompliancewithalltheapplicablecodesandordinances.
CITY. TheCityofSavage.
CITYADMINISTRATOR. TheCityAdministratorofthecityorhisorherauthorized
representative.
CITYCOUNCIL. TheCityCouncilofthecity.
CITYENGINEER. TheCityEngineerofthecityorhisorherauthorizedrepresentative.
CLINIC. Anestablishmentwherepatientsareadmittedformedicalanddentalexamsand
treatmentonanoutpatientbasisonly.
Page8of25
CLUBorLODGE. Anestablishmentinwhichalimitedgroupofpeopleareorganizedto
pursuecommonsocialorfraternalgoals, interestsoractivities, andusuallycharacterizedby
certainmembershiprestrictions, paymentoffeesordues, regularmeetingsandaconstitutionof
bylaws.
COFFEESHOP. Anestablishmentengagedprincipallyinthesaleofcoffeeandother
non-alcoholicbeveragesforconsumptiononthepremisesorforcarryout, whichmayalso
includethesaleofalimitednumberoffooditems.
COMMUNITYCENTER. Anestablishmentoperatedbyanon-profitorganizationor
governmentagency, whichincludesrecreationalfacilities, meetingrooms, socialservice
facilitiesandpublichealthfacilities, oranycombinationthereof.
COMPACTION. Thedensificationofafillbymechanicalmeans.
COMPATIBLE. Theexteriorarchitecturalappearanceandthelotlayoutanddesignofa
proposedstructurenotsoatvariancewithadjacentusesandstructuresfromanaestheticand
architecturalstandpointastocause:
1) Alikenesstoadegreetocausemonotony;
2) Adifferencetoadegreetocauseincongruity;
3) Adepreciationofneighborhoodvaluesoradjacentpropertyvalues; and
4) Anuisance, comparedtoexistingorotherproposedstructuresoruses. Typesof
nuisancecharacteristicsinclude, butarenotlimitedto: noise, dust, odors, glare, unsightly
buildingexterior, unsightlyexteriorstorage, trafficgeneration, signs, refuseorlackof
landscaping.
CONDOMINIUM. Aformofindividualownershipwithinabuildingthatentailsjoint
ownershipandresponsibilityformaintenanceandrepairsofthelandandothercommonproperty
ofthebuilding.
CONTROLMEASURE. Apracticeorcombinationofpracticestocontrolerosionand
attendantpollution.
CORNICELINE. Onasloped-roofbuilding, wheretheroofslopemeetsthewallatits
lowestpoint. Inthecaseofaflat-roofedbuilding, thetopoftheparapetwall.
CREMATORY. Buildingorstructurecontainingoneormorechambersorretortsforthe
cremationofdeadhumanbodies.
CREMATION. Thereductionofadeadhumanbodytoessentialelementsthroughdirect
exposuretointenseheatandflameandtherepositioningormovementofthebodyduringthe
Page9of25
processtofacilitatereduction, theprocessingoftheremainsafterremovalfromthecremation
chamber, placementoftheprocessedremainsinacrematedremainscontainer, andreleaseofthe
crematedremainstoanappropriateparty.
CURB. Astone, asphaltorconcreteboundarymarkingtheedgeofaroadwayorpavedarea.
CURBLEVEL. Theleveloftheestablishedcurbinfrontofthebuildingmeasuredatthe
centerofthefront. Whereabuildingfacesonmorethanonestreet, thecurblevelshallbethe
averageofthelevelsofthecurbatthecenterofthefrontofeachstreet. Wherenocurblevelhas
beenestablished, theCityEngineershallestablishthecurblevels.
DAYCAREFACILITY. Anyfacility, publicorprivate, whichforgainorotherwise
regularlyprovidesoneormorepersonswithcare, training, supervision, habilitationor
developmentalguidanceonaregularbasis, forperiodslessthan24hoursperday, inaplace
otherthantheperson’sownhome. DAYCAREFACILITIESinclude, butarenotlimitedto:
familydaycarehomes, groupfamilydaycarehomes, daycarecenters, daynurseries, nursery
schools, daytimeactivitycenters, daytreatmentprogramsanddayservices.
DECK. Astructureopentotheskywhichisattachedtoorabutsthewallofadwellingand
whichisaffordedaccesstotheinteriorofthedwellingthroughoneormoredoors.
DENSITY. Thenumberoflotsordwellingunitspernetbuildableacre.
DETENTIONFACILITY. Apermanentnaturalorman-madestructure, includingwetlands,
forthetemporarystorageofrunoffwhichcontainsapermanentpoolofwater.
DEVELOPMENT. Thedivisionofaparceloflandintotwoormoreparcels; the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structuralalteration, relocationorenlargementofany
structure; anymining, excavation, landfillorlanddisturbance; andanyuseorextensionofthe
useofland.
DEVELOPMENTPERMIT. Buildingpermit, subdivisionapproval, rezoning, interimuse
permit, conditionalusepermitorvariance.
DRAINAGESYSTEM. Anynaturalorartificialfeatureorstructureusedforthe
conveyance, drainageorstorageofsurfaceand/orundergroundwater, includingbutnotlimited
to: streams, rivers, creeks, ditches, channels, conduits, gullies, ravines, washes, lakesorponds
andstructuressuchasculverts, drainagetile, dams, bridgesandwaterstoragebasins.
DRIVE-THROUGHFACILITY. Afacilitywhichaccommodatesautomobilesandfrom
whichtheoccupantsoftheautomobilesmaymakepurchasesortransactbusiness, includingthe
stackingspacesinwhichautomobileswait. Examplesinclude, butarenotlimitedto, drive-up
windows, menuboards, orderboardsorboxes, drive-inrestaurantsanddrive-upbanks.
DRIVE-THROUGHFACILITIESshallnotincludethedirectrefuelingofmotorvehicles
DRIVEWAY. Aprivateroadorpathforvehicleaccesstoapublicroadthatisentirely
locatedontheparcelthatisaffordedaccess.
Page10of25
DWELLING. Abuilding, orportionthereof, designatedorusedpredominatelyfor
residentialoccupancyincludingone-familydwellings, two-familydwellingsandmultiple-family
dwellings, butnotincludinghotels, motels, boardingorroominghouses, touristhomesormobile
homes.
DWELLING, ATTACHED. Adwellingthatisjoinedtoanotherdwellingorbuildingatone
ormoresidesbyapartywallorwalls.
DWELLING, DETACHED. Adwellingthatisentirelysurroundedbyopenspaceonthe
samelot.
DWELLINGUNIT. Oneormoreroomscontainingcompletekitchenfacilities, permanently
installed, whicharearranged, designed, usedorintendedforuseexclusivelyaslivingquarters
foronefamilyandfornotmorethananaggregateoftworoomersorboarders. Oneormore
roomsdesignedorintendedforuseexclusivelyaslivingquartersforasinglefamilythatcontains
cooking, living, sanitaryandsleepingfacilitiesthatarephysicallyseparatedfromotherdwelling
unitsinthesamestructureandhavingitsownaccess.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. Abuilding, orportionthereof, containingthreeor
moredwellingunitsbutnotincludingamotel, hotelorroominghouse.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY. Aresidentialstructurecontainingonedwellingunit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. Aresidentialstructurecontainingtwo-familydwellingunits
only.
EARTHMATERIAL. Anyrock, naturalsoilorfilland/oranycombinationthereof.
EASEMENT. Thegrantofoneormoreofthepropertyrightsbythepropertyownertoand
forusebythepublic, acorporationoranotherindividualorentity.
EFFICIENCYDWELLINGUNITORAPARTMENT. Adwellingunitwithoneprimary
roomwhichdoublesasalivingroom, diningroomandbedroom.
EQUALDEGREEOFENCROACHMENT. Amethodofdeterminingthelocationof
encroachmentlinessothatthehydrauliccapacityoffloodplainlandsoneachsideofastream
arereducedbyanequalamountwhencalculatingtheincreasesinfloodstagesduetofloodplain
encroachments.
EROSION. Thewearingawayofthegroundsurfaceasaresultofthemovementofwind,
waterand/orice.
ESSENTIALSERVICES. Undergroundoroverheadgas, electrical, steamorwater
transmissionordistributionsystems, collection, communications, supplyordisposalsystems
includingpoles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, firealarmboxes, policecall
Page11of25
boxes, trafficsignals, hydrantsorothersimilarequipmentandaccessories, notincluding
buildings.
EXCAVATION. Theremovalofsand, dirt, gravel, rock, clayorsimilarmaterialfromthe
land.
EXPANSION, ENLARGEMENT, ORINTENSIFICATION. Anyincreaseina
dimension, size, area, volume, orheight, anyincreaseintheareaofuse, anyplacementofa
structureorpartthereofwherenoneexistedbefore, anyadditionofasitefeaturesuchasadeck,
patio, fence, driveway, parkingarea, orswimmingpool, anyimprovementthatwouldallowthe
landtobemoreintenselydeveloped, anymoveofoperationstoanewlocationontheproperty,
oranyincreaseinintensityofusebasedonareviewoftheoriginalnature, functionorpurposeof
thenon-conforminguse, thehoursofoperation, traffic, parking, noise, exteriorstorage, signs,
exteriorlighting, typesofoperations, typesofgoodsorservicesoffered, odors, areaofoperation,
numberofemployees, andotherfactorsdeemedrelevantbythecity.
FAMILY. Oneormorepersonsrelatedbyblood, marriageoradoptionoragroupofnot
morethanfourpersonsnotsorelated, maintainingacommonhouseholdinadwellingunit.
FARM. Realpropertyusedforcommercialagricultureorhorticulture, comprisingatleast
tencontiguousacres, andwhichmaycontainothercontiguousornoncontiguousacresandallof
whichisownedandoperatedbyasinglefamily, individual, partnershiporcorporation.
FENCE. Anartificiallyconstructedbarrierofanymaterialorcombinationofmaterials
erectedtoencloseorscreenareasofland.
FERTILIZER. Asubstancecontainingoneormorerecognizedplantnutrientsthatisused
foritsplantnutrientcontentanddesignedforuseoforclaimedtohavevalueinpromotingplant
growth. FERTILIZERdoesnotincludeanimalorvegetablemanuresthatarenotmanipulated,
marl, lime, limestoneandotherproductsexemptedbyrulebytheMinnesotaCommissionerof
Agriculture.
FILLING. Adepositofearthmaterialplacedbyartificialmeans.
FIREARM. Anydevice, designedtobeusedasaweapon, whichwillorisdesignedtoor
mayreadilybeconvertedtoexpelaprojectilebytheactionofanexplosiveorotherformof
combustion, butexcludingantiquefirearm, BBgun, scubagun, studornailgunusedinthe
constructionindustryortoygun.
FLOOD. Atemporaryriseinstreamfloworstagethatresultsininundationoftheareas
adjacenttothechannel.
FLOODFREQUENCY. Theaveragefrequency, statisticallydetermined, forwhichitis
expectedthataspecificfloodstageordischargemaybeequaledorexceeded.
FLOODFRINGE. Theportionofthefloodplainlocatedoutsideofthefloodway. FLOOD
Page12of25
FRINGEissynonymouswiththetermFLOODWAYFRINGEusedintheFloodInsurance
Study.
FLOODPLAIN. Theareasadjoiningawatercoursethathavebeenormaybecoveredby
theregional
flood.
FLOODPROOFING. Acombinationofstructuralprovisions, changesoradjustmentsto
propertiesandstructuressubjecttofloodingprimarilyforthereductionoreliminationofflood
damages.
FLOODWAY. Thechannelofthewatercourseandthoseportionsoftheadjoiningflood
plainsthatarereasonablyrequiredtocarryanddischargetheregionalflood.
FLOORAREA. Thesumofthegrosshorizontalareasoftheseveralfloorsofabuildingor
buildingsmeasuredfromtheexteriorfacesofexteriorwallsorfromthecenterlineofpartywalls
separatingtwobuildings. Inparticular, FLOORAREAshallinclude:
1) Basementspaceifatleastone-halfofthebasementstoryisaboveestablishedcurb
levelorwherethecurblevelhasnotbeenestablished, abovetheaveragelevelofthefinished
grade;
2) Elevatorshaftsandstairwellsateachlevel;
3) Floorspaceusedformechanicalequipmentwherethestructuralheadroomexceeds
sevenandone-halffeet, exceptequipmentopenorenclosedlocatedontheroofsuchasbulk
needs, watertanksandcoolingtowers;
4) Atticfloorspacewherethestructuralheadroomexceedssevenandone-halffeet;
5) Interiorbalconiesandmezzanines;
6) Enclosedporches, butnotterracesandbreezeways; and
7) Accessoryuses.
FLOORAREARATIO (FAR). Thetotalfloorareaonazoninglotdividedbythetotallot
areaofthatzoninglot, orinthecaseofplanneddevelopmentbythenetareasite.
FRONTAGE. Thedistanceforwhichalotlinecoincideswiththeright-of-waylineofa
publicstreetortheboundaryofaprivatestreet.
FUNERALHOME. Anyplaceorpremisedevotedtoorusedintheholding, care, or
preparationofadeadhumanbodyforfinaldispositionoranyplaceusedastheofficeorplaceof
businessofanypersonthatprovidesfuneralgoodsorservicestothepublic.
Page13of25
GABLEROOF. Roofswithtwoslopingsidesmeetingataridgeandgablesatoneorboth
ends.
GARAGE. Adetachedaccessorybuildingoraportionoftheprincipalbuildingusedforthe
parkingandstorageofvehicles, merchandiseorequipment, andwhichisnotaseparate
commercialestablishmentopentothegeneralpublic. Whenassociatedwitharesidentialuse, it
shallbelimitedtouseforparkingandstorageofvehicles, noncommercialtrailersandhousehold
equipment.
GARAGESALE. Includesrummagesales, basementsales, yardsales, porchsalesandall
otherperiodicsalesataresidentiallocationintendedforthelimitedpurposeofisolatedor
occasionalsalesasdefinedbyM.S. §2 97A.67,a sitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime,f orthe
sellingofusedgoodsorhome-crafteditemsbytheresidentsthereof.
GRADE. Thelowestpointofelevationofthefinishedsurfaceoftheground, pavingor
sidewalkwithintheareabetweenthebuildingandthepropertyline, orbetweenthebuildingand
astabilization
structuresuchasaretainingwall, or, wherethepropertylineorstructureismorethanfivefeet
fromthebuilding, betweenthebuildingandalinefivefeetfromthebuilding.
GRADE, EXISTING. Thegradepriortograding.
GRADE, FINISH. Thefinalgradeorthesitewhichconformstotheapprovedplan.
GRADE, ROUGH. Thestageatwhichthegradeapproximatelyconformstotheapproved
plan.
GRADING. Anyexcavatingorfillingorcombinationthereof.
HOMEOCCUPATION. Anoccupationcarriedonbytheoccupantofadwellingina
residentialdistrictasasecondaryuseincluding, butnotlimitedto, suchoccupationsas
dressmakingandalterations, artist’sstudio, phonesalesandtypingservices.
HORTICULTURE. Theuseoflandforthegrowingorproductionforincomeoffruits,
vegetables, flowers, nurserystock, includingornamentalplantsandtreesandculturedsod.
HYDRICSOILS. Soilsthataresaturated, floodedorpondedlongenoughduringthe
growingseasontodevelopanaerobicconditionsintheupperpart.
IMPERVIOUSSURFACE. Anymaterialthatsubstantiallyreducesorpreventsthenatural
absorptionofstormwaterintothesoilandcauseswatertorunoffthesurfaceingreaterquantities
andatanincreasedrateofflow. IMPERVIOUSSURFACESinclude, butarenotlimitedto,
buildingsorotherstructureswithroofs, sidewalksandallstone, brick, concreteorasphalt
surfaces.
Page14of25
IMPROVEMENT. Makingthenon-conformingusebetter, moreefficient, ormore
aestheticallypleasing, includinganychangethatdoesnotreplicatewhatpre-existed, butdoesnot
includeanexpansion, enlargement, orintensification.
INDUSTRY. Anenterprisethatinvolvestheproduction, processingorstorageofmaterials,
goodsorproducts.
LABORATORY, MEDICALORDENTAL. Anestablishmentprimarilyengagedin
providingprofessionalanalyticordiagnosticservicestothemedicalprofessionortothepatient,
ondirectionofaphysician; oranestablishmentprimarilyengagedinmakingdentures, artificial
teethandorthodonticappliancestoorderforthedentalprofession.
LANDDISTURBINGORDEVELOPMENTACTIVITIES. Anychangeoftheland
surfaceincludingremovingvegetativecover, excavating, filling, gradingandtheconstructionof
anystructure.
LEGALNON-CONFORMITYORNON-CONFORMINGUSE. Anylanduse, structure,
physicalformoflanddevelopment, lotofrecordorsignlegallyestablishedbeforetheeffective
dateofthischapterorsubsequentamendmenttoitthatwouldnotbepermittedby, orisnotin
fullcompliancewith, theregulationsofthischapter. Anon-conformityofnon-conforminguseis
oneoftwotypes: non-conforminglanduseornon-conformingdevelopment.
LINTEL. Thehorizontalbeamthatformstheuppermemberofawindowordoorframeand
supportsthestructureaboveit.
LOADINGSPACE. Aspaceaccessiblefromthestreetoralley, inabuildingoronthelot,
fortheuseoftruckswhileloadingorunloadingmerchandiseormaterials. Thespaceshallbeof
thesizeastoaccommodateonetruckofthetypetypicallyusedintheparticularbusiness.
LOT. Apiece, parcelorplotoflandintendedforbuildingdevelopmentasaunitfortransfer
ofownership.
LOTAREA. Theareaofahorizontalplaneboundedbythefront, sideandrearlotlines,
measuredwithinthelotboundaries.
LOT, CORNER. Alotsituatedattheintersectionoftwostreets, theinteriorangleofthe
intersectionnotexceeding135degrees.
LOT, INTERIOR. Alototherthanacornerlot.
LOT, THROUGH. Alotwhichfrontsupontwoparallelorthatfrontsupontwostreetsthat
donotintersectattheboundariesofthelot.
Page15of25
LOTCOVERAGE. Theareaofazoninglotoccupiedbytheprincipalbuildingorbuildings
andaccessorybuildings.
LOTDEPTH. Lotdepthmeanshorizontaldistancebetweenfrontlotlineandrearlotline.
LOTLINE, CORNERSIDE. Asidelotlineseparatingalotfromastreetright-of-wayora
privatestreet.
LOTLINE, FRONT. Aboundaryofalotwhichrunsalonganexistingordedicatedpublic
street, butnotanalley.
LOTLINE, REAR. Thelotlineoppositeandmostdistantfromthefrontlotline. Inthecase
ofatriangularorotherwiseirregularlyshapedlot, alinetenfeetinlengthentirelywithinthelot,
paralleltoandatamaximumdistancefromthefrontlotline.
LOTLINE, SIDE. Anyboundaryofalotthatisnotafrontlotlineorrearlotline.
LOTOFRECORD. Alotwhichisapartofasubdivision, themapofwhichhasbeen
recordedintheofficeoftheRegistrarofDeeds, oralotdescribedbymetesandbounds, thedeed
towhichhasbeenrecordedintheofficeoftheRegistrarofDeedsatthetimethischapteris
passed.
LOTWIDTH. Thehorizontaldistancebetweenthesidelotlinesofalotmeasuredatthe
buildingsetbackline.
MANSARDROOF. Ahiproofhavingtwoslopesoneachside.
MANUFACTUREDHOME. Astructure, transportableinoneormoresectionswhich, in
thetravelingmode, iseightfeetormoreinwidthand40feetormoreinlength, or, whenerected
onasiteis320ormoresquarefeet, andwhichisbuiltonapermanentchassisanddesignedtobe
usedasadwellingwithorwithoutapermanentfoundationwhenconnectedtotherequired
utilities, andincludestheplumbing, heating, airconditioningandelectricalsystemscontained
therein; except, thatthetermincludesanystructureswhichmeetalloftherequirementsandwith
respecttowhichthemanufacturervoluntarilyfilesthecertificaterequiredbythesecretaryand
Page16of25
complieswiththestandardsestablishedunderMinnesotalaw.
MECHANICALEQUIPMENT. Airconditioning, heating, ventilationorotherequipment
thatarereasonablynecessarytotheoperationofabuildingorusewithinabuilding.
NETBUILDABLEAREA. Thedevelopableareaoflandexclusiveofpublicstreet
rights-of-way, wetlands, majordrainageways, waterbodiesorslopessteeperthanthreetoone
ratio.
NON-CONFORMINGDEVELOPMENT. Alegalnon-conformityotherthananonconforminglanduse,
thatcompliedwithordinancestandardsatthetimeitwasestablishedbut
thatdoesnotcurrentlyconformtoanordinancestandardsuchasheight, setback, orsize.
NON-CONFORMINGLANDUSE. Anactivityusingland, buildings, and/orstructuresfor
apurposethatwaslegallyallowedwhenestablishedbutthatisnotcurrentlyallowedasausein
thezoningdistrictinwhichitislocated.
OBSTRUCTION. Anydam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projections, excavation, channelrectification, culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill,
structure, ormatterin, along, across, orprojectingintoanychannel, watercourseorregulatory
floodhazardareawhichmayimpede, retardorchangethedirectionoftheflowofwater, orthat
isplacedwheretheflowofwatermightcarrythesamedownstreamtothedamageoflifeor
property.
OFFSETS. Anelementthatbalancesorcounteractsforsomethingelsebycontrast.
OUTDOORSALESANDDISPLAY. Theoutdoorplacementorpresentationofgoods,
materialsormerchandiseforsaleonthepremises.
ORDINARYHIGHWATERMARK. Commonlythatpointwherethenaturalvegetation
changesfrompredominatelyaquatictopredominatelyterrestrial. ORDINARYHIGHWATER
MARKforwatercoursesmeansthetopofthebank. ORDINARYHIGHWATERMARKfor
lakesmeansamarkdelineatingthehighestwaterlevelthathasbeenmaintainedforasufficient
periodoftimetoleaveevidenceuponthelandscape.
OUTDOORSTORAGE. Theoutdoorplacementordepositingofgoods, materials,
equipment, stockorsupplies.
OVERLAYDISTRICT. Azoningdistrictthatencompassesoneormoreprimaryzoning
districts, orportionsthereof, andthatimposesadditionalrequirements, orrelaxesoneormore
standardsrequiredbytheprimaryzoningdistrict.
PARCEL. Aseparateareaofland, includingalot, havingspecificboundariesandcapableof
beingconveyedandrecorded.
PARKING, OFF-STREET. Anarea, eitheraparkinglotoragarage, thatprovidesoff-street
Page17of25
parkingforvehicles.
PARKINGSPACE. Asuitablesurfacedandpermanentlymaintainedareaoffthepublic
streetright-of-way, eitherwithinoroutsideofabuilding, ofsufficientsizetostoreonestandard
automobile, butinnocaselessthan180squarefeet, exclusiveofpassageways, drivewaysor
othermeansofcirculation.
PARTICULATEMATTER. Dust, smokeorotherair-bornepollutionintheformofminute
separateparticles.
PEDESTRIANWAY. Aright-of-way, publiclyorprivatelyowned, intendedforhuman
movementbywalking.
PLACEOFASSEMBLY. Achurch, synagogue, temple, mosqueorotherfacilitythatis
usedforprayerbypersonsofsimilarbeliefsoraspecialpurposebuildingthatisdesignedor
particularlyadaptedfortheprimaryuseofconducting, onaregularbasis, religiousservicesand
associatedaccessoryusesbyareligiouscongregation.
PLANNEDUNITDEVELOPMENT. Atypeofdevelopmentcharacterizedbyaunifiedsite
designforanumberofdwellingunitsordwellingsitesonaparcel, whetherforsale, rentor
lease, andalsousuallyinvolvingclusteringoftheseunitsorsitestoprovideareasofcommon
openspace, densityincreases, andamixofstructuretypesandlanduses. Thesedevelopments
maybeorganizedandoperatedascondominiums, time-sharecondominiums, cooperatives, full
feeownership, commercialenterprisesoranycombinationofthese, orclustersubdivisionsof
dwellingunits, residentialcondominiums, townhouses, apartmentbuildings, campgrounds,
recreationalvehicleparks, resorts, hotels, motelsandconversionsofstructuresandlandusesto
theseuses.
PLANNINGCOMMISSION. ThePlanningCommissionofthecity.
POLEBUILDING. Abuildinginwhichwoodpolesortimbersaretheprimarysupportfor
theroofsystemandformthefoundationstructure.
PREMISES. Aseparateareaofland, includingalot, havingspecificboundariesand
capableofbeingconveyedandrecorded.
PRODUCTIONorPROCESSING. Theassembly, disassembly, fabrication, manufacture,
transformation, packaging, sortingorotherhandlingofgoodsormaterials, eitherasan
intermediateinputforfurtherproductionandprocessingorforfinalsale, useorconsumption.
PROTECTEDWATERS. AnywatersofthestateasdefinedinM.S. §1 03G.005,S ubd. 15,
asitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime. However, nolake, pondorflowageoflessthanten
acresinsizeandnoriverorstreamhavingatotaldrainagearealessthantwosquaremilesshall
beregulatedforthepurposeofshorelandzoning.
PROTECTIVECOVENANTS. Anycontractmadebetweenprivatepartiesastothemanner
Page18of25
inwhichlandmaybeused.
PUBLICRIGHT-OF-WAY. Theareaon, below, oraboveapublicroadway, highway,
street, cartway, bicyclelaneandpublicsidewalkinwhichthecityhasaninterest, including
otherdedicatedrights-of-wayfortravelpurposesandutilityeasementsofthecity.
PUBLICUSE. Auseoflandownedoroperatedbyamunicipality, schooldistrict, countyor
stateagencyorothergovernmentalentity.
PUBLICUTILITY. Persons, corporationsorgovernmentssupplyinggas, electric,
transportation, water, sewerorlandlinetelephoneservicetothegeneralpublic. Forthepurpose
ofthischapter, wirelessservicefacilitiesshallnotbeconsideredpublicutilityusesandare
definedseparately.
REACH. Ahydraulicengineeringtermtodescribealongitudinalsegmentofastreamor
riverinfluencedbyanaturalorman-madeobstruction. Inanurbanarea, thesegmentofastream
orriverbetweentwoconsecutivebridgecrossingswouldmosttypicallyconstituteaREACH.
RECREATIONALVEHICLE. Anymotorvehicledesignedfor, usedorcapableofusefor
sport, amusementorrecreation, whetherornoteligibletobelicensedforuseuponstreetsand
highways, includingbutnotlimitedtocampers, pickupcampers, tenttrailers, motorhomesless
than22feetinlength, boatsandboattrailers, snowmobiles, motorbikes, motorscooters, trail
bikes, mini-bikes, motorcycles, gokarts, hovercraft, allterrainvehiclesordunebuggies, but
excludingmotorvehiclesdesignedforcommercial, industrialoragriculturaluse.
REGIONALFLOOD. Afloodwhichisrepresentativeoflargefloodsknowntohave
occurredgenerallyinMinnesotaandreasonablycharacteristicofwhatcanbeexpectedtooccur
onanaveragefrequencyinthemagnitudeofthe100-yearrecurrenceinterval.
REGULATORYFLOODPROTECTIONELEVATION. Apointnotlessthanonefoot
abovethewatersurfaceprofileassociatedwiththeregionalfloodplusanyincreasesinflood
heightsattributabletoencroachmentsonthefloodplain. Itistheelevationtowhichuses
regulatedbythischapterarerequiredtobeelevatedorfloodproofed.
REPLACEMENT, RECONSTRUCTIONORRESTORATION. Constructionthatexactly
matchespre-existingconditions.
RESIDENTIALFACILITY. Anyfacility, publicorprivate, whichforgainorotherwise,
regularlyprovidesoneormorepersonswitha24-hourperdaysubstituteforcare, food, lodging,
training, education, supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation, andtreatmenttheyneed, butwhich
foranyreasoncannotbefurnishedintheperson’sownhome. RESIDENTIALFACILITIES
include, butarenotlimitedto: stateinstitutionsunderthecontroloftheCommissionerofPublic
Welfare, fosterhomes, residentialtreatmentcenters, maternityshelters, grouphomes, residential
programsorschoolsforhandicappedchildren.
RESTAURANT. Anestablishmentthatsellsunpackagedfoodtothecustomerina
Page19of25
ready-to-consumestate, inindividualservings, andwherethecustomerconsumesthesefoodsin
thebuilding, picksupthefoodfromthebuildingtoconsumeelsewhere, orthefoodisdelivered
tothecustomerbyemployeesoftherestaurant.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH. Arestaurantprovidingadrive-throughfacility, as
earlierdefinedinthissection.
RETENTIONFACILITY. Apermanentnaturalorman-madestructurethatprovidesfor
thestorageofstormwaterrunoffbymeansofapermanentpoolofwater.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. Astripoflandoccupiedorintendedtobeoccupiedbyaroad, crosswalk,
utilityline, railroad, electrictransmissionlineorothersimilaruse.
RIPARIAN. Landrelatingorbelongingtothebankand/orshoreofariver, stream, creek,
lake, pondorotherwaterbasin.
SALVAGEYARD. Alot, parceloflandorstructure, orpartthereof, usedprimarilyforthe
collecting, storageandsaleofwastepaper, rags, scrapmetal, discardedmaterialsorsimilar
materials; orforthecollection, dismantling, storageandsalvagingofmachineryorvehiclesnot
inrunningcondition; orthesaleofpartthereof.
SATELLITEEARTHSTATIONANTENNA. Anantenna, usuallyparabolicorsphericalin
shape, capableofreceivingtelevisionorradiosignalsfromorbitingsatellites.
SCREENING. Themethodbywhichaviewofonesitefromanotheradjacentsiteis
shielded, concealedorhidden. Screeningtechniquesincludefences, wall, hedges, bermsorother
features.
SEDIMENT. Solidmattercarriedbywater, sewageorotherliquids.
SELF-SERVICESTORAGEFACILITY. Anestablishmentdesignedandutilizedforthe
purposeofrentingorleasingindividualstoragespacestotenantswhohavesoleaccesstothe
spaceforthestorageofpersonalproperty.
SEMI-PUBLICUSE. Theuseoflandbyaprivate, nonprofitorganizationtoprovidea
publicservicethatisordinarilyopentosomepersonsoutsidetheregularconstituencyofthe
organization.
SETBACK. Theminimumseparationinlinearfeet, measuredonahorizontalplane, required
betweenthewallofabuildingorstructureandeachofthelotlines, betweenthewallsof
buildingslocatedonthesamezoninglotorfromthebackofaparkingordrivewaycurbtothe
lotline.
SETBACK, CORNERSIDE. Alineparalleltoanysidelotline, locatedimmediately
adjacenttoandextendingalongapublicorprivatestreet, andextendingfromthefrontsetback
linetotherearsetbackline.
Page20of25
SETBACK, FRONT. Alineparalleltothefrontlotlineandextendingfromsidelotlineto
sidelotline.
SETBACK, REAR. Alineparalleltoallrearlotlinesandextendingfromsidelotlineto
sidelotline.
SETBACK, SIDE. Alineparalleltoanysidelotlineandextendingfromthefrontsetback
linetotherearsetbackline.
SHOPPINGCENTER. Agroupofcommercialestablishmentsplanned, developed, owned
ormanagedasaunit, relatedinsize (grossfloorarea) andtypeofshopstothetradeareathatthe
unitserves, andwithoff-streetparkingprovidedontheproperty.
SHOREIMPACTZONE. Landlocatedbetweentheordinaryhighwaterlevelofapublic
waterandalineparalleltoitatasetbackof50% oftherequiredstructuresetback.
SHORELAND.
1) Landlocatedwithinthefollowingdistancesfromprotectedwaters:
a) Within1,000feetfromtheordinaryhighwatermarkofalake, pondor
flowage;
b) Within300feetfromariverorstream; or
c) Withinthelandwardextentofafloodplainontheriversorstreams, whichever
isgreater.
2) Thepracticallimitsofshorelandsmaybelessthanthestatutorylimitswherethe
limitsaredesignatedbynaturaldrainagedividesatlesserdistances, andwhenapprovedby
theDNRCommissioner
SITEPLAN. Anintegralsetofdocumentsthatmayconsistofbothdrawnandwritten
materialswhosepurposeistoprovidethenecessaryinformationforanapprovingauthorityto
decidewhethertheproposeddevelopmentwillcomplywiththestandardsandregulationsofthis
chapter.
SMALLWIRELESSFACILITY. AsdefinedinChapter100, Section100.03.
STABLE, PRIVATE. Aplacewherehorsesareconfined, bredorraisedprimarilyfor
personaluse.
STABLE, PUBLIC. Aplacewherehorsesarekeptwiththepremisesopentothepublic
duringestablishedhours, includingbutnotlimitedtoridingacademies, rental, auctionhouses,
boarding, breeding, trainingandconditioning.
Page21of25
STACKINGSPACE. Apavementarea, exclusiveofanyotherrequiredaislesorparking
spaces, forusebyvehiclesawaitingserviceatdrive-throughfacility. Thespaceshallhavea
minimumwidthof12feetandlengthof20feet.
STEEPSLOPE. Landwhereagriculturalactivityordevelopmentiseithernot
recommendedordescribedaspoorlysuitedduetoslopesteepnessandthesite’ssoil
characteristics, asmappedanddescribedinavailablecountysoilsurveysorothertechnical
reports, unlessappropriatedesignandconstructiontechniquesandfarmingpracticesareusedin
accordancewiththeprovisionsofthischapter. Wherespecificinformationisnotavailable,
STEEPSLOPESarelandshavingaverageslopesover33-1/3%.
STORAGE. Thekeepingofitems, equipment, vehicles, trailersormaterialsforaperiodof
timelongerthanwouldbeinvolvedinthenormaldaytodayuseorconsumptionofthesame.
STORY. Thatportionofabuildingincludingbetweentheuppersurfaceofanyfloorandthe
uppersurfaceofthefloornextabove, exceptthatthetopmoststoryshallbethatportionofa
buildingincludedbetweentheuppersurfaceofthetopmostfloorandtheceilingorroofabove. If
thefinishedleveldirectlyaboveausableorunusedunderfloorspaceismorethansixfeetabove
gradeasdefinedhereinformorethan50% ofthetotalperimeterorismorethan12feetabove
gradeasdefinedhereinatanypoint, theusableorunusedunderfloorspaceshallbeconsideredas
aSTORY.
STORY, FIRST. Theloweststoryinabuildingwhichqualifiesasastory, asdefinedherein,
exceptthatafloorlevelinabuildinghavingonlyonefloorlevelshallbeclassifiedasaFIRST
STORY, providedthefloorlevelisnotmorethanfourfeetbelowgrade, asdefinedherein, for
morethan50% ofthetotalperimeter, ornotmorethaneightfeetbelowgrade, asdefinedherein,
atanypoint.
STREET, ARTERIAL. Astreetwhichprovidesfortrafficmovementtoandfrom
municipalitiesandthesurroundingareas, toandfromfreeways/expresswaysandcollector
streets, andbetweenmajorpartsofanurbanarea. Intersectionsareatgradeanddirectaccessto
abuttingpropertyisintentionallylimited.
STREET, COLLECTOR. Astreetwhichcollectsanddistributestheinternaltrafficwithin
anareaofacommunitysuchasaresidentialneighborhoodorindustrialdistrictandbetween
arterialandlocalstreets. Itprovidessomeaccesstoabuttingproperty.
STREET, LOCAL. Astreetoflittleornocontinuity, designedtoprovideaccesstoabutting
propertyandideallyleadingintocollectorstreets.
STRUCTURE. Anythingconstructedorerectedwithamoreorlessfixedlocationonthe
groundorinoroverabodyofwater. Astructureshallinclude, butnotbelimitedto, buildings,
fences, walls, signs, canopies, decks, patios, antennas, piers, docksandanyobjectsorthings
permanentlyattachedtothestructure.
SUBDIVISION. Improvedorunimprovedlandorlandswhicharedividedforthepurpose
Page22of25
ofreadysaleorleaseordividedsuccessivelywithinafive-yearperiodforthepurposeofsaleor
lease.
SUBSTANDARDUSE. Anyuseofshorelandsexistingpriortotheeffectivedateofthis
chapterwhichispermittedwithintheapplicablezoningdistrictbutdoesnotmeettheminimum
lotareaandlengthorwaterfrontage, structuresetbacksorotherdimensionalstandardsofthis
chapter.
TOEOFTHEBLUFF. Thelowerpointofa25-footsegmentwithanaverageslope
exceeding33-1/3%.
TOPOFTHEBLUFF. Thehigherpointofa25-footsegmentwithanaverageslope
exceeding33-1/3%.
TOWER. Anygroundorroofmountedpole, spire, structureorcombinationthereoftaller
than15feet, includingsupportinglines, cables, wires, bracesandmasts, intendedprimarilyfor
thepurposeofmountinganantenna, meteorologicaldeviceorsimilarapparatusabovegrade.
Tower” doesnotincludeawirelesssupportstructureasdefinedinthisSection.
TOWNHOUSES. Dwellingunitshorizontallyattachedtooneormoresimilardwellingunits
inalinearorclusterarrangement. CharacteristicfeaturesofTOWNHOUSESaretheirprivate
entrancesandsmallprivateyards (patios) foroutdoorliving. ATOWNHOUSE
DEVELOPMENTnormallyincludesatleastonelargecommonareaofopenspaceforaesthetic
andrecreationalpurposes.
TRAVELTRAILER. Avehicularportablestructurebuiltonachassisdesignedtobeusedas
atemporarydwellingfortravel, recreationandvacationuses.
USEABLEOPENSPACE. Thatrequiredportionofalotatgroundlevel, unoccupiedby
buildingsandavailabletoalloccupantsofthebuilding. Thisspaceofminimumprescribed
dimensionshallnotbedevotedtoservicedrivewaysoroff-streetparkingspaceand/orloading
berth, butshallbeusedforgreenery, recreationalspaceandotherleisureactivitiesnormally
carriedonoutdoors. Whereandtotheextentprescribedintheseregulations, balconiesandroof
areasmayalsobeconsideredasuseablespace.
USE. Thepurposeoractivityforwhichthelandorthebuildingthereonisdesigned,
arrangedorintendedorforwhichitisoccupiedormaintained.
USE, ACCESSORY. Auseoflandorofabuildingorportionthereof, incidentaland
subordinatetoaprincipaluse.
USE, CONDITIONAL. Ause, eitherpublicorprivate, whichbecauseofitsunique
characteristics, cannotbeproperlyclassifiedasapermitteduseinaparticulardistrict. Afterdue
considerationineachcaseoftheimpactoftheuseuponneighboringlandandofthepublicneed
fortheparticularuseattheparticularlocation, the “specialuse” mayormaynotbegranted.
Page23of25
USE, PERMITTED. Ausewhichmaybelawfullyestablishedinaparticulardistrictor
districts, provideditconformswithallrequirements, regulationsandperformancestandards, if
any, ofthedistrict.
USE, PRINCIPAL. Themainuseoflandorbuildingasdistinguishedfromasubordinateor
accessoryuse.
VARIANCE. Amodificationorvariationfromtheliteralrequirementsofthisdevelopment
chapterasappliedtoaspecificpieceofproperty.
WETLANDS. Transitionallandbetweenterrestrialandaquaticsystemswherethewater
tableisusuallyatornearthesurfaceorthelandiscoveredbyshallowwater. WETLANDSmust
haveapredominanceofhydricsoils, beinundatedorsaturatedwithwateratafrequencyand
durationsufficienttosupportaprevalenceofhydrophyticvegetationtypicallyadaptedforlifein
saturatedsoilconditionsandundernormalcircumstances, supportaprevalenceofhydrophytic
vegetation.
WIRELESSFACILITY. AsdefinedinChapter100, Section100.03.
WIRELESSSERVICE. AsdefinedinChapter100, Section100.03.
WIRELESSSUPPORTSTRUCTURE. AsdefinedinChapter100, Section100.03.
YARD. Anopenspaceonalotwhichisunobstructedfromthelowestleveltothesky,
exceptashereinafterpermitted. AYARDextendsalongalotlineandatrightanglestothelot
linestoadepthofwidthspecifiedintheyardregulationsforthedistrictinwhichthelotis
located.
YARD, CORNERSIDE. Aspaceextendingfromthefrontyardtotherearyardbetweenthe
principalbuildingandasidelotlinewhichrunsalongaprivateorpublicstreet, measured
perpendiculartothebuildingattheclosestpointtothesidelotline.
YARD, FRONT. Aspaceextendingacrossthefullwidthofthelotbetweenanybuilding
andthefrontlotlineandmeasuredperpendiculartothebuildingattheclosestpointtothefront
lotline.
YARD, REAR. Aspaceextendingacrossthefullwidthofthelotbetweenanybuildingand
therearlotlineandmeasuredperpendiculartothebuildingattheclosestpointtotherearlot
line.
YARD, SIDE. Aspaceextendingfromthefrontyardtotherearyardbetweentheprincipal
buildingandthesidelotlineandmeasuredperpendiculartothebuildingattheclosestpointto
thesidelotline.
ZONINGADMINISTRATOR. TheZoningAdministratorofthecity, orhisorher
authorizedrepresentative, asdesignatedbytheCityAdministrator.
Page24of25
ZONINGDISTRICT. Anareaorareasforwhichtheregulationsandrequirements
governinguse, lotandbulkofbuildingsandpremisesareuniform.
ZONINGMAP. Themapsettingforththeboundariesofthezoningdistrictsofthecity,
whichmapisapartofthischapter.
PriorCode, § 9-1-12) (Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001; Ord. 692, passed10-17-11; Ord. 719, passed
5-20-2013; Ord. 734, passed4-07-2014; Ord. 745, passed11-17-2014; Ord. 797, passed05-07-
2018)
Page25of25
ADMINISTRATIONAND ENFORCEMENT
152. 025 General provisions
152. 026 Duties of decision- making bodies and officials
152.027 General application procedures
152. 028 Public hearings
152.029 Appeals
152. 030 Zoning amendments
152. 031 Conditional use permits
152. 032 Interim uses
152. 033 Variances
152. 034 Site plan and building design review
152. 035 Enforcement
152. 036 Violation
152. 025 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
A) Purpose. This subchapter is established to set forth the procedures required for the
administration of this chapter, to outline the powers and duties of the officials and bodies
charged with the administration, to establish standards for required land use approvals and to
provide for its enforcement in a manner which adds to the quality of land use and development
and protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
B) Compliance with conditions of approval. All land use approvals made pursuant to this
chapter shall remain in effect as long as all of the conditions and guarantees of the approval are
observed. Failure to comply with the conditions and guarantees shall constitute a violation of this
chapter and may result in termination of the land use approval.
C) Pending applications. No new application for land use approval for the same project or
proposal shall be submitted or accepted until all previous applications for the project or proposal
have been finally acted upon or withdrawn.
Prior Code, § 9- 2- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 026 DUTIES OF DECISION-MAKING BODIES AND OFFICIALS.
A) Zoning Administrator. Except where otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the
Zoning Administrator, or his or her assignee, shall be responsible for the administration,
interpretation and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
B) Development Review Committee. The Development Review Committee, consisting of
city staff members as appointed by the City Administrator, is established to review plans for
conformance with the technical requirements of this chapter and to make recommendations to
the Planning Commission and City Council regarding applications for land use approval.
Page 1 of 17
C) Planning Commission. The Planning Commission, as established and organized under
34.001 through 34. 006 of the Savage City Code, shall have the advisory and decision-making
powers granted to it as identified within this subchapter and elsewhere in this chapter.
Prior Code, § 9- 2- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 027 GENERAL APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
A) Submittalforms. All applications for land use approval shall be made on forms
approved by the city and available from the Zoning Administrator.
B) Pre-application conference. A pre-application conference with the Zoning
Administrator shall be required prior to submission of any application for land use approval. The
purpose of the conference is to acquaint the applicant with applicable procedure and title
requirements, to provide for an exchange of information regarding the proposed project and to
identify potential opportunities and constraints for development of a given site.
C) Submission of technical studies. The city may require applicants for land use approval
to submit technical studies as may be necessary to enable the Planning Commission and City
Council to evaluate the application. The studies may include, but not be limited to, traffic
studies, engineering studies, environmental impact assessments and economic impact reports.
The costs of the studies shall be borne by the applicant, with the persons or firms preparing the
study approved by the Zoning Administrator.
D) Completeness ofapplication. No application for land use approval shall be deemed
complete until all items that are required in support of the application have been submitted. In
cases where an application is determined to be incomplete, the Zoning Administrator shall notify
the applicant, in writing, within fifteen days from the date of submission, specifying the items of
information that are needed.
E) Application and submission deadlines. The Zoning Administrator shall administratively
set submission deadlines for all applications requiring public hearing. Compliance with the
deadlines shall generally be required in order to have the application placed on an agenda to be
heard by the Planning Commission. At the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, non-agenda
items may be brought before the Planning Commission for consideration, provided, however,
that the Planning Commission may refuse to hear a non- agenda item at its sole discretion.
F) Application fees. Fees for all applications provided for in this chapter shall be
established by ordinance and are non-refundable, except when an application is withdrawn by the
applicant prior to notice of public hearing.
G) Required action by review bodies. Pursuant to M.S. § 15. 99, as it may be amended from
time to time, any application for zoning approval shall be approved or denied within 60 days
from the date of its official and complete submission, unless extended pursuant to statute or a
time waiver is granted by the applicant. If applicable, processing of the application through
required state or federal agencies shall extend the review and decision- making period an
Page 2 of 17
additional 60 days unless the applicant waives this limitation.
H) Reconsideration ofland use approval applications. No application for land use approval
that has been denied by the City Council, in whole or in part, shall be reconsidered for a period
of six months from the date of City Council action on the application, except on grounds of new
evidence or proof of a change in conditions.
I) Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the City Council acting
pursuant to this chapter may have the decision or order reviewed by the District Court, subject to
the provisions of state law.
Prior Code, § 9- 2- 3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 734, passed 04- 07- 2014)
152. 028 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
A) Public notice. For all land use applications requiring a public hearing as set forth in this
chapter, notice of the public hearing shall be given in the following manner. The failure to give
mailed notice to individual property owners, or defects in the notice, shall not invalidate the
proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt to comply with this section has been made.
1) Newspaper ofgeneral circulation. The Zoning Administrator shall publish notice
of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing at least once, not less than ten days nor more
than 30 days before the hearing, in a legal newspaper of general circulation. For purposes of
computing time, both the day of publication and the day of the public hearing shall be excluded.
2) Affected property owners. Except in the case of zoning text amendments or zoning
map amendments affecting an area greater than five acres, the Zoning Administrator shall mail
notice to all owners of record of property located in whole or in part within 350 feet of the
boundaries of the subject property, as identified in the records of the County Assessor' s office,
not less than ten days nor more than 30 days before the hearing. It shall be the applicant' s
responsibility to provide an abstractor' s certificate showing the names and addresses of all
property owners within the notification area. The certificate shall be submitted concurrent with
other required application materials.
B) Notification regarding natural resources. When an application for a conditional use
permit, variance, appeal, zoning amendment, expansion of a non-conforming use, or other
similar land use review relates to the Flood Plain or Shoreland Overlay Districts, as established
in §§ 152.355 through 152. 366 and §§ 152.400 through 152.408, the Zoning Administrator shall
submit to the Minnesota Commissioner of Natural Resources a written notice of public hearing at
least 21 days in advance of the hearing.
C) Procedures. All hearings conducted shall be open to the public. Any person may appear
and testify at a hearing either in person or by duly appointed agent or attorney. Upon the
conclusion of public input, the review body shall announce its decision or recommendation or
shall continue the matter to a subsequent meeting. No additional public notice shall be required
once the public hearing on an item has been opened. The review body shall keep minutes of its
Page 3 of 17
public hearings and shall also keep records of its official actions. Decisions of the review body
shall be filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator.
D) Continuances. Any applicant or authorized agent may request the continuance of a
public hearing, provided that a written request is filed with the Zoning Administrator at least two
business days prior to the date of scheduled public hearing. The Planning Commission and City
Council, upon majority vote, may grant a continuance upon good cause, provided that the record
indicates the reason for the continuance, any conditions placed upon the continuance, and the
date on which the item will be considered. At the discretion of the Planning Commission or City
Council, re-notification of public hearing may be required.
E) Notice to applicant regarding decision. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the
applicant for any land use approval, in writing, of the City Council' s decision within ten days. In
the event that the request for approval was denied, the letter shall clearly state the reasons for the
denial.
Prior Code, § 9- 2- 4) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 029 APPEALS.
A) Appeals ofdecisions by administrative staff. All findings and decisions of the Zoning
Administrator or other official involved in the administration of this chapter shall be final subject
to appeal to the Planning Commission, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. Any
affected person may initiate a request by filing an appeal with the Zoning Administrator on an
approved form. All appeals shall be filed within 60 days of the date of the decision. The Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing on each complete application for appeal and, after the
close of the hearing, shall make findings and submit its recommendations to the City Council.
B) Action by the City Council on appeals. The City Council, acting as the Board of
Appeals and Adjustments, shall make the final decision regarding all appeals requests. Approval
shall require a majority vote of the City Council.
C) Expiration ofappeal. If substantial development or construction has not taken place
within one year of the date of approval of an appeal, the appeal shall be considered void unless a
petition for a time extension has been granted by the City Council. The extension request shall be
submitted in writing at least 30 days prior to expiration of the appeal and shall state facts
showing a good faith effort to complete work permitted under the original approval.
Prior Code, § 9- 2- 5) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 030 ZONING AMENDMENTS.
A) Purpose ofzoning amendments. Amendments to the text of this chapter and the official
zoning map are made for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety and general welfare,
and in consideration of changing conditions, conservation of property values, the trend of
development and the current and anticipated future uses of property.
Page 4of17
B) Initiation ofzoning amendments. Amendments shall be initiated by the City Council,
Planning Commission or by petition of any person with a legal or equitable interest in a property,
as follows.
1) Amendments initiated by petition. An application for amendment to the zoning
classification of a particular property shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an
approved form and be accompanied by an accurate boundary survey of the property, concept
development plan and any other information determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
necessary for review of the request.
2) Amendments initiated by the City Council or Planning Commission. The City
Council or the Planning Commission may initiate amendments to the text of this chapter or to the
zoning classification of specific properties in the manner provided by M.S. § 462.357, as it may
be amended from time to time.
C) Hearing on zoning amendments. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing
on each valid and complete application for zoning amendment and all amendments initiated by
the City Council or Planning Commission. After the close of the hearing on a proposed zoning
amendment, the Planning Commission shall make findings, pursuant to division (E) below, and
shall submit the same together with its recommendations to the City Council.
D) Action by the City Council on zoning amendments. The City Council shall make the
final decision regarding all zoning amendments. Amendments to the text of this title shall require
a majority vote of the City Council. Amendments to zoning district boundaries shall be adopted
in accordance with state law.
E) Requiredfindings on zoning amendments. The City Council shall make each of the
following findings before granting approval of a request to amend this chapter or to change the
zoning designation of an individual property.
1) The proposed amendment is consistent with the applicable policies of the city' s
comprehensive plan.
2) The proposed use is or will be compatible with present and future uses of land in
the area.
3) The proposed use conforms to all performance standards contained herein and in
the city code.
4) The proposed use can be accommodated with existing public services and will not
overburden the city' s service capacity.
5) The existing zoning classification was designated in error or there have been
significant changes in neighborhood development patterns or community goals and policies that
render the existing zoning inappropriate.
Page 5 of 17
Prior Code, § 9- 2- 6) Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 031 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
A) Purpose ofconditional use permits. A conditional use permit is a zoning device that is
intended as a means of reviewing uses that, because of their unique characteristics, require
special consideration with respect to the objectives of the comprehensive plan and with respect to
impact on surrounding properties. A conditional use permit is granted for the particular use of a
specific property, and may be transferred to subsequent owners so long as the use does not
change.
B) Application for conditional use permit. Any person having a legal or equitable interest
in a property may file an application for the use when it is identified as a conditional use within
the zoning district in which the property is located. An application for a conditional use permit
shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an approved form. A written description of the
proposed use, boundary survey and a detailed site plan, including information as specified in
152.034(E), shall also accompany the application form unless specifically waived by the
Zoning Administrator.
C) Hearing on application for conditional use permit. The Planning Commission shall hold
a public hearing on each complete application for a conditional use permit. After the close of the
hearing on a proposed conditional use, the Planning Commission shall make findings, pursuant
to division (E), and shall submit the same together with its recommendations to the City Council.
D) Action by City Council on conditional uses. The City Council shall make the final
decision regarding all applications for conditional use. Approval of the conditional use permit
shall require a majority vote of the City Council.
E) Requiredfindings for conditional use permits. The City Council shall make each of the
following findings before granting a conditional use permit.
1) The conditional use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience or general welfare.
2) The conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property
in the vicinity and will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of
surrounding property for uses permitted in the district.
3) The conditional use will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained in a
manner that is compatible in appearance with the existing or intended character of the
surrounding area.
4) The conditional use will not impose hazards or disturbing influences on
neighboring properties.
Page 6 of 17
5) The conditional use will not substantially diminish the value of neighboring
properties.
6) The site is served adequately by essential public facilities and services, including
utilities, access roads, drainage, police and fire protection and schools or will be served
adequately as a result of improvements proposed as part of the conditional use.
7) Adequate measures have been or will be taken to minimize traffic congestion in the
public streets and to provide for adequate on- site circulation of traffic.
8) The conditional use is consistent with the applicable policies and recommendations
of the city' s comprehensive plan or other adopted land use studies.
9) The conditional use, in all other respects, conforms to the applicable regulations of
the district in which it is located.
F) Established conditions ofapproval. The City Council may establish any reasonable
conditions of approval that are deemed necessary to mitigate adverse impacts associated with the
conditional use, to protect neighboring properties and to achieve the objectives identified
elsewhere in this chapter.
G) Site improvement performance agreement andfinancial guarantee. The applicant, as
may be applicable, shall be required to guarantee completion of all improvements as shown on
the approved site plan and as required by the conditional use permit approval. The guarantee
shall be made by means of a site improvement performance agreement and a financial guarantee
as specified in § 152. 034( L).
H) Revocation of conditional use permit. Failure to comply with any condition set forth as
part of conditional use permit approval shall constitute a violation of this chapter and is subject
to the enforcement process identified elsewhere in this chapter. Continued noncompliance shall
also constitute grounds for revocation of the conditional use permit, as determined by the City
Council following a public hearing on the matter.
I) Expiration ofconditional use permits. If substantial development or construction has
not taken place within one year of the date of approval of a conditional use permit, the permit
shall be considered void unless a petition for a time extension has been granted by the City
Council. The extension request shall be submitted in writing at least 30 days prior to expiration
of the conditional use permit and shall state facts showing a good faith effort to complete work
permitted under the original approval.
J) Discontinuance ofconditional use permits. Where a conditional use has been
established and is discontinued for any reason for a period of one year or longer or where a
conditional use has been changed to a permitted use or to any other conditional use, the
conditional use permit shall be deemed to be abandoned.
Prior Code, § 9- 2- 7) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
Page 7 of 17
152. 032 INTERIM USES.
A) Purpose of interim uses. An interim use is a use not currently allowed by this chapter,
which may be permitted as a temporary use of property in the following cases:
1) To allow a use for a temporary period of time until a permanent location is obtained
or while the permanent location is under construction;
2) To allow a use which is presently judged acceptable by the City Council, but that
with anticipated development or redevelopment, will not be acceptable in the future or will be
replaced in the future by a permitted or conditional use allowed within the respective district;
and/ or
3) To allow a use which is reflective of long-range change in an area and which is in
compliance with the comprehensive plan, provided that the use maintains harmony and
compatibility with surrounding uses and is in keeping with the architectural character and design
standards of existing uses and development.
B) Authorization of interim use. The City Council may approve an interim use of property
as defined and authorized by M.S. § 462.357, as it may be amended from time to time.
C) Application for interim use. Any person having a legal or equitable interest in a property
may file an application to use the land for one or more interim uses. An application for interim
use shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an approved form and shall be accompanied
by the information as is requested by the Zoning Administrator to facilitate review.
D) Hearing on application for interim use. The Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing on each valid and complete application for an interim use as provided in § 152. 028.
After the close of the hearing on a proposed interim use, the Planning Commission shall make
findings, pursuant to § 152.032, and shall submit the same together with its recommendations to
the City Council.
E) Action by City Council on interim uses. The City Council shall make the final decision
regarding all applications for interim use. Approval shall require a majority vote of the City
Council.
F) Interim use findings. The City Council shall make the following findings in order to
approve an interim use.
1) The proposed use meets the standards of a conditional use permit as established in
152.031.
2) The proposed use conforms to applicable general performance standards identified
in §§ 152.065 through 152. 085.
Page 8 of 17
3) The use is allowed as an interim use in the respective zoning district.
4) The date or event that will terminate the use can be identified with certainty.
5) The use will not impose additional unreasonable costs on the public.
6) The user agrees to any conditions that the City Council deems appropriate for
permission of the use.
G) Termination of interim use. An approved interim use shall terminate upon the
occurrence of any of the following events.
1) The termination date or event specified with approval of the interim use.
2) Any violation of the conditions under which the interim use was approved.
3) A change in this chapter that would render the use non-conforming.
H) Expiration of interim use permits. If the authorized use has not commenced within one
year of the date of approval of the interim use permit, the permit shall be considered void unless
a petition for a time extension has been granted by the City Council. The extension request shall
be submitted in writing at least 30 days prior to expiration of the interim use permit and shall
state facts showing a good faith effort to complete work permitted under the original approval.
I) Site improvement performance agreement andfinancial guarantee. The applicant, as
may be applicable, shall be required to guarantee completion of all improvements as shown on
the approved site plan and as required by the interim use permit approval. Such guarantee shall
be made by means of a site improvement performance agreement and a financial guarantee as
specified in § 152. 034( L).
Prior Code, § 9- 2- 8) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 033 VARIANCES.
A) Authorization. Pursuant to Minnesota Statute §462.357, Subd. 6, as it may be amended
from
time to time, the City Council may issue variances from the provisions of this Chapter.
B) Variances Permitted.
1) Variances shall only be permitted:
a) when they are in harmony with the general purposes and intent of the ordinance;
and
b) when the variances are consistent with the comprehensive plan.
Page 9 of 17
2) Variances may be granted when the applicant establishes that there are practical
difficulties in complying with the zoning ordinance.
C) Practical difficulties. " Practical difficulties," as used in connection with the granting of
variance, means that:
1) the property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner not permitted
by
the zoning ordinance;
2) the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the property not created
by the
landowner; and
3) the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality. Economic
considerations alone do not constitute practical difficulties. Practical difficulties
include, but are not limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy
systems.
D) Permissible variances. Variances shall be granted for earth sheltered construction as
defined in Minnesota Statute §216C.06, Subd. 14, when in harmony with the ordinance. The
City Council may not permit as a variance any use that is not allowed under the zoning ordinance
for the property in the zone where the affected person' s land is located. The City Council may
permit as a variance the temporary use of a one family dwelling as a two family dwelling. The
City Council may impose conditions in the granting of variances. A condition must be directly
related to and must bear a rough proportionality to the impact created by the variance.
E) Application for variance. Any person having a legal or equitable interest in a property
may file an application for one or more variances. An application for a variance shall be filed
with the Zoning Administrator on an approved form and shall be accompanied by a boundary
survey, site plan and any other information deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator to
facilitate review.
F) Hearing on application for variance. The Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing on each valid and complete application for a variance. After the close of the hearing on a
proposed variance, the Planning Commission shall make findings, pursuant to division (G)
below, and shall submit the same together with its recommendations to the City Council.
G) Requiredfindings for variances. The City Council shall not vary the regulations of this
chapter unless it makes findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case.
The findings made by the City Council shall reflect that the proposed variance meets the
requirements of division (B) above.
H) Action by City Council on variances. The City Council shall make the final decision
regarding all applications for variance from the provisions of this chapter. Approval shall require
Page 10 of 17
a majority vote of the City Council.
I) Site improvement performance agreement andfinancial guarantee. The applicant, as may
beapplicable, shall be required to guarantee completion of all private improvements as shown on
the approved site plan and as required by the variance approval. The guarantee shall be made by
means of a site improvement performance agreement and a financial guarantee as specified in
152.034( L).
J) Expiration ofvariance. If substantial development or construction has not taken place
within one year of the date of approval of a variance, the variance shall be considered void unless
a petition for a time extension has been granted by the City Council. The extension request shall
be submitted in writing at least 30 days prior to expiration of the variance and shall state facts
showing a good faith effort to complete work permitted under the original approval.
Prior Code, § 9- 2- 9) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11)
152. 034 SITE PLAN AND BUILDING DESIGN REVIEW.
A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a formal site plan review procedure
for commercial, industrial, institutional and multiple- family development projects and provide
regulations pertaining to the enforcement of site design standards consistent with the
requirements of this chapter.
B) Exemptions. Except in those cases specifically cited in this chapter, the following shall
be excepted from the requirements of this section:
1) Single-family and two- family dwellings;
2) Minor revisions or additions to existing structures, provided that the proposed
modifications do not exceed 30% of the floor area of the structure or 10, 000 square feet,
whichever is less; and
3) Accessory structures, provided that all standards established in § 152. 074 are
satisfied.
C) Sketch plan. Prior to formulation of a site plan, an applicant may present a sketch plan
to the Zoning Administrator prior to filing of a formal application. The Zoning Administrator
shall have the authority to refer the plan to the Planning Commission and/ or City Council for
discussion, review and informal comment. Any opinions or comments provided to the applicant
are to be considered advisory only and shall not constitute a binding decision on the request. The
plan is intended to be conceptual but shall be drawn to scale with topography of a contour
interval not greater than two feet and may include the following:
1) The proposed site with reference to existing development, topography and drainage
conditions on adjacent properties, at least to within 200 feet;
Page 11 of 17
2) Natural features;
3) General location of existing and proposed structures;
4) Tentative access, circulation and street alignments, both public and private;
5) Amenities to be provided such as recreational areas, open space, walkways and
landscaping;
6) General location of parking areas;
7) Proposed public sanitary sewer, water and storm drainage;
8) A statement showing the proposed density of the project with the method of
calculating the density also shown; and
9) Other items as may be deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator.
D) Application for site plan approval. Any person having a legal or equitable interest in a
property may file an application for site plan approval. The application shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator on an approved form and shall be accompanied by a boundary survey, a
site plan including information specified in division (E) below, and any other information
deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator to facilitate review.
E) Required information. The following exhibits shall accompany each application for site
plan review, unless specifically waived by the Zoning Administrator:
1) Site boundaries, buildings, structures and other improvements shall be identified on
site with a current certificate of survey, prepared and signed by a Minnesota licensed land
surveyor, depicting the following:
a) Scale of plan, at one inch equals 50 feet or less;
b) North point indication;
c) Existing boundaries with lot dimensions and area;
d) Existing site improvements;
e) All encroachments;
f) Easements of record;
g) Legal description of the property; and
h) Ponds, lakes, rivers or other water features bordering on or running through the
Page 12 of 17
subject property.
2) A site plan utilizing a copy of the current certificate of survey as a base for the
subject property, depicting the following:
a) Name and address of developer/ owner;
b) Name and address of architect/ designer;
c) Date of plan preparation;
d) Dates and descriptions of all revisions;
e) Name of project or development; and
f) All proposed improvements, including:
1. Required and proposed setbacks;
2. Location, setback and dimensions of all proposed buildings and structures;
3. Location of all adjacent buildings located within 100 feet of the exterior
boundaries of the property in question;
4. Location, number, dimensions and setbacks of proposed parking spaces
and drive aisles;
5. Location, number and dimensions of proposed loading spaces;
6. Location, width and setbacks of proposed curb cuts and driveways;
7. Vehicular circulation;
8. Sidewalks, trails and walkways;
9. Location and type of all proposed lighting, including details of all
proposed fixtures;
10. Location of recreation and service areas;
11. Location of rooftop equipment and proposed screening;
12. Provisions for storage and disposal of waste, garbage and recyclables,
including details for screening exterior trash/recycling enclosures; and
13. Location, size and type of water and sewer system mains and proposed
Page 13 of 17
service connections.
3) A grading/ stormwater management plan in accordance with the provisions
established in §§ 152.535 through 152. 549;
4) A landscaping and screening plan in accordance with the provisions of§§ 152.515
through 152.523; and
5) Other plans and information as required by the Zoning Administrator including but
not limited to:
a) Architectural elevations, color drawings or renderings and sample building
materials of all principal and accessory buildings, identifying type and color of materials used on
all exterior surfaces;
b) Typical floor plan and room plan drawn to scale with a summary of square
footage for each use or activity;
c) Type, location and size of all proposed signage;
d) Vicinity map showing the property in relation to near by highways or major
street intersections; and
e) Sound source control plan.
F) Review procedures. The Zoning Administrator shall forward the site plan to the
Planning Commission for review. The site plan shall be evaluated based on its compliance with
the comprehensive plan, provisions of this chapter and other applicable city codes and policies,
with a recommendation made to the City Council.
G) Action by City Council on site plans. The City Council shall make the final decision
regarding all applications for site plan approval. Approval shall require a majority vote of the
City Council.
H) Relationship to building permit. Upon approval of the site plan by the City Council, the
Building Official will be authorized to release a building permit for the proposed project
pursuant to adopted building and fire codes. The site plan approval process does not imply
compliance with the requirements of the building and fire codes.
I) Plan agreements. All site and construction plans officially submitted to and approved
by the City Council shall be treated as a formal agreement between the applicant and the city.
Once approved, no changes, modifications or alterations shall be made to any plan detail,
standard or specification without prior submission of a plan modification request.
J) Plan modifications. The Zoning Administrator may approve minor revisions to a
previously approved site plan if they are warranted by engineering or other circumstances that
Page 14 of 17
were not foreseen at the time the plans were approved. All other revisions, including changes to
approved building materials and/ or colors, will require approval by the City Council in
accordance with the review procedures established in this subchapter.
K) Expiration ofsite plan. Unless otherwise specified, the approved site plan shall become
null and avoid within one year of the date of approval unless the property owner or applicant has
substantially commenced construction of any building, structure, addition or alteration or use
requested as part of the approved plan or unless a petition for a time extension has been granted
by the City Council. The extension request shall be submitted in writing at least 30 days prior to
expiration of the site plan and shall state facts showing a good faith effort to complete work
permitted under the original approval.
L) Site improvement performance agreement andfinancial guarantee. Following the
approval of a site plan required by this chapter and prior to issuance of a building permit, the
applicant, if deemed necessary by the City Council, shall guarantee to the city the completion of
all improvements as shown on the approved site plan and as required by the site plan approval.
This guarantee shall be made by means of a site performance agreement and a financial
guarantee as provided below.
1) The applicant shall execute the site performance agreement on forms provided by
the city. The agreement shall define the required work and reflect the terms of this subchapter as
to the required guarantee of the performance of the work by the applicant.
2) The required work includes, but is not limited to, private exterior amenities such as
landscaping, vegetation establishment, private driveways, parking areas, curb and gutter,
recreational facilities, wetland buffers, erosion and sediment control, fences and screening and
other similar facilities. The required work shall also include all aspects of the tree preservation
plan, if applicable.
3) A financial guarantee shall be submitted with the executed site performance
agreement as provided herein.
a) Financial guarantees acceptable to the city include cash escrow or an
irrevocable letter of credit.
b) The term of the financial guarantee shall be for the life of the site improvement
performance agreement and it shall be the applicant' s responsibility to insure that a submitted
financial guarantee shall continue in full force and effect until the Zoning Administrator shall
have approved and accepted all of the work undertaken to be done and shall thereby have
released the guarantee or reduced the amount of the guarantee as provided in this subchapter.
c) When any instrument submitted as a financial guarantee contains provision for
an automatic expiration date, after which the instrument may not be drawn upon, not
withstanding the status of the site performance agreement or of the required work, it shall be the
applicant' s responsibility to notify the city in writing, by certified mail, at least 60 days in
advance of the expiration date of the intent to either renew or to not renew the instrument. If the
Page 15 of 17
instrument is to be renewed, a written notice of extension shall be provided at least 30 days prior
to the expiration date. If the instrument is not to be renewed and has not been released by the
Zoning Administrator, another acceptable financial guarantee in the appropriate amount shall be
submitted at least 30 days prior to the expiration date. Upon receipt of an acceptable substitute
financial guarantee, the Zoning Administrator may release the original guarantee.
d) The amount of the financial guarantee shall be established by the Zoning
Administrator based upon an itemized estimate of the cost of all required work as provided by
the applicant. A cash escrow or irrevocable letter of credit shall be in the amount of 100% of the
approved estimated cost.
e) At the option of the city, the applicant may submit a separate financial
guarantee for that portion of the required work consisting solely of landscaping improvements
with another financial guarantee for all other exterior amenities and improvements that comprise
the work. All trees shall be warranted to be alive, of good quality, and disease- free for 12 months
from the time of planting. Any subsequent replacement shall be warranted for 12 months from
the time ofplanting.
4) The time allowed for completion of the required improvements shall be set forth in
the site performance agreement. This agreement and the financial guarantee shall provide for
forfeiture to the city to cure a default or reimburse the city the cost of enforcement measures. As
the applicant completes various portions of the required work, the Zoning Administrator may
release the portion of the financial guarantee as is attributable to the completed work.
Landscaping improvements shall not be deemed complete until the city has verified survivability
of all required plantings through one winter season, defined for the purposes of this section as the
period between October 31 and April 30.
5) The applicant shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing when all or part of
the required improvements have been completed in accordance with the approved plan and may
be inspected. Upon receipt of the notice, the Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the
inspection of the improvements to determine that the useful life of all work performed meets the
standards for the particular industry, profession or material used in the performance of the work.
Any required work failing to meet the standards shall not be deemed to be complete and the
applicant shall be notified in writing as to required corrections. Upon determination that required
work has been completed, including the winter season survivability of landscape plantings,
notice shall be given to the applicant of the date of completion and action taken by the Zoning
Administrator to release, or to reduce the amount of, the financial guarantee.
Prior Code, § 9- 2- 10) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11; Ord. 747, passed
04- 20- 2015)
152. 035 ENFORCEMENT.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Administrator, who is authorized to take any
appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator as provided by statute, charter or ordinance.
The activities may include, but not be limited to, the following:
Page 16 of 17
A) Periodic inspection of buildings, structures or uses of land to determine compliance
with the terms of this chapter;
B) Notification, in writing, of any person responsible for violating a provision of this
chapter, indicated the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it;
C) Order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; order removal of
illegal buildings, structures, additions or alterations; order discontinuance of illegal work being
done; or take any other action authorized by this chapter to insure compliance with or to prevent
violation of its provisions, including cooperation with the City Attorney in the prosecution of
complaints; and
D) Seek immediate enforcement, without prior written notice, whenever it is determined
that an emergency exists in relation to the enforcement of a provision of this chapter which
requires immediate action to protect the health, safety or welfare of occupants of any structure,
or the public.
Prior Code, § 9- 2- 11) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 036 VIOLATION.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not more than the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor prescribed under state law. Each
day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Prior Code, § 9- 2- 12) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
Page 17 of 17
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS GENERALLY
152.050 Establishment of zoning districts
152. 051 Zoning map
152.052 Interpretation of district boundaries
152. 050 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.
In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this chapter, the city shall be divided
into the following use districts:
A) Primary zoning districts:
1) R- 1, Low Density Residence District;
2) R-2, Medium Density Residence District;
3) R- 3, High Density Residence District;
4) C- 1, Neighborhood Service District;
5) C- 2, General Commerce District;
6) C- 3, Downtown Development District;
7) BP, Business Park District;
8) I-1, Limited Industrial District;
9) I-2, Ports of Savage Industrial District;
10) P- 1, Preservation Open Space District; and
11) P- 2, Public Buildings District.
B) Overlay zoning districts:
1) Flood Plain Overlay District;
2) Hamilton Overlay District;
3) Shoreland Overlay District;
4) Wetland Overlay District; and
Page 1 of 3
5) Bluffland Overlay District.
C) Planned unit development districts:
1) PRD, Planned Residential Development District;
2) PCD, Planned Commercial Development District;
3) PMD, Planned Mixed-Use Development District; and
4) PID, Planned Industrial District.
Prior Code, § 9- 3- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 051 ZONING MAP.
The location and boundaries of the districts established by this text are hereby set forth on
the zoning map entitled " Official Zoning Map of the City of Savage." The map shall be on file
with the Zoning Administrator, and hereinafter shall be referred to as " zoning map." The map
and all notations, references or other information shown thereon shall have the same force and
effect as if fully set forth herein and is thereby made a part of this chapter by reference.
Prior Code, § 9- 3- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 052 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
The following rules shall be used to determine the precise location of any zoning district
boundary, as shown on the zoning map.
A) Boundaries shown as following or approximately following the municipal limits shall
be construed as following the limits.
B) Boundaries shown as following or approximately following the centerline of streets,
highways or alleys shall be construed to follow the centerline.
C) Boundary lines that follow or approximately follow platted lot lines or other property
lines shall be construed as following the lines.
D) Boundaries shown as following or approximately following section lines, half-section
lines or quarter- section lines shall be construed as following the lines.
E) Boundaries shown as following or approximately following railroad lines shall be
construed to lie midway between the main tracks of the railroad lines.
F) Boundaries shown as following or approximately following shorelines of any lakes
shall be construed to follow the mean high water line of the lakes, and, in the event of change in
Page 2 of 3
the ordinary high water line, shall be construed as moving with the actual mean high water line.
G) Boundaries shown as following, or approximately following, the centerlines of streams,
rivers or other continuously flowing watercourses shall be construed as following the channel
centerline of the watercourses taken at mean low water, and, in the event of a natural change in
the location of the streams, rivers or other watercourses, the zoning district boundary shall be
construed as moving with the channel centerline.
H) Boundaries shown as separated from, and parallel or approximately parallel to, any of
the features listed in divisions (A) through (G) above shall be construed to be parallel to the
features.
I) Appeals concerning the exact location of zoning district boundary lines shall be made to
the Planning Commission and City Council, as specified in § 152. 029.
Prior Code, § 9- 3- 3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
Page 3 of 3
GENERALREGULATIONSANDPERFORMANCESTANDARDS
152.065 Purpose
152.066 Applicability
152.067 Non-conformities
152.068 Lotcontrols
152.069 Dwellingunitrestriction
152.070 Trafficvisibility
152.071 Agriculturaloperations
152.072 Undergroundutilities
152.073 Specialbuildingsetbacks
152.074 Accessoryusesandstructures
152.075 Movingofbuildings
152.076 Temporaryusesandstructures
152.077 Fences
152.078 Outdoorstorage
152.079 Towersandantennas
152.080 Performancestandards
152.081 Emergencyvehicleaccess
152.082 Watersurfaceuseregulations
152.083 Surfacewaterappropriation
152.084 Windenergyconversionsystems (WECS)
152.085 OutdoorWoodFurnaces
152.086 TemporaryFamilyHealthCareDwellings
152.065 PURPOSE.
Thissubchapterisestablishedtoprovideregulationsofgeneralapplicabilityforproperty
throughoutthecity, topromotetheorderlydevelopmentanduseofland, toprotectandconserve
thenaturalenvironment, tominimizeconflictsamonglanduses, andtoprotectthepublichealth,
safetyandwelfare.
PriorCode, § 9-4-1) ( Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001)
152.066 APPLICABILITY.
Theregulationssetforthinthissubchapterapplytoallstructuresandalllanduses, exceptas
otherwiseprovidedinthischapter. Nouseorstructureshallbeoperatedoroccupiedsoasto
constituteadangerous, injuriousornoxiousconditionbecauseoffire, explosionorotherhazard,
noise, vibration, smoke, dust, fumes, odororotherairpollution, light, glare, heat, cold,
dampness, electricaldisturbance, liquidorsolidrefuseorwaste, waterorsoilpollutionorother
substanceorcondition. Nouseorstructureshallunreasonablyinterferewiththeuseand
enjoymentofpropertybyanypersonofnormalsensitivities. Inaddition, nouseorstructureshall
beoperatedoroccupiedinamannernotincompliancewithanyperformancestandardcontained
inthischapterorwithanyotherapplicableregulation.
Page1of35
PriorCode, § 9-4-2) ( Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001)
152.067 NON-CONFORMITIES.
A) Purpose. Itisthepurposeofthissectiontoaccomplishthefollowing:
1) Recognizetheexistenceofuseswhichwerelawfulwhenestablishedbutwhichno
longermeetallordinancerequirements:
2) Discouragetheenlargement, expansion, intensificationorextensionofany
non-conforminguseoranyincreaseintheimpactofanon-conforminguseonadjacent
properties;
3) Regulatetherepair, replacement, restoration, andimprovementofnon-conforming
usestopreventandabatenuisancesandtoprotectthepublichealth, safety, orwelfare; and
4) Encouragetheeliminationofnon-conformingusesorreducetheirimpacton
adjacentproperties.
B) Generalstandards. Anonconformingusemaybeusedandcontinued, including
throughrepair, replacement, restoration, maintenance, orimprovement, butnotincluding
expansion, onlyincompliancewiththeprovisionsofthissection. Theusemusthavebeenin
compliancewithalllanduseregulationsatthetimethenon-conformitywascreatedinorderto
beeligibleforthebenefitsofbeinganon-conforminguse.
1) Theremaybenoexpansion, enlargement, orintensification, oranyuseoranysite
elementofanynon-conforminguseexcepttomakeitapermitteduse. Normalbuilding
maintenanceandrepairareallowed. Expansion, enlargementorintensificationofconforming
aspectsofanon-conformingdevelopmentareexceptedfromthisrequirement, forexample, ifa
structurehasanon-conformingfrontsetback, itmaybeexpandedonthesidesthatdomeet
setbackrequirementsaslongastheexpansionitselfmeetsordinancerequirements.
2) Nonon-conformingusemayberesumedifnormaloperationoftheusehasbeen
discontinued, orifanon-conformingbuildinghasbeenremovedandnotreplaced, foraperiodof
12ormoremonths. Timewillbecalculatedasbeginningonthedayfollowingthelastdayin
whichtheusewasinnormaloperationandwillruncontinuouslythereafter. Followingthe
expirationof12months, onlyusesthatarepermittedbythissectionareallowedtobe
established.
3) Fulluseofanon-conformingusemaynotberesumediftheamountoflandorfloor
areadedicatedtotheuseislessenedoriftheintensityoftheuseisinanymannerdiminishedfor
aperiodof12ormoremonths. Timewillbecalculatedasbeginningonthedayfollowingthe
lastdayinwhichthenon-conformingusewasinfulloperationandwillruncontinuously
thereafter. Followingtheexpirationof12months, thenon-conformingusemaybeusedonlyin
themannerortotheextentusedduringthepreceding12months. Forthepurposesofthis
Page2of35
section, intensityofusewillbedeterminedbyareviewoftheoriginalnature, functionor
purposeofthenon-conforminguse, thehoursofoperation, traffic, parking, noise, exterior
storage, signs, exteriorlighting, typesofoperations, typesofgoodsorservicesoffered, odors,
areaofoperation, numberofemployees, andotherfactorsdeemedrelevantbythecity.
4) Removalordestructionofanon-conformingusetotheextentofmorethan50% of
itsestimatedmarketvaluebyfireorotherperil, excludinglandvalueandasdeterminedbythe
cityassessor, terminatestherighttocontinueorreplaceanynon-conforminguse, exceptifa
validandcompletebuildingpermitapplicationhasbeensubmittedtothecitywithin180days
afterthepropertywasdamaged.
5) Ifreplacement, reconstruction, orrestorationofalegalnon-conforminglanduseis
allowed, itmayoccurwithoutanylanduseapprovalfromthecityiftheresultingusedoesnot
createanynewadverseimpactsonadjacentpropertyandmatchesexactlytheconditionsthat
existedbeforetheworkwasundertakenorbeforetheusewasdamagedordestroyed. Workthat
wouldnotmeetthisrequirementandanyworkthatwouldbeanimprovementtoa
non-conforminglandusemaynotbeundertakenunlessaconditionalusepermithasbeenissued
fortheproperly. Thecitymayimposeconditionsinaconditionalusepermittoprotectthepublic
health, safety, orwelfare, andtomitigateanynewlycreatedimpactsonadjacentproperty.
6) Ifreplacement, reconstruction, orrestorationofalegalnon-conforming
developmentisallowed, itmayoccurwithoutanylanduseapprovalfromthecityiftheresulting
usedoesnotcreateanynewadverseimpactsonadjacentpropertyandmatchesexactlythe
conditionsthatexistedbeforetheworkwasundertakenorbeforetheusewasdamagedor
destroyed, exceptforinternalimprovementsandimprovedmaterialsusedtoreplaceroof
surfaces, siding, windows, doors, andsimilarcomponents. Workthatwouldnotmeetthis
requirementoranyotherimprovementtoanon-conformingdevelopmentmaynotbeundertaken
unlesstheappropriateapprovalrequiredbelowhasbeengrantedfortheproperty. Thecitymay
imposeconditionsinitsapprovaltoprotectthepublichealth, safety, orwelfare, andtomitigate
anynewlycreatedimpactsonadjacentproperty.
a) Workthatbringsastructureintocompliancewithbuildingcoderequirements
requiresapprovalfromtheZoningAdministrator. TheZoningAdministratormaychoose, inhis
orhersolediscretion, torequiresiteplanapprovalinsteadofadministrativeapproval.
b) Allotherimprovementsrequiresiteplanapprovalnotwithstandinganyother
provisionofthissectiontothecontrary.
7) Workthatconstitutesanexpansionofanynon-conformingusemaynotbedone
withoutfirstobtainingavariance. Expansionofanon-conforminglandusemaybeapproved
onlybytheCityCouncilafterreceivingtheadviceofthePlanningCommission. Expansionofa
non-conformingdevelopmentmaybeapprovedbythePlanningCommission. Avarianceisalso
requiredif:
a) Theuseoccupiesanyspacewithinanon-conformingareathatwaspreviously
notoccupiedbothverticallyandhorizontally. Forexample, avariancewouldberequiredifa
Page3of35
secondfloorareaisexpandedintothenon-conformingsetbackeventhoughthenon-conformity
ofthefirstfloorsetbackdimensionisreduced; or
b) Thenon-conformingaspectofauseisreducedbutstilldoesnotcomplywith
currentordinancestandards.
8) Notwithstandingtheprohibitionscontainedinthissection, ifapprovedbytheCity
Council, anon-conformingusemaybechangedtoanothernonconforminglanduseofless
intensityifitisinthepublicinterest. Inallinstances, theapplicanthastheburdenofprovingthat
theproposedlanduseislessintensethantheexitingnonconforminglanduse.
9) Ifanon-conforminguseissupersededorreplacedbyapermitteduse, the
non-conformingstatusofthepremisesandanyrightswhichariseundertheprovisionsofthis
sectionterminate.
10) Notwithstandingthissection, anon-conforminguseorstructureinafloodplainarea
mayonlyberepaired, replaced, maintained, improved, orexpandedtotheextentthatitwould
qualifyforeligibilityintheNationalFloodInsuranceProgram, wouldnotincreaseflooddamage
potentialorincreasethedegreeofobstructiontofloodflowsinthefloodwayandwouldcomply
withtheprovisionsin §§1 52.355through152.366.
PriorCode, § 9-4-3) ( Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152.068 LOTCONTROLS.
Lotcontrolsareestablishedtoprovidefortheorderlydevelopmentanduseofland, to
minimizeconflictsamonglanduses, andtoprovideadequatelight, air, openspaceand
separationofuses.
A) Minimumlotarea. Lotarearequirementsshallbeasspecifiedintheapplicablezoning
districtinwhichapropertyislocated. Noyardorlotexistingatthetimeofpassageofthis
chaptershallbereducedinsizeorareabelowtheminimumrequirementsidentifiedwithinthis
chapter.
B) Requiredsetbacks. Setbackrequirementsshallbeasspecifiedintheapplicablezoning
district.
Setbacksprovidedforanexistingstructureoruseshallnotbereducedbelow, orfurtherreduced
ifalreadylessthan, theminimumrequirementsofthischapterforequivalentnewconstruction.
C) Divisionoflot. Nolotshallbedividedintotwoormorelotsunlessalllotsresulting
fromthedivisionconformtoallapplicableregulationsofthischapter.
D) Streetfrontage. Eachlotshallhavefrontageonapublicstreetatawidthsatisfyingthe
requirementsspecifiedforeachzoningdistrict. Inthecaseofacondominium, unifiedshopping
centerorplannedunitdevelopment, theentiresiteshallbeconsideredonelot.
Page4of35
E) Limitedprincipalbuildings. Thereshallbenomorethanoneprincipalbuildingonone
zoninglotinanyresidentialdistrictexceptaspartofaplannedunitdevelopment. Forallother
zoningdistricts, aconditionalusepermitshallberequiredtoallowmorethanoneprincipal
buildingonalot,i naccordancewiththeprovisionsof §1 52.031.
F) Setbackencroachments. Allrequiredsetbacksshallremainopenandunobstructedfrom
groundleveltothesky, subjecttothefollowingpermittedobstructions. Innocase, however,
shalltheidentifiedpermittedobstructionsbelocatedcloserthanonefoottoapropertyline,
exceptforfences:
1) Chimneys, cornices, canopies, eavesandotherornamentalfeatures, providedthey
donotextendmorethantwoandone-halffeetintoarequiredyard;
2) Baywindows, providedtheencroachmentdoesnotexceed20squarefeetinarea
andthesetbackoftheprincipalwallstructureistenfeetorgreater;
3) Terraces, steps, stoopsandothersimilarstructuresthatdonotextendabovethe
heightofthegroundfloorleveloftheprincipalstructure, providedtheydonotextendtoa
distancelessthantwofeetfromanylotline;
4) Fireescapesnotexceedingthreefeetinwidth, withinsideorrearyardsonly;
5) InareaszonedR-2, MediumDensityResidenceDistrict, decks, breezeways,
uncoveredporchesandsimilarstructuresmayextendtowithinfivefeetofasidepropertylineor
eightfeetofarearpropertyline;
6) Drivewaysandparkingareas, subjecttotheprovisionsestablishedin §§1 52.490
through152.502;
7) Lightfixturesprovidedthattheperformancestandardsof §1 52.080aresatisfied;
8) Recreationalplaygroundequipmentandlandscapefeatures;
9) Fencesincompliancewith § 152.077;
10) Accessorybuildingsincompliancewith § 152.074;
11) Air-conditioning, heating, ventilationorothermechanicalequipment, subjecttothe
screeningrequirementsspecifiedin §§1 52.515through152.523. Innocase, however, shallthe
equipmentbelocatedinthefrontorcornersideyardareaorcloserthanfivefeettoasideorrear
propertylineunlessitisclearlyestablishedthatnootheralternativesexist; and
12) Signsincompliancewiththeprovisionsof §§1 52.460through152.478.
G) Cornerlots. Onacornerlot, oneofthelotlinesthatabutsthestreetshallbeconsidered
afrontlotlineandtheothershallbeconsideredacornersidelotline. Establishmentofthefront
Page5of35
lotlineshallbebasedontheorientationoftheexistingorproposedbuilding.
H) Throughlots. Onathroughordoublefrontagelot, bothlotlinesthatabutthestreetshall
beconsideredfrontlotlinesforapplyingtheyardsetbackrequirementsofthischapter, exceptin
thecaseofafenceoraccessorybuilding. Inaddition, nohomeonathroughlotorcornerlotin
anyresidentialzoneshallbealloweddirectaccesstoanymajorcollectororarterialstreet
designatedasthatbythecomprehensiveplan, exceptasmaybepermittedbytheCityEngineer.
I) Flaglots. Thefollowingregulationsshallapplytotheplattingofflaglots.
1) Flaglotsmustconnecttoapublicstreetbymeansofanaccessconnectionthathas
aminimumwidthof35feet.
2) Widthofthedrivewaywithintheaccessshallbeaminimumof12feetanda
maximumof50% ofaccesswidth, nottoexceed24feet.
3) Houselocationandsetbacksshallbespecifiedthroughtheplanneddevelopment
zoningprocess.
4) Thecenterlineofthedrivewayshallberadialtotheright-of-waylines.
5) Drivewayslocatedwithinstreetright-of-wayshallmaintainafive-footsetback
fromtheprojectionlineofsidelotlinestothecenterofthestreet.
J) Outlots. Outlotsaredeemedunbuildableandnobuildingpermitshallbeissuedforthe
properties, exceptinthecaseofpublicparkfacilitiesandessentialservices.
K) Buildingheight. Thebuildingheightlimitationsestablishedineachseparatezoning
districtshallapplytoallbuildingsandstructures, withtheexceptionofthefollowing, provided
howeverthatnoexcludedroofequipmentorstructuralelementextendingbeyondthedefined
heightofabuildingmayoccupymorethan25% oftheroofarea:
1) Churchsteeples, spiresorbelfries;
2) Chimneysorflues;
3) Cupolasanddomesthatdonotcontainuseablespace;
4) Flagpoles;
5) Mechanicalorelectricalequipment, subjecttoapplicablescreeningrequirementsin
152.515through152.523;
6) Monuments;
7) Parapetwallsextendingnotmorethanthreefeetabovethelimitingheightofthe
Page6of35
building;
8) Communicationantennasandtowersinaccordancewiththestandardsidentifiedin
152.079;
9) Towers, polesorotherstructuresforessentialservices; or
10) Watertowers.
PriorCode, § 9-4-4) ( Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152.069 DWELLINGUNITRESTRICTION.
A) Exceptasmaybeexpresslyallowedbythischapter, nogarage, tent, accessorybuilding
orrecreationalvehicleshall, atanytime, beusedaslivingquarters, temporarilyorpermanently.
Tents, playhousesorsimilarstructuresmaybeusedforplayorrecreationalpurposes.
B) Basementsandcellarsmaybeusedaslivingquartersorroomsasaportionofthe
principalresidentialdwelling.
PriorCode, § 9-4-5) ( Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001; Ord. 577, passed6-21-2004) Penalty, see §
152.999
152.070 TRAFFICVISIBILITY.
Nofences, structuresorplantingsshallbepermittedtoexceed30inchesinheightwithin
anyfrontorsideyardareaonacornerlotthatmayinterferewiththevisibilityacrossthecorner.
Aminimumsighttriangleshallbeestablishedoneachcornerlotateverystreetintersection
throughwhichmotoristsshallhavereasonableunobstructedview. Theminimumsighttriangleis
atrianglelocatedatthecornerofintersectingstreets. Theadjacentsidesshallbelocatedalong
thecurblineoralongthegutterlineofstreetswithoutcurbandgutter, andshallbe50feetin
length. Thethirdsideshallbeastraightlinejoiningtheendpointsoftheadjacentsides. Thecity
mayorderremovalofvisionobstructionslocatedwithintheminimumsighttriangle.
PriorCode, § 9-4-6) ( Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152.071 AGRICULTURALOPERATIONS.
A) Allagriculturaloperationscurrentlyinexistencewillbepermittedtocontinueoperation
subjecttothefollowingconditions:
1) Agriculturaluses, asdefinedin §1 52.012, exceptingcommercialanimalfarms, fur
farms, kennelsandpoultryfarms, butincludingtruckgardeningandotherhorticulturaluses, are
apermitteduseinthedistrictinwhichanexistingoperationislocatedprovidedthatanynew
privatestableorothernewbuildinginwhichfarmanimalsarekeptshallbeadistanceof100
Page7of35
feetormorefromanyotherlotinaresidentialzoningdistrict.
2) Limitedsalesofproductsproducedmaybeconductedonthepremisesfroma
roadsidestand, butthestandshallnotexceed12feetinheightor500squarefeetinfloorarea,
andnoportionofanystandshallbelocatedorerectednearerthan50feettoanypublicstreet.
B) Aconditionalusepermitshallberequiredtoallowestablishmentofanynew
agriculturaluseaftertheeffectivedateofthischapter.
PriorCode, § 9-4-7) ( Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152.072 UNDERGROUNDUTILITIES.
A) Undergroundutilitiesrequired. Allutilitylineshereafterinstalled, constructedor
otherwiseplacedwithinthecityforelectric, telephone, TVcableorotherlikeorsimilarservices
toserveresidential, commercialandindustrialcustomersinnewlyplattedareaswhetherowned,
installedorconstructedbythesupplier, consumeroranypartyshallbeinstalledandplaced
undergroundinanapproved, safemanner, subjectonlytotheexceptionsstatedbelow.
1) Abovegroundplacement, construction, modificationorreplacementof:
a) Meters, gauges, transformers, streetlightingandserviceconnectionpedestals;
b) Thoselinescommonlyreferredtoas “highvoltage” transmissionlines
providedthat60dayspriortocommencementofconstructionofaproject, theCityEngineer
shallbefurnishednoticeoftheproposedproject, anduponrequest, theutilitycompanyinvolved
shallfurnishanyrelevantinformationregardingtheprojecttotheCityEngineer; and
c) Thoselinesinresidential, commercialandindustrialareaswheretheCity
Council, followingconsiderationandrecommendationbythePlanningCommission, findsthat
undergroundplacementisimpracticalornottechnicallyfeasibleduetotopographical, subsoilor
otherexistingconditionswhichadverselyaffectundergroundutilityplacement.
2) Abovegroundplacementoftemporaryservicelinesshallonlybeallowed:
a) Duringthenewconstructionofanyprojectforaperiodnottoexceed24
months;
b) Duringanemergencytosafeguardlivesorpropertywithinthecity; and
c) Foraperiodofnotmorethansevenmonthswhensoilconditionsmake
excavationimpractical.
B) Repairandmaintenanceofexistinginstallations. Nothinginthissectionshallbe
construedtopreventrepair, maintenance, replacementormodificationofexistingoverhead
utilitylines.
Page8of35
PriorCode, § 9-4-8) ( Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152.073 SPECIALBUILDINGSETBACKS.
A) Setbacksbetweenbuildings. Incaseswhereseveralbuildingsmightbeconstructedon
onelotofrecord, excludingresidentiallots, theminimumspacebetweenthebuildingsshallbe
nolessthanadistanceequaltoone-halfofthebuildingheightsofthetwobuildingsinvolved.
B) Buildingsetbackfromstateorcountyhighways. Inadditiontorequirementscontained
elsewhereinthischapter, thefollowingsetbacksshallapplytopropertieslocatedadjacentto
stateorcountyhighways:
RoadClassification MinimumSetback
STH101andSTH13 40feetfromright-of-way
CSAH42 150feetfromcenterline
Othercountyhighways 100feetcenterline
C) Buildingsetbackfromrailroads. Fiftyfeetfromrailroadright-of-way.
PriorCode, § 9-4-9) ( Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001; Ord. 577, passed6-21-2004) Penalty, see §
152.999
152.074 ACCESSORYUSESANDSTRUCTURES.
A) Generalrequirements. Accessoryusesandstructuresshallcomplywiththefollowing
standardsandallotherapplicableregulationsofthischapter.
1) Noaccessoryuseorstructureshallbeconstructedorestablishedonanylotpriorto
thetimeofconstructionoftheprincipalusetowhichitisaccessory.
2) Theaccessoryuseorstructureshallbeincidentaltoandcustomarilyassociated
withtheprincipaluseorstructure.
3) Theaccessoryuseorstructureshallbesubordinateinarea, extent, andpurposeto
theprincipaluseorstructureserved.
4) Theaccessoryuseorstructureshallcontributetothecomfort, convenienceor
necessityoftheoccupantsoftheprincipaluseorstructureserved. Innocaseshallanaccessory
structurebeutilizedasanindependentresidence, eitherpermanentlyortemporarily.
Page9of35
5) Theaccessoryuseorstructureshallbelocatedonthesamezoninglotasthe
principaluseorstructure, exceptforaccessoryoff-streetparkingandloadingfacilities, subjectto
theprovisionsof §§1 52.490through152.502.
6) Theaccessoryuseorstructureshallnotbeinjurioustotheuseandenjoymentof
surroundingproperties.
B) Residentialaccessorybuildingsandgarages.
1) Designcriteria. Inallresidentialdistricts, thedesignandconstructionofany
garage, carportorstoragebuildingshallbesimilartoorcompatiblewiththedesignand
constructionofthemainbuilding. Theexteriorbuildingmaterials, roofstyleandcolorsshallbe
similartothemainbuildingorshallbecommonlyassociatedwithresidentialconstruction. In
addition, thefollowingshallapply:
a) Garagedooropeningsshallbelimitedtoninefeetinheight; and
b) Polebuildingsareprohibited.
2) Minimumgaragearearequirement. Atwo-cargarageofnotlessthan400square
feetperdwellingunitshallberequiredforallsingle-familydetachedandsingle-familyattached
dwellings. Aone-cargarageofnotlessthan240squarefeetperdwellingunitshallberequired
forallmulti-familyresidentialstructures.
3) Maximumaccessorybuildingsize. Themaximumaccumulativesizeofaccessory
buildingsallowedinaresidentialdistrictshallbe1,000squarefeetperlotforsingle-familyand
two-familydwellingsand350squarefeetperunitformulti-familyresidentialproperties. The
calculationshallincludetheareaofbothattachedgaragesandanydetachedaccessorybuildings.
Maximumaccumulativesizemaybeincreasedbyconditionalusepermit, inaccordancewiththe
provisionsof §1 52.031.I nnocase, however, shallthetotalfloorareaofallaccessorystructures
exceedthegroundfloorareaoftheprincipalbuildinglocatedonthesamelot.
4) Attachedstructures. Anaccessorystructureshallbeconsideredattached, andan
integralpartof, theprincipalstructurewhenitisconnectedbyanenclosedpassageway. The
structuresshallbesubjecttothefollowingrequirements.
a) Thestructureshallmeettherequiredsetbacksforaprincipalstructure, as
establishedforthezoningdistrictinwhichitislocated.
b) Thestructureshallnotexceedtheheightoftheprincipalbuildingtowhichitis
attached.
5) Detachedstructures. Detachedaccessorystructuresshallbepermittedinresidential
districtsinaccordancewiththefollowing.
a) Forlotslessthanone-halfacreinsize, onedetachedaccessorystructuremay
Page10of35
bepermittedinadditiontooneprivategarage, whetherdetachedorattached. Onlyonedetached
accessorystructuremayexceed120squarefeetinsize.
b) Forlotsone-halfacreinsizeorlarger, twodetachedaccessorystructuresmay
bepermittedinadditiontooneprivategarage, whetherdetachedorattached. Onlyonedetached
accessorystructuremayexceed120squarefeetinsize.
c) Detachedaccessorystructuresshallbelocatedtothesideorrearofthe
principalbuilding, andarenotpermittedwithinthefrontyardorwithinacornersideyard.
Minimumsetbacksforthestructuresshallbefivefeetfromsidepropertylinesandtenfeetfrom
arearpropertyline.
d) Maximumheightshallnotexceed12feet.
e) Detachedaccessorystructuresshallnotcovermorethan5% oftherearyardof
residentialproperties. Forlots5,000squarefeetinsizeorsmaller, thecombinedareaofall
detachedaccessorystructuresmaycoverupto10% ofthetotallotarea. Aminimumtwo-car
garagemeasuringnolargerthan24' x24' shallbeallowedforallsingle-familylotscontaining
morethan5,000squarefeetsolongasall
setbackrequirementsaremet.
C) Exceptions. Propertiesthatexceedfiveacresinsizeandthatarenotservedby
municipalsewerandwatershallgenerallybesubjecttotheprovisionsof §1 52.074(A)a nd (B),
exceptasfollows:
1) Propertiesutilizedforfarmingpurposes, asdefinedin §1 52.012shallbeexempt
fromallnumber, sizeanddesignrequirementsestablishedbythissection, providedthatany
accessorybuildingshallmaintainaminimumsetbackof100feetfromafrontlotlineand50feet
fromallsideorrearlotlines.
2) Fornon-farmresidentialproperties, oneoftheallowabledetachedstructuresmay
beincreasedinsizeuptotwotimesthesizeofthedwellingatitsfoundation, subjecttoapproval
ofaninterimusepermitinaccordancewith § 152.032. Designcriteriastandardsmaybe
modifiedorwaivedbytheCityCouncil, dependingontheproposeduseofthestructure.
Additionally, placementofthestructurewillbesubjecttotheprovisionsidentifiedin §1 52.097.
PriorCode, § 9-4-10) (Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001; Ord. 577, passed6-21-2004; Ord. 643,
passed9-8-2008) Penalty, see § 152.999
152.075 MOVINGOFBUILDINGS.
A) Permitrequired. Nopersonshallmoveanyprincipalbuildingfromwithinorwithout
thecitylimitstoanewlocationwithinthecitywithoutfirstobtainingapprovalofaconditional
usepermitinaccordancewiththeprovisionsof §1 52.031.T hisrequirementshallapplytothe
movingofpreexistingbuildingsandisnotmeanttoapplytonewbuildingsmanufacturedoff-site
andmovedtoapermanentsiteinsectionsorascompletedstructures.
Page11of35
B) Standards.
1) TheBuildingOfficialoraqualifiedindependentinspectorshallinspectthebuilding
tobe
movedtodeterminecompliancewiththeBuildingCodeandapplicableordinancesofthecity,
andshallmakeareporttothePlanningCommissionandCityCouncilidentifyinganyconditions
ofnon-complianceandproposedremedies.
2) AsidefromfunctionalrequirementsdeterminedbytheBuildingOfficial, thecentral
objectiveofthissectionistoassurevisualcompatibilityandpreservationofpropertyvalues
withinthecity. Inevaluatingthecompatibilityandpreservationofpropertyvalues, thePlanning
CommissionandCityCouncilshallconsider, amongotherthings, thestructure’ssize, height,
age, architecturalstyleandgeneralappearance.
C) Timelimit. Buildingsshallnotberemovedfromtheirfoundationandtemporarilystored
withinthecityuntilassuranceisprovidedthatthenewfoundationiscapableofreceivingthe
building. Innocaseshallbuildingsintransittoorfromthecitybestoredofftheirfoundation
withinthecityformorethan30days. Thetemporarystorageisrestrictedonthebasisofpublic
safetyandnegativevisualimpact.
D) Financialsecurity. Thepersonorpersonsresponsibleformovingabuildingshall
provideacashescroworbankletterofcreditinanamountdeterminedbytheBuildingOfficial
toassurecompliancewiththeprovisionsofthissection. Evidenceofsufficientliabilityinsurance
shallalsoberequired.
PriorCode, § 9-4-11) (Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152.076 TEMPORARYUSESANDSTRUCTURES.
Thefollowingtemporaryusesandstructuresshallbepermittedinallzoningdistricts, except
asotherwisespecifiedbelow, providedthetemporaryuseorstructureshallcomplywiththe
regulationsofthezoningdistrictinwhichitislocatedandallotherapplicableregulationsofthis
chapter.
A) Garagesales. Garagesalesshallbelimitedtothreeperyear, andthedurationofeach
saleshallbelimitedtofourdays.
B) Seasonaloutdoorsaleofproducts. Theseasonaloutdoorsaleofproducts, includingbut
notlimitedtoproduce, plantsandChristmastrees, maybeallowedasatemporaryuse, in
accordancewiththeprovisionsestablishedin §§1 12.25through112.33.
C) Temporarystructures. Theplacementofatemporarystructureonanypropertywithin
thecityshallrequireapprovalofaconditionalusepermit, exceptasspecificallyprovidedfor
elsewhereinthischapter. Thestructuresshallmeetthefollowingstandards.
Page12of35
1) Allrequiredbuildingsetbacksshallbeobserved.
2) AllapplicablerequirementsoftheStateBuildingCodeshallbemet.
3) Provisionsforwaterandsewerservicingthetemporarystructureshallbesubjectto
reviewandapprovaloftheBuildingOfficial.
4) Placementofthestructureshallnotreducethenumberofparkingstallsbelowthe
minimumrequirementsestablishedin §§1 52.490through152.502.
PriorCode, § 9-4-12) (Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001; Ord. 719, passed05-20-2013) Penalty, see §
152.999
152.077 FENCES.
Fencesshallbepermittedinallyardssubjecttothefollowing.
A) Permitnotrequired. Buildingpermitsarenotrequiredtoconstructfences, exceptin
caseswheretheheightofthefencewillexceedsixfeetinheight.
B) Location. Fencesshallbelocatedentirelyupontheprivatepropertyofthepersons
constructingthefenceunlesstheownerofthepropertyadjoiningagrees, inwriting, thatthe
fencemaybeerectedonthedivisionlineoftherespectiveproperties. Additionally, thelocation
offencesshallbesubjecttothefollowing.
1) Allfencesshallbeconstructedtoallowaccessbyutilitycompanypersonneltoread
utilitymetersontheproperty.
2) Nofenceshallbelocatedacrossoronaneasementfordriveway, sidewalkorother
vehicleorpedestrianaccess.
3) Nofencesshallbelocatedorconstructedinamannertoimpedetheflowofwater
uponadrainageorpondingeasement.
4) Athree-footsetbackfromtheright-of-waylinealongarterialorcollectorstreetsis
requiredwheresidewalksortrailsexistorareplanned.
5) Allfencesaresubjecttositedistancerequirementsasestablishedin §1 52.070.
C) Construction. Fencesshallbeconstructedinaworkmanlikemannerandofsubstantial
materialreasonablysuitedforitsintendedpurpose.
1) Thefollowingmaterialsareacceptablefencematerial:
a) Brickorfieldstone;
Page13of35
b) Wroughtiron;
c) Vinyl;
d) Chainlinkwithaminimumthicknessofnine (9) gaugeandarequiredtoprail
support;
e) Stockadeorboardonboardwood;
f) Otherpermanentmaterialsdesignedforpermanentfencing.
2) Allfencepostsandsupportingmembersshallbeerectedsothatthefinishedsideor
sidesofthefencefacetheadjacentpropertyorpublicright-of-way. Nomore
thantwotypesofrelatedfencingmaterialsshallbeusedinanyfenceorwall.
Fencesconstructedofwoodshallberesistanttodecay. Nofenceshallbe
constructedofincluding, butnotlimitedto, chickenwire, rope, cable, railroad
ties, landscapetimbers, utilitypoles, pallets, usedordiscardedmaterialsin
disrepairorothersimilaritems.
3) SnowfencesmadeofacceptablematerialsmaybeusedfromNovemberthrough
MarchandmustberemovedfromAprilthroughOctober.
D) Maintenance. Everyfenceshallbemaintainedonbothsidesinaconditionofgood
repairandshallnotbeallowedtobecomeorremaininaconditionofdisrepairordangeror
constituteanuisance, publicorprivate. Anyfencethatis, orhasbecomedangeroustothepublic
healthorwelfare, isapublicnuisance, andthecitymaycommenceproperproceedingsforthe
abatementthereof. Materialsusedtorepairandmaintainfencesmustbeconsistentwiththe
existingmaterialsandcolor.
E) Electricfences. Electricfencesshallnotbepermitted.
F) Barbedwirefences. Barbedwirefencesshallonlybepermittedonfarmsorforspecial
securityrequirementsbyconditionalusepermit, asidentifiedindivision (H)(2) below.
G) Fencinginresidentialareas.
1) Exceptinrequiredfrontyardareas, fencesmaybeerecteduptosixfeetinheight.
Incaseswherealotabutsaroadwaydesignatedasacountyorstatehighway, theheightofthe
fencemaybeextendeduptoeightfeetinheightalongthelotlinesthatabuttheroadway.
2) Fencesextendingacrossfrontyardsshallnotexceedfourfeetinheightandshallbe
atleast75% openspaceforpassageofairandlight.
H) Fencinginnon-residentialareas.
1) Businessandindustrialfencesmaybeerecteduptoeightfeetinheight. Fencesin
Page14of35
excessofeightfeetshallrequireaconditionalusepermit.
2) Businessandindustrialfenceswithbarbedwiresecurityarmsaminimumofsix
feetinheight (measuredwithoutthesecurityarm) maybeallowedbyconditionalusepermit.
Thesecurityarmshallbeangledinamannerthatitextendsonlyoverthepropertyofthepermit
holderanddoesnotendangerthepublic. Thesecurityfencingshallnotbelocatedalonga
propertylineabuttingaresidentialuse.
I) Specialpurposefences. Fencesforspecialpurposeandfencesdifferinginconstruction,
heightorlengthmaybepermittedinanydistrictbyconditionalusepermit. Findingsshallbe
madethatthefenceisnecessarytoprotect, bufferorimprovethepremises.
PriorCode, § 9-4-13) (Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001; Ord. 692passed10-17-11) Penalty, see
152.999
152.078 OUTDOORSTORAGE.
Exceptasspecificallyprovidedforbythischapter, allmaterialsandequipmentshallbe
storedwithinabuilding.
A) Exceptions.
1) Laundrydryingandrecreationalequipmentsuchasclotheslinepoles, swingsets
andsandboxes.
2) Constructionandlandscapingmaterialsandequipmentcurrentlybeingusedonthe
premises.
3) Agriculturalequipmentandmaterialsiftheseareusedorintendedforuseonthe
premises.
4) Off-streetparkingofmotorvehiclesandrecreationalvehiclesasspecifiedin
152.494.
5) Firewoodpiles, providedtheyarekeptorstoredasfollows:
a) Inneatandsecurestacks (maximumoffourstacks), eachofwhichshallbeno
higherthanfivefeet. Thetotalvolumeofallstoredwoodshallnotexceedfivefeethighbyten
feetwideby25feetlong.
b) Stacksshallnotbecloserthanfivefeetfromsidepropertylinesandtenfeet
fromrearpropertylinesunlessscreenedbyasolidfenceorwall.
c) Thewoodstacksshallnotbeinfestedorinhabitedwithrats, rodents, verminor
insectsnoxiousordangeroustopersonorproperty.
Page15of35
d) Thewoodshallnotbestoredorkeptinthefrontyardorcornersideyard.
e) Temporarystorageoflotsforupto14daysoutsideoftherequiredareasof
setbackfrompropertylinesandstreetisallowedforthepurposeofcuttingandsplittinglotstoa
sizeusableintheresidence’swoodburningdevice.
B) Standardsforoutdoorstorage. Outdoorstorageshallbeallowedasaconditionalusein
theindustrialzoningdistrictsandintheC-2, GeneralCommerceDistrict, underthefollowing
conditions.
1) Theoutdoorstorageshallbeanaccessoryuseofthepropertyandshalloccupy
spaceotherthanarequiredfrontorcornersideyard.
2) Theoutdoorstorageareashallbefencedarounditsperimeterwithaminimumsix
foothighfenceandshallbescreenedincompliancewiththeprovisionsof §1 52.522(D).
3) Theheightofmaterialsstored, excludingoperablevehiclesandequipment, shall
notexceedtheheightoftheperimeterfence, exceptthattheheightofmaterialsmaybeincreased
totwotimestheheightofthefencewhenthestoredmaterialsmeetbuildingsetback
requirements.
4) Theoutdoorstorageareaishard-surfacedwitheitherbituminousorconcrete. In
industrialdistricts, compactedbituminousmillingsorothercomparabledust-freesurface
materialmaybeusedatthediscretionoftheCityCouncil.
5) Thestorageareashallnottakeup, orinterferewithaccessto, anyrequiredparking
spacesasestablishedin §§1 52.490through152.502.
6) Theoutdoorstorageareashallnotencroachintotherequiredrearorsideyard
buildingsetbackareaifabuttingaresidentialdistrict.
7) Thereshallbenooutdoorstorageofscraporcannibalizedmotorvehicles,
machineryorequipment.
PriorCode, § 9-4-14) (Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001; Ord. 616, passed11-6-2006) Penalty, see §
152.999
152.079 TOWERSANDANTENNAS.
A) Purpose. Inordertoaccommodatethecommunicationneedsofresidentsand
businesseswhileprotectingthepublichealth, safetyandgeneralwelfareofthecommunity, the
CityCouncilfindsthattheseregulationsarenecessaryto:
1) Maximizetheuseofexistingandapprovedtowersandbuildingstoaccommodate
newwirelessserviceantennasinordertoreducethenumberofnewtowersnecessarytoserve
thecommunity;
Page16of35
2) Ensureantennasandtowersaredesigned, locatedandconstructedinaccordance
withallapplicablecoderequirementstoavoidpotentialdamagetoadjacentpropertiesfrom
failureoftheantennaandtowerthroughstructuralstandardsandsetbackrequirements; and
3) Requiretowerequipmenttobescreenedfromtheviewofpersonslocatedon
propertiescontiguoustothesiteand/ortobecamouflagedinamannertocomplementexisting
structurestominimizeadversevisualeffectsofantennasandtowers.
B) Heightrestrictions. Theheightoftowersshallbedeterminedbymeasuringthevertical
distance
fromthetower’spointofcontactwiththegroundorrooftoptothehighestpointofthetower,
includingallantennasorotherattachments. Whentowersaremounteduponotherstructures, the
combinedheightofthestructureatthetower’spointofattachmentandtowermustmeetthe
heightrestrictionsofthissection. Exceptasspecificallyexemptedinthissection, maximum
heightsfortowersareasfollows.
1) Inallresidentialzoningdistricts, themaximumheightofanyantennaortower,
includingallantennasandotherattachments, shallnotexceed40feet, exceptthattheheightmay
beincreasedbyconditionalusepermitiftheapplicantcandemonstratethatbaseduponthe
topographyofthesiteandsurroundingarea, sitingoftheantenna, antennadesign, surrounding
treecoverandstructuresand/orthroughtheuseofscreening, thatoff-siteviewsofthetowerwill
beminimized.
2) Inallnon-residentialzoningdistricts, themaximumheightofanytower, including
allantennasandotherattachments, shallnotexceed40feet, exceptthattheheightmaybe
increasedbyconditionalusepermit.
C) Exceptionstoheightrequirements. Thefollowingareexceptionstothemaximum
heightrestrictionsfortowers.
1) InaccordancewiththepreemptionrulingPRB1oftheFederalCommunications
Commission, towerssupportingamateurradioantennasthatcomplywithallotherrequirements
ofthissectionareexemptedfromtheheightlimitationsuptoatotalheightof70feet, provided
thattheheightistechnicallynecessarytoreceiveandbroadcastamateurradiosignals.
2) Towersandotherantennadeviceswhichareattachedtoastructureandnot
freestandingmaybelocatedinanydistrictunderthefollowingconditions:
a) Thetowersandantennasarelocateduponexistingorproposedstructures
allowedasprincipalorconditionalusesintheunderlyingzoningdistrictand/oruponpublic
structures; and
b) Thetowersandantennasarelimitedtoaheightoftenfeetprojectingabovethe
structure. TheCityCouncilmayallow, throughaconditionalusepermit, anantennaheightofup
to25feetabovethestructureiftheapplicantcandemonstratethat, byacombinationofantenna
design, positioningofthestructureand/orbyscreeningerectedoralreadyinplaceonthe
Page17of35
structure, off-siteviewsoftheantennaareminimizedtoacceptedlevels.
3) Publicutilitystructures, includingbutnotlimitedtowatertowers, antennas, lights
andsignals, powerandtelephonepolesandpolessupportingemergencywarningdevices.
D) Setbackrequirements. Towersshallconformwitheachofthefollowingminimum
setbackrequirements.
1) Towersshallmeetthesetbacksoftheunderlyingzoningdistrictwiththeexception
ofindustrialandcommercialzoningdistricts, wheretowersmayencroachintotherearand/or
sidesetbackareaprovidedthattherearand/orsidepropertylineabutsanotherindustriallyor
commerciallyzonedpropertyandthetowerdoesnotencroachuponanyeasements.
2) Towersshallbesetbackfromtheplannedpublicrights-of-wayasshownonthe
mostrecentlyadoptedmasterstreetplanofthecitybyaminimumdistanceequaltoone-halfof
theheightofthetowerincludingallantennasandattachments.
3) Towersshallnotbelocatedbetweenaprincipalstructureandapublicstreet, with
thefollowingexceptions:
a) Inindustrialzoningdistricts, towersmaybeplacedwithinasideyardabutting
aninternalindustrialstreet; and
b) Onsitesadjacenttopublicstreetsonallsides, towersmaybeplacedwithina
sideyardabuttingalocalstreet.
4) Atower’ssetbackmaybereducedoritslocationinrelationtoapublicstreetvaried
throughaconditionalusepermit, atthesolediscretionoftheCityCouncil, toallowthe
integrationofatowerintoanexistingorproposedstructuresuchasachurchsteeple, lightpole,
powerlinesupportdeviceorsimilarstructure. ThetermINTEGRATIONmayinclude
replacementofanexistingstructuretoincludeawirelessserviceprovider, butdoesnotinclude
replicationofastructure.
E) Towersinresidentialzoningdistricts. Towersintheresidentialzoningdistrictsare
subjecttothefollowingrestrictions.
1) Towerssupportingamateurradioantennasandconformingtoallapplicable
provisionsofthischaptershallbeallowedonlyintherearyardofresidentiallyzonedparcels.
2) Towerssupportingwirelessserviceantennasandconformingtoallapplicable
provisionsofthischaptershallbeallowedonlyinthefollowingresidentiallyzonedlocations
withaconditionalusepermit:
a) Churchsites, whenarchitecturallyintegratedintosteeplesorbelltowers;
b) Parksites, whencompatiblewiththenatureofthepark; and
Page18of35
c) Government, school, utilityandinstitutionalsites.
F) Lighting. Towersshallnotbeilluminatedbyartificialmeansandshallnotdisplay
strobelightsunlessthelightingisspecificallyrequiredbytheFederalAviationAdministrationor
otherfederalorstateauthorityforaparticulartower. Whenincorporatedintotheapproved
designofthetowerforcamouflagepurposes, lightfixturesusedtoilluminateballfields, parking
lotsorsimilarareasmaybeattachedtothetower.
G) Signsandadvertising. Nosignage, advertisingoridentificationofanykindintendedto
bevisiblefromthegroundorotherstructuresispermitted, exceptapplicablewarningand
equipmentinformationsignagerequiredbythemanufacturerorbyfederal, stateorlocal
authorities.
H) Accessoryutilitybuildings. Allutilitybuildingsandstructuresaccessorytoatowershall
bearchitecturallydesignedtoblendinwiththesurroundingenvironmentandshallmeetthe
minimumsetbackrequirementsforaccessorystructuresoftheunderlyingzoningdistrict. Ground
mountedequipmentshallbescreenedfromviewbysuitablevegetation, exceptwhereadesignof
non-vegetativescreeningbetterreflectsandcomplementsthearchitecturalcharacterofthe
surroundingneighborhood.
I) Designstandards. Proposedormodifiedtowersandantennasshallmeetthefollowing
requirements:
1) Towersandantennas (includingantennacables) shallbedesignedtoblendintothe
surroundingenvironmenttothemaximumextentpossibleasdeterminedbythecitythroughthe
useofbuildingmaterials, colors, texture, screening, landscapingandothercamouflaging
architecturaltreatment, exceptininstanceswherethecolorisdictatedbyfederalorstate
authoritiessuchastheFederalAviationAdministration; and
2) WirelessservicetowersshallbeofamonopoledesignunlesstheCityCouncil
determinesthatanalternativedesignwouldbetterblendintothesurroundingenvironment.
J) Co-locationrequirement. Allwirelessservicetowerserected, constructedorlocated
withinthecityshallcomplywiththefollowingrequirements.
1) AproposalforanewwirelessservicetowershallnotbeapprovedunlesstheCity
Councilfindsthatthewirelessfacilityplannedfortheproposedtowercannotbeaccommodated
onanexistingorapprovedtowerorbuildingwithinaone-fourthmilesearchradiusfortowers
lessthan80feetinheight, aone-halfmilesearchradiusfortowerslessthan120feetinheight,
andaonemilesearchradiusfortowersequaltoorgreaterthan120feetinheightoftheproposed
towerduetooneormoreofthefollowingreasons.
a) Theplannedwirelessfacilitywouldexceedthestructuralcapacityofthe
existingorapprovedtowerorbuilding, asdocumentedbyaqualifiedandlicensedprofessional
engineer, andtheexistingorapprovedtowercannotbereinforced, modifiedorreplacedto
Page19of35
accommodateplannedorequivalentwirelessfacilityatareasonablecost.
b) Theplannedwirelessfacilitywouldcauseinterferencemateriallyimpacting
theusabilityofotherexistingorplannedwirelessfacilityatthetowerorbuildingasdocumented
byaqualifiedandlicensedprofessionalengineerandtheinterferencecannotbepreventedata
reasonablecost.
c) Existingorapprovedtowersandbuildingswithinthesearchradiuscannot
accommodatetheplannedwirelessfacilityataheightnecessarytofunctionreasonablyas
documentedbyaqualifiedradiofrequencyengineer.
d) Otherunforeseenreasonsthatmakeinunfeasibletolocatetheplannedwireless
facilityuponanexistingorapprovedtowerorbuilding, includingtheinabilityoftheexisting
towerorbuildingtomeetthetechnologicalradiofrequencyrequirementsoftheproposed
wirelessfacilityortherefusaloftheowneroftheexistingtowerorbuildingtomakespace
availableforthewirelessfacilityonthattowerorbuilding.
2) Theapplicantmustdemonstratethatagoodfaithefforttoco-locateonexisting
towersandstructureswasmade, butanagreementcouldnotbereached.
3) Anyproposedwirelessservicetowershallbedesigned, structurally, electrically,
andinallrespects, toaccommodateboththeapplicant’santennasandcomparableantennasforat
leasttwoadditionalusersifthetowerisover120feetinheightorforatleastoneadditionaluser
ifthetowerisover80feetinheight. Towersmustbedesignedtoallowforfuturerearrangement
ofantennasuponthetowerandtoacceptantennasmountedatvaryingheights.
K) Towerconstructionrequirements. Alltowerserected, constructedorlocatedwithinthe
cityshallcomplywiththerequirementsoftheStateBuildingCode.
L) Antennamountedonroofs, wallsandexistingtowers. Theplacementofwirelessservice
antennasonroofs, wallsandexistingtowersmaybeapprovedbythecity, withoutaconditional
usepermit, providedtheantennameetstherequirementsofthissectionandprovidedthatno
antennashallbeplacedontheroofofabuildingwithintheHamiltonOverlayDistrict, asdefined
in §§1 52.380through152.389. Inadditiontothesubmittalrequirementsrequiredelsewherein
thischapter, anapplicationforabuildingpermitforantennastobemountedonanexisting
structureshallbeaccompaniedbythefollowinginformation:
1) Asiteplanshowingthelocationoftheproposedantennasonthestructureand
documentingthattherequestmeetstherequirementsofthissection;
2) Abuildingplanshowingtheconstructionoftheantennasandtheproposedmethod
ofattachingthemtotheexistingstructure, anddocumentingthattherequestmeetsthe
requirementsofthissection; and
3) Certificationbyaqualifiedandlicensedprofessionalengineerindicatingthe
existingstructureortower’sabilitytosupporttheantennas.
Page20of35
M) Abandonedorunusedtowersorportionsoftowers. Allabandonedorunusedtowers
andassociatedfacilitiesshallberemovedwithin12monthsofthecessationofoperationsatthe
siteunlessthecityapprovesatimeextension. Intheeventthatatowerisnotremovedwithin12
monthsofthecessationofoperationsatasite, thecitymayremovethetowerandassociated
facilitieswiththecostsofremovalassessedagainsttheproperty. Afterthefacilitiesareremoved,
thesiteshallberestoredtoitsoriginaloranimprovedstate.
N) Interferencewithpublicsafetytelecommunications. Noneworexistingwirelessservice
shallinterferewithpublicsafetytelecommunications.
O) Additionalsubmittalrequirements. Inadditiontotheinformationrequiredelsewherein
thischapterinsupportofanapplicationforabuildingpermitfortowersandtheirantennas,
applicationsforconditionalusepermitsforthetowersshallincludethefollowingsupplemental
information:
1) Areportfromaqualifiedandlicensedprofessionalengineerdemonstratingthe
following:
a) Descriptionofthetowerheightanddesignincludingacross-sectionand
elevation;
b) Documentationoftheheightabovegradeforallpotentialmountingpositions
forco-locatedantennasandtheminimumseparationdistancesbetweenantennas; and
c) Descriptionofthetower’scapacity, includingthenumberandtypeofantennas
thatitcanaccommodate.
2) Forallwirelessservicetowers, aletterofintentcommittingthetowerownerand
hisorhersuccessorstoallowtheshareduseofthetowerifanadditionaluseragreesinwritingto
meetreasonabletermsandconditionsforshareduse, solongasthereisnonegativestructural
impactuponthetowerandthereisnodisruptiontotheserviceprovided; and
3) Beforetheissuanceofabuildingpermit, thefollowingsupplementalinformation
shallbesubmitted.
a) Confirmationthattheproposedtowercomplieswiththerequirementsofthe
FederalAviationAdministration, FederalCommunicationsCommissionandanyappropriate
statereviewauthorityorthatthetowerisexemptfromthoseregulations.
b) Areportfromaqualifiedandlicensedprofessionalengineerthatdemonstrates
thetower’scompliancewiththeapplicablestructuralandelectricalstandardsasrequiredbythe
StateBuildingCode.
P) Exemptions. Thefollowingantennasareexemptfromtherequirementsofthissection
exceptasotherwiseprovided:
Page21of35
1) Satelliteearthstationantennas. Satelliteearthstationantennasthataretwometers
orlessindiameterandlocatedorproposedtobelocatedinacommercialorindustrialdistrict;
2) Antennasdesignedtoreceivesignals. Antennasdesignedtoreceivesignalsas
follows:
a) Antennasthatareonemeterorlessindiameterandthataredesignedtoreceive
directbroadcastsatelliteservice, includingdirect-to-homesatelliteservices;
b) Antennasthatareonemeterorlessindiameterandthataredesignedtoreceive
videoprogrammingservicesviamulti-pointdistributionservices, includingmulti-channel
multi-pointdistributionservices, instructionaltelevisionfixedservicesandlocalmulti-point
distributionservices; and
c) Antennasdesignedtoreceivetelevisionbroadcastsignals.
3) Requirementsforantennasexemptedunderthisdivision. Antennasexempted
underthisdivisionaresubjecttothefollowingrequirements.
a) Antennas (includingantennacables) shallbedesignedtoblendintothe
surroundingenvironmentthroughtheuseofappropriatecolors, exceptininstanceswherethe
colorisdictatedbyfederalorstateauthoritiessuchastheFederalAviationAdministration.
b) Nolighting, signage, advertisingoridentificationofanykindintendedtobe
visiblefromthegroundorotherstructuresispermitted, exceptapplicablewarningand
equipmentinformationsignagerequiredbythemanufacturerorbyfederal, stateorlocal
authorities.
c) Antennasandanyguywiresorguywireanchorsshallnotbeerectedwithina
publicorprivateutilityanddrainageeasementorwithinarequiredfrontorcornersideyard, and
shallbesetbackaminimumoffivefeetfromalllotlines.
d) Antennasshall, totheextentfeasible, beplacedinapositionthatisnotvisible
fromthestreet, unlessplacementinaccordancewiththeserequirementswouldimpairreception
ofanacceptablesignal.
e) Antennasshallnotexceed12feetinheightinaresidentialzoningdistrictor20
feetinheightinanon-residentialzoningdistrict.
f) Antennasshallnotbeconstructed, installedormaintainedsoastocreatea
safetyhazardorcausedamagetothepropertyofotherpersonsandshallconformtothelatest
structuralstandardsandwindloadingrequirementsoftheUniformBuildingCodeandthe
ElectronicsIndustryAssociationandanyotherapplicablereviewingagencies.
4) Residentialdistrictstandards. Satelliteearthstationantennasinexcessofone
Page22of35
meterindiameterandantennasdesignedtoreceivedirectbroadcastservicesormulti-channel
multi-pointdistributionservicesinexcessofonemeterindiametermaybeallowedby
conditionalusepermitwithintheresidentialzoningdistrictsofthecityand, inadditiontothe
requirementsofthissection, shallcomplywiththefollowingstandards.
a) Thelotonwhichtheantennaislocatedshallbeofsufficientsizetoassurethat
anobstruction-freereceivewindowcanbemaintainedwithinthelimitsoftheproperty
ownership.
b) Exceptwheretheantennaisscreenedbyastructureexceedingtheantenna
height, landscapebufferingandscreeningshallbemaintainedonallsidesoftheantennaina
mannerinwhichgrowthofthelandscapeelementswillnotinterferewiththereceivewindow.
c) Theantennaisnotgreaterthanthreemetersindiameter.
5) Non-residentialdistrictstandards. Satelliteearthstationantennasinexcessoftwo
metersindiameterandantennasdesignedtoreceivedirectbroadcastservicesormultichannel
multi-pointdistributionservicesinexcessofonemeterindiameterareallowedasaconditional
usewithinthenon-residentialzoningdistrictsofthecityand, inadditiontotherequirementsof
thissection, shallcomplywiththefollowingstandards.
a) Thelotonwhichtheantennaislocatedshallbeofsufficientsizetoassurethat
anobstructionfreetransmit-receivewindoworwindowscanbemaintainedwithinthelimitsof
thepropertyownership.
b) Exceptwheretheantennaisscreenedbyastructureexceedingtheantenna
height, landscapebufferingandscreeningshallbemaintainedonallsidesoftheantennaina
mannerinwhichgrowthofthelandscapeelementswillnotinterferewiththetransmit-receive
window.
Q) WirelessSupportStructuresandSmallWirelessFacilitiesinthePublicRight-of-Way.
1) Wirelesssupportstructuresandsmallwirelessfacilitiesareapermitteduseinthe
publicright-of-waywithinorabuttingallzoningdistricts, exceptasprovidedinsubsection (2)
below. Nopersonshallplaceawirelesssupportstructureorsmallwirelessfacilityinthepublic
right-of-wayunlessincompliancewiththerequirementsofChapter100.
2) Theinstallationofaneworreplacementwirelesssupportstructureforthesitingof
smallwirelessfacilitiesinthepublicright-of-waywithinorabuttinganareazonedforsinglefamilyresidentialuseshallbepermittedonlywithaconditionalusepermitgrantedpursuantto
therequirementsofSection152.031andmeetingthefollowingadditionalstandards:
a) Thewirelesssupportstructureshallbelocatedatleastsixhundred (600) feet
fromanyexistingwirelesssupportstructureorpublicutilitystructure.
b) Theheightoftheneworreplacementwirelesssupportstructureshallnot
Page23of35
exceedtheaverageheightofallstructuresontheblockorthemaximumheightofstructures
allowedinthezoningdistrict, whicheverisless.
c) Thewirelesssupportstructureshallhavenoassociatedground-mounted
equipmentexceptanelectricalmeterifsuchmeterisnecessaryfortheoperationofasmall
wirelessfacilitytobeplacedonthewirelesssupportstructure.
d) Theapplicantfortheconditionalusepermitshallcomplywithallrequirements
ofChapter100, includingbutnotlimitedtoobtainingaright-of-waypermit, obtainingasmall
wirelessfacilitypermit, andenteringintoaStandardSmallWirelessFacilityCollocation
Agreementwiththecity, asappropriate.
e) Placementofthewirelesssupportstructureshallcomplywithgenerally
applicableandreasonablehealth, safety, andwelfareregulationsconsistentwiththeCity’s
managementofthepublicright-of-way.
PriorCode, § 9-4-15) (Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001; Ord. 797, passed5-7-2018) Penalty, see §
152.999
152.080 PERFORMANCESTANDARDS.
A) Lighting. Nouseorstructureshallbeoperatedoroccupiedastocreatelightorglarein
anamountortoadegreeorintensityastoconstituteahazardouscondition, orastounreasonably
interferewiththeuseandenjoymentofpropertybyanypersonofnormalsensitivities, or
otherwiseastocreateapublicnuisance. Allusesshallcomplywiththefollowingstandards
exceptasotherwiseprovidedinthissection.
1) Alllightingfixturesshallbeofadowncast, cutofftype, concealingthelightsource
fromviewandpreventingglarefromspillingintoanyresidentialproperty.
2) Lightingshallnotcreateasensationofbrightnessthatissubstantiallygreaterthan
ambientlightingconditionssoastocauseannoyance, discomfortordecreasedvisual
performanceorvisibility.
3) Lightingshallnotdirectlyorindirectlycauseilluminationorglareinexcessof
one-halffoot-candlemeasuredattheclosestresidentialpropertylineandonefoot-candle
measuredatthestreetcurblineornon-residentialpropertylinenearestthelightsource.
4) Lightingshallnotcreateahazardforvehicularorpedestriantraffic.
5) Lightingofbuildingfaçadesorroofsshallbelocated, aimedandshieldedsothat
lightisdirectedonlyontothefaçadeorroof.
6) Lightingshallbemaintainedstationaryandconstantinintensityandcolor, and
shallnotbeofaflashing, movingorintermittenttype.
Page24of35
7) Theuseslistedbelowshallbeexemptfromtheprovisionsofthissectionas
follows:
a) Publiclycontrolledormaintainedstreetlightingandwarningandemergency
ortrafficsignals;
b) Athleticfieldsandoutdoorrecreationfacilitiesservingoroperatedbyan
institutionalorpublicusethatotherwisemeetsalloftherequirementsofthischaptershallbe
exemptduetotheiruniquerequirementsfornighttimevisibilityandlimitedhoursofoperation;
and
c) Neonsigns, theatermarqueelightsanddecorativelighting.
B) Glareandheat. Nouseorstructureshallbeoperatedoroccupiedastocreateglareor
heatfromhightemperatureprocessessuchasweldingormetallurgicalrefininginanamountor
toadegreeorintensityastoconstituteahazardouscondition, orastounreasonablyinterfere
withtheuseandenjoymentofpropertybyanypersonofnormalsensitivities, orotherwiseasto
createapublicnuisance. Usesproducingglareorheatshallbeperformedwithinacompletely
enclosedbuildinginamannerastomaketheglareorheatcompletelyimperceptiblefromany
pointalongapropertyline.
C) Vibration. Nouseorstructureshallbeoperatedoroccupiedastovibrationinanamount
ortoadegreeorintensityastoconstituteahazardouscondition, orastounreasonablyinterfere
withtheuseandenjoymentofpropertybyanypersonofnormalsensitivities, orotherwiseasto
createapublicnuisance. Anyusecreatingperiodicearth-shakingvibrationsshallbeprohibitedif
thevibrationsareperceptiblebeyondthelotlineofthesiteonwhichtheuseislocated. The
standardsshallnotapplytovibrationscreatedduringaconstructionprocess.
D) Radiationandelectricalemissions. Nouseorstructureshallbeoperatedoroccupiedas
toemitdangerousradioactivitybeyondenclosedareasortocreateelectricaldisturbanceinan
amountortoadegreeorintensityastoconstituteahazardouscondition, orastounreasonably
interferewiththeuseandenjoymentofpropertybyanypersonofnormalsensitivities, or
otherwiseastocreateapublicnuisance.
E) Noise. Nouseorstructureshallbeoperatedoroccupiedastocreatenoiseinanamount
orwiththerecurrenceoratatimeofdayastoconstituteahazardouscondition, orasto
unreasonablyinterferewiththeuseandenjoymentofpropertybyanypersonofnormal
sensitivities, orotherwiseastocreateapublicnuisance. Allusesshallcomplywiththestandards
governingnoiseasregulatedbytheMinnesotaPollutionControlAgencyandby § 95.05.
F) Odoremissions. Nouseorstructureshallbeoperatedoroccupiedastocreateodorin
anamountortoadegreeastoconstituteahazardouscondition, orastounreasonablyinterfere
withtheuseandenjoymentofpropertybyanypersonofnormalsensitivities, orotherwiseasto
createapublicnuisance. Allusesshallcomplywiththestandardsgoverningodoremissionsas
regulatedbytheMinnesotaPollutionControlAgency.
Page25of35
G) Airemissions. Nouseorstructureshallbeoperatedoroccupiedastocreatethe
emissionofsmoke, particulatematter, noxiousgasorotherairemissioninanamountortoa
degreeastoconstituteahazardouscondition, orastounreasonablyinterferewiththeuseand
enjoymentofpropertybyanypersonofnormalsensitivities, orotherwiseastocreateapublic
nuisance. Allusesshallcomplywiththestandardsgoverningairemissionsasregulatedbythe
MinnesotaPollutionControlAgency.
H) Waterpollution. Nouseorstructureshallbeoperatedoroccupiedastocreatewater
pollutioninanamountastoconstituteahazardouscondition, orastounreasonablyinterfere
withtheuseandenjoymentofpropertybyanypersonofnormalsensitivities, orotherwiseasto
createapublicnuisance. Allusesshallcomplywiththestandardsgoverningwaterpollutionas
regulatedbytheMinnesotaPollutionControlAgency.
I) Explosiveandflammablematerials. Nouseorstructureinvolvingthemanufacture,
storageoruseofexplosiveorflammablematerialsshallbeoperatedoroccupiedastoconstitute
ahazardouscondition, orastounreasonablyinterferewiththeuseandenjoymentofpropertyby
anypersonofnormalsensitivities, orotherwiseastocreateapublicnuisance. Allusesinvolving
themanufacture, storage, oruseofexplosiveorflammablematerialsshallcomplywithall
pertinentregulations, includingbutnotlimitedtotheMinnesotaBuildingCodeandMinnesota
UniformFireCode. Anyuserequiringthestorage, useormanufacturingofproductsthatcould
decomposebydetonationshallbelocatednotlessthan400feetfromanynon-industriallyzoned
districtline, providedthatthissectionshallnotapplytothestorageoruseofliquefiedpetroleum
ornaturalgasfornormalresidentialorbusinesspurposes.
J) Hazardousmaterials. Nouseorstructureinvolvinghazardousmaterialsshallbe
operatedoroccupiedastoconstituteahazardouscondition, orastounreasonablyinterferewith
theuseandenjoymentofpropertybyanypersonofnormalsensitivities, orotherwiseastocreate
apublicnuisance. Allusesshallcomplywiththestandardsgoverninghazardousmaterialsas
regulatedbytheMinnesotaPollutionControlAgency.
A) Wastedisposal. Nouseorstructureshallbeoperatedoroccupiedastodischargewaste
materialinanamountastoconstituteahazardouscondition, orastounreasonablyinterferewith
theuseandenjoymentofpropertybyanypersonofnormalsensitivities, orotherwiseastocreate
apublicnuisance. Allusesshallcomplywiththestandardsgoverningwastedischargeas
regulatedbytheMinnesotaPollutionControlAgency. Wastematerialshallnotbewashedor
dumpedintothepublicstormsewersystemorthesanitarysewersystemwithoutapermitfrom
thecity. Ifthepermitisnotgranted, amethodofdisposalshallbedevisedwhichshallnot
requirecontinuouslandacquisitionforpermanentoperationandwillnotcauseadetrimental
effecttotheadjacentland. Shouldthewastebeofasolidformratherthanfluid, thestoragearea
shallbesolocatedandscreenedfrompublicview. Inalldistricts, allwastematerial, debris,
refuse, garbage
materialsnotcurrentlyinuseforconstructionorotherwiseregulatedhereinshallbekeptinan
enclosedbuildingorbeproperlyscreenedaccordingtotherequirementsofthissubchapter.
L) Drainage, erosionandsedimentcontrol. Nolandareashallbedevelopedandnouse
shallbeallowedthatresultsinwaterrunoff, flooding, erosionorsedimentdepositiononadjacent
Page26of35
properties. Run-offshallbeproperlychanneledintoastormdrain, watercourse, pondingareaor
othersuitablefacility.
1) Inthedevelopment, improvement, excavationoralterationofland, theexisting
directionof
drainageshallnotbechangediffunctioningproperly, unlessplansforthedevelopmentare
approvedbytheCityEngineer.
2) Priortoissuanceofabuildingorexcavation/fillingpermitorexcavationfilling
approvalforanydevelopment, improvement, excavationoralterationofland, astormwater
managementplanshallbeprepared, consistentwiththisCode, andsubmittedtotheCity
Engineerforapproval. Theplanshallspecifythemeasurestobeusedbefore, duringandafter
constructionuntilthesoilandslopearestabilizedbypermanentcover. Thesecontrolmeasures
shallbemaintainedingoodworkingorderuntilsitestabilizationoccurs.
3) Crossingsofwatercourses, thatdrain100acresormore, shallmaintainprofile
stabilityandconveyancecapacity.
M) Trafficcontrol. Trafficgeneratedbyanyuseshallbechannelizedandcontrolledina
mannerthatwillavoidcongestiononpublicstreets, safetyhazardsorexcessivetrafficthrough
residentialareas. Trafficintoandoutofallbusinessandindustrialusesorareasshallbeforward
movingwithnobackingontostreetsorpedestrianways. Noaccessdrivetoanylotshallbe
locatedwithin30feetofanytwointersectingstreetright-of-waylines.
N) Maintenance. Allstructures, landscapingandfencingshallbemaintainedinamanner
compatiblewithadjacentpropertiesandconsistentwiththegoalsandobjectivesofthe
comprehensiveplanandasfurtherspecifiedwithinthischapter. Allpropertyownersshallbe
responsibleforkeepingtheirlandfreeofwastematerial, noxiousweedsandconditions
potentiallydetrimentaltothegeneralhealth, safetyandwelfare.
PriorCode, § 9-4-16) (Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001; Ord. 692, passed10-17-11; Ord. 747, passed
04-20-2015) Penalty, see § 152.999
152.081 EMERGENCYVEHICLEACCESS.
A) Purpose. Thepurposeofthissectionistofacilitatetherapidandeffective
extinguishmentoffiresandtheprovisionofemergencyservicesbyensuringthatallpremises
thattheFireDepartmentandotheremergencypublicrescueandothersafetydepartmentsare
calledupontoprotectwillbereadilyaccessibleforeffectiveemergencyserviceoperations.
B) Emergencyaccessrequired. Everyusepermittedbythischaptershallprovideaccess
forfirevehiclesandemergencyapparatusfromapublicstreet, exceptstructureswithlessthan
threedwellings. EmergencyaccessshallbeprovidedasrequiredbytheMinnesotaUniformFire
Codeandotherregulationsadoptedbythecity.
Page27of35
C) Firelanestandards. Allfirelanesshallcomplywiththefollowingstandards.
1) Thefirelaneshallprovideclear, unobstructedaccessforvehiclesandapparatusat
alltimes.
2) Signsprohibitingparkingorstandingofmotorvehiclesshallberequired.
3) Firelanesshallbeatleast20feetinwidth. TheFireChiefshallhavetheauthority
torequireadditionalwidthinordertoinsureadequatefireorrescueoperation.
D) Alternativestorequiredaccessandfirelanes. Therequirementsforfireaccess
roadwaysandfirelanesmaybemodifiedwhenanapprovedfireprotectionsystemorsystems, as
definedbytheSavageUniformFireCode, areinstalledif, intheopinionoftheFireChief,
firefightingandrescueoperationsarenotimpaired.
PriorCode, § 9-4-17) (Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152.082 WATERSURFACEUSEREGULATIONS.
A) Purpose. AsauthorizedbyM.S. §4 59.20,a sitmaybeamendedfromtimetotime,t his
sectionisenactedforthepurposeandwiththeintenttocontrolandregulatetheuseofthewaters
withinthecity, topromotethefullestuseandenjoymentbythepublicingeneralandthecitizens
ofthecityinparticularofthewaters’ toinsuresafetyforpersonsandpropertyinconnection
withtheuseofthewaters’ toharmonizeandintegratethevaryingusesofthewatersandto
promotethegeneralwelfare, safetyandwelfareofthepublic.
B) Specificregulations. Nomotorpoweredwatercraftshallbeoperatedatanytimeupon
thewatersurfaceofMcCollPond (DNR #70-17W). Thisrestrictiondoesnotapplytoelectric
motorsorscalemodelboats.
C) Enforcement.
1) TheenforcementofthissectionshallbetheprimaryresponsibilityoftheCounty
Sheriff’sDepartmentandcitypoliceofficers.
2) OtherlicensedpeaceofficersincludingconservationofficersoftheDepartmentof
NaturalResourcesofthestatearealsoauthorized.
D) Exemptions. AllauthorizedResourceManagement, EmergencyandEnforcement
Personnel, whileactingintheperformanceoftheirassignedduties, areexemptfromthe
foregoingrestrictions.
PriorCode, § 9-4-18) (Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152.083 SURFACEWATERAPPROPRIATION.
Page28of35
A) Purpose. Thissectionisenactedtoeliminatepotentialforshorelanderosion, toprotect
againstpotentialforlegalliability, topreservethequalityofnaturalresourceswithinthecityand
therebypromotefullestenjoymentofthecity’slakesandstreams.
B) Specificregulations. Theappropriationofwaterfromanypubliclake, pond, water
body, wetland, river, creek, streamorwatercourselocatedwithinthecity, foranypurpose
andbyuseofanytypeofpumporpipingsystem, isstrictlyprohibitedwiththefollowing
exceptions. WatercanberemovedfromalakeorstormwaterpondintheCity, forpurposes
ofresidentialirrigation, ifitisperformedconsistentwiththefollowingconditions:
1) Thewaterlevelinthelakeorpondisatleast90% ofthenormalwaterlevel;
2) Thewaterremovaldoesnotresultinscouringorerosion;
3) Theuseofthelakeorpondwaterdoesnotresultinsiterunofforthedischargeof
pollutants;
4) Thereisnootherstatute, ruleorordinanceprohibitingtheactivity; and
5) Priortoappropriation, theresidentiallandownernotifiestheCityEngineerwiththe
nameandlocationofthebodyofwater, thequantityandrateofwaterwithdrawal
andtheresidentiallandowner’scontactinformation. TheCityEngineercandenyor
restricttheactivityifneededforprotectionofpublicsafetyortheenvironment.
C) Exemption. Thisrestrictionshallnotapplytopumping/pipingthatexistedpriorto
March10, 1994, providedthereisnofeasibleoptionforthewaterintake, asdeterminedbythe
CityEngineerandconditioneduponsubmittaltothecityofwrittenverificationofthe
pre-existingsituation.
PriorCode, § 9-4-19) (Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001; Ord. 692, passed10-17-11; Ord. 759, passed
10-05-2015) Penalty, see § 152.999
152.084 WINDENERGYCONVERSIONSYSTEMS (WECS).
A) Purpose. Thepurposeofthissectionistoregulatetheinstallationandoperationsof
WECSwithinthecity, nototherwisesubjecttositingandoversightbythestate.
B) Definitions. Forthepurposesofthissection, thefollowingdefinitionsshallapply
unlessthecontextclearlyindicatesorrequiresadifferentmeaning.
METEOROLOGICALTOWER. Towerswhichareerectedprimarilytomeasurewind
speedanddirectionsplusotherdatarelevanttositingWECS. METEOROLOGICALTOWERS
donotincludetowersandequipmentusedbyairports, theMinnesotaDepartmentof
Transportation, orothersimilarapplicationstomonitorweatherconditions.
PROPERTYLINE. Theboundarylineoftheareaoverwhichtheentity/individual
Page29of35
applyingforaWECSconditionalusepermithaslegalcontrolforthepurposesofinstallationofa
WECS. Thiscontrolmaybeattainedthroughfeetitleownership, easement, orotherappropriate
contractualrelationshipbetweentheapplicantandthelandowner.
TOTALHEIGHT. Thehighestpoint, abovegroundlevel, reachedbyarotortiporany
otherpartoftheWECS.
TOWER. Includesverticalstructuresthatsupporttheelectricalgenerator, rotorblades,
ormeteorologicalequipment.
WINDENERGYCONVERSIONSYSTEMSORWECS. Anydevicesuchasawind
charger, windmill, orwindturbineandassociatedfacilitiesthatconvertswindenergyto
electricalenergy.
C) Application. WECSmaybeallowedasaconditionalusefollowingissuanceofa
conditionalusepermitwithintheLimitedIndustrialandBusinessParkzoningdistrictsofthe
city, subjecttotheregulationsandrequirementsofthissection.
D) Declarationsofconditions. TheCouncilmayimposesuchconditionsonthegrantingof
aWECSconditionalusepermitasmaybenecessarytocarryoutthepurposeandprovisionsof
thissection.
E) Submittalrequirements. AllapplicationsforaWECSconditionalusepermitshallbe
accompaniedbythefollowing:
1) Adetailedsiteplandrawntoscaleanddimensionalshowingthefollowing
information:
a) Lotlinesanddimensions.
b) Locationandheightofallbuildings, structures, abovegroundutilitiesandtrees
locatedonthelot, includingbothexistingandproposedstructures.
c) Locationsandheightofalladjacentbuildings, structures, aboveground
utilitiesandtreeslocatedwithin350feetoftheexteriorboundariesofthelotinquestion.
d) Existingandproposedsetbacksofallstructureslocationonthelotinquestion.
e) Sketchelevationofthelotandadjacentlotsaccuratelydepictingtheproposed
WECSanditsrelationshiptostructuresonadjacentlots.
2) StandarddrawingsofthestructuralcomponentsoftheWECS, includingthebase
andfootings, shallbesubmittedalongwithengineeringdataandcalculationstodemonstrate
compliancewiththestructuraldesignprovisionsoftheStateBuildingCode. Drawingsand
engineercalculationsshallbecertifiedbyaregisteredengineer.
Page30of35
3) DocumentationorotherevidencefromthedealerormanufacturerthattheWECS
hasbeensuccessfullyoperatedinatmosphericconditionssimilartotheconditionswithinthe
city. TheWECSshallbewarrantedagainstanysystemfailuresreasonablyexpectedinsevere
weatheroperationconditions.
4) Documentationorotherevidencefromthemanufacturer’sengineeroranother
qualifiedengineercertifyingthattheturbine, foundationandtowerdesignoftheWECSiswithin
acceptedprofessionalstandards, giventhelocalsoilandclimateconditions.
5) AsignificanttreeinventoryinconformancewithChapter102showingthelossof
significanttreeswithintheconstructionareafortheWECSand/ortemporarymeteorological
tower.
6) AletterorcopyofthereviewresponsefromtheFAAconcerningthedevelopment
applicationandtheirrequirementsforwarningdevices, heightrestrictions, andthelike.
7) Acertifiedsurveyforthepropertyand/oralllandswithintwotimesthedistance
specifiedinthisdivision (E) verifyingthelocation, dimensions, typesandusesofexisting
structures, proposedaccessorystructures, above-groundutilitylines, propertylines, heightofall
significanttrees, drainageandutilityeasements, publicrights-of-wayandtheproposedlocation
fortheWECS.
8) ThetechnicalspecificationsoftheWECSincluding, butnotlimitedto, thetype,
totalheight, bladelength, operatingparameters, anticipatedsoundlevelatthepropertyline,
lightningprotectionandclearancedistancesbetweenthefarthestextensionoftheWECSblades
tothepropertylines.
F) Generalstandards. AllWECSconstructedwithinthecityshallcomplywiththe
followingrequirements:
1) NomorethanoneWECSshallbepermittedperlot.
2) AbuildingpermitshallberequiredfortheinstallationofaWECSwithinthecity.
3) ThetotalheightoftheWECSshallbedeterminedbycalculatingtheheightfrom
thebaseofthetoweratexistinggradetothehighestpossibleextensionoftheblade.
4) ThepermittedmaximumheightoftheWECS, thetotalheightofthesystemshall
beincluded. Totalsystemheightshallbemeasuredfromthebaseofthetowertothehighest
possibleextensionoftherotor.
a) Aratioofonefoottoonefootbetweenthedistanceoftheclosestproperty
linetothebaseoftheWECStothetotalheightofthesystem.
b) Amaximumtotalheightof175feet.
Page31of35
Theshortestheightof (a) and (b) aboveshallbeusedindeterminingthemaximum
allowabletotalheightoftheWECSsystem. ThetotalheightofaWECSmustalsocomplywith
FAAregulationPart77, “ObjectsAffectingNavigableAirSpace” and/orMnDOTRule14,
MCAR1.3015 “CriteriaforDeterminingObstructiontoAirNavigation.”
5) TheWECSshallbelocatedtocomplywiththefollowingminimumsetback
requirements:
a) Fromthenearestdwelling, businessorotherhabitablestructure: 300feet.
b) Fromthenearestpublicright-of-way: 300feet.
c) Fromthenearestpropertyline: 300feet. Thedistancemaybereducedifthe
applicantprovidessupportingdocumentationshowingthattheWECScanfunctionwithinthe
nighttimenoisestandardsspecifiedin §9 5.05andiftheWECSisadjoiningpermanentpublic
openspace. However, innoinstanceshallanyportionoftheWECSextendoveranyproperty
line, includingthefullarcareacreatedbyanybladesusedinthesystem.
d) NoportionoftheWECS, includingthefullarcareacreatedbyanybladesused
inthesystem, shallextendoveranyabove-groundpowerlineordrainageandutilityeasement.
6) AllWECSrotorsshallhaveadiameternogreaterthan26feet.
7) BladearcscreatedbytheWECSshallhaveaminimumof30feetofclearanceover
anyaccessorystructureortreewithinthefullarcareacreatedbythebladesusedinthesystem
withina200footradius.
8) TheWECSshallbeequippedwithbothamanualandautomaticbrakingdevice
capableofstoppingtheWECSoperationinhighwinds (40milesperhourorgreater).
9) TheWECS, includingtheblades, shallbegroundedandshieldedtoprotectagainst
naturallightingstrikesinconformancewiththeNationalElectricCodeasadoptedbythecity.
10) TheWECSelectricalequipmentandconnectionsshallbedesignedandinstalledin
conformancewiththeNationalElectricCodeasadoptedbythecity.
11) NoWECSshallbeinterconnectedwiththelocalelectricalutilitycompanyuntilthe
utilitycompanyandtheCityEngineerhaveapprovedsuchproposal. Theinterconnectionofthe
WECSwiththeutilitycompanyshalladheretotheNationalElectricalCodeasadoptedbythe
city.
12) TheWECSshalldisplayasignpostedatthebaseofthetower, nottoexceedtwo
squarefeetinarea. Thesignshallcontainthefollowinginformation:
a) Awarningofhighvoltage;
Page32of35
b) Themanufacturer’sname;
c) Anemergencytelephonenumber; and
d) Theemergencyshutdownprocedures.
Additionalsignsmayberequiredonthebasisofindividualapplicationsassafety
needsdictate.
13) Topreventunauthorizedclimbing, WECStowersmustcomplywithoneofthe
followingprovisions:
a) Towerclimbingapparatusshallnotbelocatedwithin12feetoftheground.
b) Alockedanti-climbdeviceshallbeinstalledonthetower.
c) Towerscapableofbeingclimbedshallbeenclosedbyalocked, protective
fenceatleasteightfeethigh.
14) NoWECSshallhaveaffixedlights, reflectors, flashersoranyotherillumination
exceptforthosedevicesrequiredbytheFederalAviationAdministration (FAA).
15) TheWECSshallbefiltered, shieldedorotherwisedesignedandconstructedsoas
nottocauseelectrical, radiofrequency, televisionandothercommunicationsignalinterference.
16) NoisesemanatingfromtheoperationofaWECSshallbeincompliancewithand
regulatedbytheStateofMinnesotaPollutionControlStandards, MinnesotaRegulationsNPC1
and2, asamended.
17) TheWECSshallbeconstructedinamonopoledesignoftubularsteelandshallbe
self-supportingwithouttheuseofguywiresorothersimilarfeatures. Towersshallbepainteda
non-contrastingcolorconsistentwiththesurroundingareasuchaspalegrayorwhiteorhavea
galvanizedfinishtoreducevisualimpact.
18) Thecityherebyreservestherightuponissuingaconditionalusepermittoinspect
thepremisesonwhichtheWECSislocated. IfaWECSisnotmaintainedinanoperational
conditionandposesapotentialsafetyhazard, theownershalltakeexpeditiousactiontocorrect
thesituation.
19) Theapplicantshallberesponsibleforimmediaterepairordamagetopublic
drainagesystemsorotherpublicinfrastructurestemmingfromconstruction, operationor
maintenanceoftheWECS.
20) AnyWECSwhichisnotusedforsixmonthsshallbedeemedabandonedandshall
bedismantledandremovedfromthepropertyattheexpenseofthepropertyowner.
Page33of35
G) Temporarymeteorologicalequipmentandtowers. Temporarymeteorological
equipmentlocateduponatemporarytowerusedonaninterimbasistogatherwindand
meteorologicaldatatodeterminefeasibilityoftheWECSshallrequiretheprocessingof
administrativepermitissuedbytheZoningAdministratorandshallcomplywiththefollowing:
1) Nomorethanonesuchtemporarymeteorologicaltowershallbepermittedonalot
atonetime.
2) Themeteorologicaltowershallbeplacedonpropertyfornolongerthan18months
fromthedateofpermitissuance.
3) Anymeteorologicaltowernotusedforsixmonthsshallbedeemedabandonedand
shallbedismantledandremovedfromthepropertyattheexpenseofthepropertyowner.
4) Thetowershallbetemporaryinnatureandshallnothavepermanentfoundations.
Guywiresmaybeusedaslongastheconnectionstothegroundaretemporaryandthewiresare
designedtosupportthewindandiceloadofthemeteorologicaltower. Visibleandreflective
objects, suchasplasticsleeves, reflectorsortape, shallbeplacedonguywireanchorpointsand
alongtheouterandinnermostguywiresuptoeightfeetabovetheground.
5) Abuildingpermitshallberequiredforinstallationofameteorologicaltowerand
thetowershallmeettheminimumwindandiceloaddesignrequiredbytheStateBuildingCode.
Priortosubmittalofthebuildingpermitapplication, theZoningAdministratorshalldetermine
whatthesubmittalrequirementswillbeforthetemporarymeteorologicaltower.
6) Themeteorologicaltowerandanyrelatedguywiresshallbeprotectedfrom
unauthorizedclimbing.
7) Themeteorologicaltowershallbesetbackadistanceequaltoitsheightfromany
lotline, dwelling, schoolbusinessorinhabitablestructure.
8) Themeteorologicaltowershallbegroundedandshieldedtoprotectagainstnatural
lightningstrikesinconformancewiththeNationalElectricalCode.
9) Nometeorologicaltowershallhaveaffixedorattachedlights, reflectors, flashersor
anyotherillumination, exceptforthosedevicesrequiredbytheFAA.
Ord. 644, passed9-8-2008)
152.085 OUTDOORWOODFURNACES.
A) Purpose. Topromotethepublichealth, safety, andwelfareandtosafeguardthehealth,
comfort, livingconditions, safety, andwelfareofthecitizensoftheCityofSavageduetoair
pollutionandhumanhealthimpactscausedbytheuseofoutdoorwoodfiredfurnacesand
similardevices.
Page34of35
B) Definitions. Forthepurposesofthissection, thefollowingdefinitionshallapplyunless
thecontextclearlyindicatesorrequiresadifferentmeaning.
OUTDOORWOODFURNACE. Anyequipment, device, applianceorapparatus, or
anypartthereof, whichisinstalled, affixedorsituatedoutdoorsfortheprimarypurposeof
combustionoffueltoproduceheatorenergyusedasacomponentofaheatingsystem. An
OutdoorWoodFurnacemayalsobereferredtoasanOutdoorWoodBoiler, OutdoorWoodfiredHydronicHeaterorSolidFuelBurners.
C) ProhibitedUse. NoOutdoorWoodFurnacesorsimilardevicesshallbepermitted
withinanyZoningDistrict.
Ord. 653, passed5-18-2009)
152.086 TEMPORARYFAMILYHEALTHCAREDWELLINGS.
PursuanttoauthoritygrantedbyMinnesotaStatutes, Section462.3593, subdivision9, the
CityofSavageopts-outoftherequirementsofMinn. Stat. 462.3593, whichdefinesandregulates
TemporaryFamilyHealthCareDwellings.
Ord. 773, passed8-15-2016)
Page35of35
SPECIFIC USE/CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
152. 095 Purpose
152. 096 Applicability
152.097 Use standards
152. 098 Building design and construction standards
152. 095 PURPOSE.
Specific use standards are established to provide supplemental regulations to address the
unique characteristics of certain land uses. Building design and construction standards are
intended to ensure that buildings in commercial and industrial areas of the city will be of high
quality in both visual and functional terms.
Prior Code, § 9- 5- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 096 APPLICABILITY.
A) Use standards. The use standards in this subchapter apply to the uses listed in § 152. 097
whether the uses are permitted by right or by conditional use in the applicable zoning district.
The standards identified within this subchapter shall apply in addition to all other applicable
regulations of this chapter.
B) Building design standards. The standards identified in § 152. 098 shall apply to all new
structures and in all cases where exterior repairs, remodeling or expansion of existing buildings
require a building permit. It is not intended, however, that the provisions by applied to residential
structures.
Prior Code, § 9- 5- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 097 USE STANDARDS.
A) Automobile and vehicle sales.
1) The sales area shall not take up, or interfere with access to, any required parking
spaces as established in §§ 152.490 through 152. 502.
2) Accessory repair shall be subject to the provisions established elsewhere in this
subchapter for that use.
3) The sales area shall be surfaced with concrete or bituminous, include perimeter
curbing, and shall meet required parking setbacks for the district in which the use is located.
4) Used sales shall only be allowed when an integral part of a new automobile
dealership or if the vehicles are located completely inside a principal or accessory building.
Page 1 of 18
5) All necessary city or state licenses shall be obtained.
6) Outside storage of parts, materials and equipment shall not be permitted.
B) Automobile convenience facility.
1) Fuel pumps shall be installed on pump islands. Adequate space shall be provided to
access fuel pumps and allow maneuverability around the pumps.
2) Underground fuel storage tanks are to be positioned to allow adequate access by
motor fuel transports and unloading operations that do not conflict with circulation, access and
other activities on the site.
3) A protective canopy structure may be located over the pump islands and an
accessory structure, subject to the following standards.
a) The edge of the canopy shall maintain setbacks as required for the principal
building.
b) The canopy shall not exceed 18 feet in height and must provide at least 14 feet
of clearance to accommodate a semi-trailer passing underneath.
c) The canopy fascia shall not exceed three feet in vertical height.
d) Canopy lighting shall consist of canister spotlights recessed into the canopy.
No portion of the light source or fixture may extend below the bottom face of the canopy. Total
canopy illumination shall not exceed 115 foot- candles below the canopy at ground level. The
fascia of the canopy shall not be illuminated.
e) The architectural design, colors and character of the canopy shall be consistent
with the principal building on the site.
f) Signage may be allowed on a detached canopy, however the signage will apply
towards the allowable sign area for the principal building.
g) Canopy posts/ sign posts shall not obstruct traffic or the safe operation of the
gas pumps.
4) Pump islands must be elevated six inches above the traveled surface of the site and
must be set back at least 30 feet from any property line. Additionally, the set back between pump
islands must be a least 24 feet, measured curb face to curb face.
5) Any public address system shall not be audible from any property line. Playing of
music or advertisement from the public address system is prohibited.
Page 2 of 18
6) No outside storage, display or services shall be allowed except as follows:
a) Propane sales limited to 20-pound capacity tanks may be located outside
provided the tanks are secured in a locker and the use meets all State Uniform Building and Fire
Codes.
b) Sale or display of goods shall be allowed on the sidewalk immediately in front
of the principal building, provided that a minimum four-foot clearance is maintained for
pedestrian access and that the display does not exceed four feet in height and is maintained in an
orderly fashion. Display shall not block the handicap accessible route.
c) Sale or display of goods shall be allowed in an area underneath the canopy
adjacent to the pump island provided that the display does not exceed four feet in height and is
maintained in an orderly and safe fashion and in accordance with applicable State Fire Code
regulations.
7) A car wash facility is permitted as an accessory use, subject to the additional
requirements established for that use in division (K) below.
C) Automobile and vehicle rental.
1) The rental vehicle display area shall not take up, or interfere with access to, any
required parking spaces as established in §§ 152.490 through 152.502.
2) Accessory automobile repair shall be subject to the provisions established
elsewhere in this subchapter for that use.
3) The display area shall be surfaced with concrete or bituminous.
4) No sales of vehicles shall be allowed on the premises.
D) Automobile repair, major.
1) All painting must be conducted in an approved paint booth. All paint booths and all
other activities of the operation shall thoroughly control the emission of fumes, dust or other
particulate matter in compliance with Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota State
Fire Code and other applicable building codes.
2) All flammable and hazardous materials, including liquids and rags, shall conform
to the applicable provisions of the Minnesota State Fire Code and other applicable state and
county regulations.
3) Outside storage of equipment, parts or materials is prohibited except as allowed
with a conditional use permit in accordance with Section 152. 078 ( B) Outdoor Storage.
4) Outdoor display of used vehicles for sale is not permitted.
Page 3 of 18
5) All repair, assembly, disassembly or maintenance of vehicles shall occur within a
closed building except minor maintenance including tire inflation, adding oil and wiper
replacement.
1) Parking shall comply with the minimum off-street parking requirements found in
Section 152.498 and shall meet standards outlined in Section 152.497 Parking Area Design and
Maintenance. Vehicles shall not be stored in the required parking areas for a period exceeding 7
days. Parking of vehicles on public right- of-way is prohibited.
2) The storage of damaged, inoperable or junk vehicles must be completely inside a
building except as allowed with a conditional use permit in accordance with Section 152. 078 ( B)
Outdoor Storage.
E) Automobile repair, minor.
1) All flammable and hazardous materials, including liquids and rags, shall conform to
the applicable provisions of the Minnesota State Fire Code and other applicable state and county
regulations.
2) Outside storage of equipment, parts or materials is prohibited except as allowed
with a conditional use permit in accordance with Section 152. 078 ( B) Outdoor Storage.
3) Outdoor display of used vehicles for sale is not permitted.
4) All repair, assembly, disassembly or maintenance of vehicles shall occur within a
closed building except minor maintenance including tire inflation, adding oil and wiper
replacement.
5) The storage of damaged, inoperable or junk vehicles waiting for repair must be
completely inside a building except as allowed with a conditional use permit in accordance with
Section 152. 078 ( B) Outdoor Storage
6) Parking shall comply with the minimum off-street parking requirements found in
Section 152.498 and shall meet standards outlined in Section 152.497 Parking Area Design and
Maintenance. Vehicles shall not be stored in the required parking areas for a period exceeding 7
days. Parking of vehicles on public right- of-way is prohibited.
F) Bank/financial institution. Drive-through facilities are permitted as a conditional use
subject to the provisions of§ 152. 031 and to the development standards identified in division (P)
below.
G) Bar, nightclub or similar liquor establishment. Any use that generates more than 50%
of its revenues from the sale of alcohol shall require approval of a conditional use permit,
pursuant to § 152.031 when located closer than 500 feet to any existing school, church, day care
facility or residential use. The distance shall be measured from the nearest property line of the
Page 4of18
school, church, day care facility or residential area to the main entrance of the liquor
establishment.
H) Boat and marine sales. Subject to applicable standards for automobile and vehicle sales,
as identified in division (A) above.
I) Boat repair, maintenance and storage. Subject to applicable standards for major
automobile repair, as specified in division (D) above.
J) Building material sales. Subject to outside storage and display standards identified in
152.078 and elsewhere in this section.
K) Car wash.
1) Adequate stacking space shall be provided to accommodate vehicles.
2) Stacking spaces shall not interfere with on-site circulation patterns or required
on- site parking and loading areas.
3) Parking and stacking spaces shall be screened from view of abutting residential
districts in compliance with the provisions of§§ 152. 515 through 152. 523.
4) Provisions are made to control and reduce noise and special precautions shall be
taken to limit the effects of noise associated with the car wash operation, dryer and vacuum
machines. The wash doors must remain closed during the entire wash and dry operation cycle.
5) The location and operation of vacuum machines must not interfere with stacking
areas, on- site circulation or on- site parking and loading areas, and may not be located in a yard
abutting residentially zoned property.
6) Untreated water from the car wash shall not be discharged into the storm sewer. If
the water is to be pre-treated and discharged into the storm sewer, the pre-treatment plans shall
be subject to review and approval by the City Engineer and Building Official, and subject to
applicable requirements of Metropolitan Council Environmental Services and Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency.
L) Communication towers. All communication towers are subject to the provisions established
for that use in § 152. 079.
M) Contractor office andyard. Subject to outside storage standards established in
152.078.
N) Day care facilities.
1) The proposed site shall have a minimum lot area as determined by the Minnesota
Department of Human Services and as required by the zoning district in which it is located. The
City Council may increase the required lot area in those cases where an increase is considered
Page 5 of 18
necessary to ensure compatibility of activities and to maintain public health and safety.
2) Required off-street parking shall be located separately from any outdoor play area.
3) Adequate short- term parking or drop off areas, accommodating at least three
vehicles, shall be provided within close proximity to the main entrance. The parking or drop- off
areas shall not conflict with off-street parking access or pedestrian movement.
4) Outdoor play areas must be adequately enclosed to prevent children from leaving
the premises unattended and shall not be located within a required front yard area.
5) Residential day care facilities are exempt from the above standards.
0) Dog care facilities.
1) Must be located in a freestanding building and must be located a minimum of five
hundred
500) feet from any residential property line.
2) Outdoor play areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any property line
in the rear or side yards and shall be enclosed by eight ( 8)- foot high solid fence designed to
retain dogs. The fence shall provide a complete visual screen from surrounding properties.
3) An employee shall remain on site at all times dogs are on the premises including
overnight.
4) Dogs shall be kept inside at all times except when exercised and shall be
accompanied by an employee at all times when outside the building during the dog's stay.
5) Outdoor exercise areas must be cleaned at least once a day to prevent the
accumulation of dog waste and the spread of disease.
6) All state health department and Minnesota pollution control agency requirements for
such facilities are met.
7) Limited to a maximum of twenty (20) dogs on site at any one time, provided that under
the conditional use permit requirements for this use, the maximum number of dogs may
be increased over twenty (20) if the applicant demonstrates such larger number still meets
the requirements for a conditional use permit under § 152. 031 ( E) and ( F).
P) Drive-through facilities for restaurants, banks and other similar uses.
1) The site design must accommodate adequate turning radius and vertical clearance
for vehicles. Designated loading areas must be exclusive of off-street parking stalls and drive
aisles and shall not cause conflicts with customer vehicles and pedestrian movement.
Page 6 of 18
2) Appropriate provisions must be made to protect pedestrian areas from
encroachments by parked or moving vehicles. In front of the principal structure, a minimum five
foot wide sidewalk shall be provided.
3) A continuous and permanent concrete curb, not less than six inches above grade
shall separate internal sidewalks from motor vehicle areas.
4) Drive-through windows are permitted subject to the following standards.
a) Adequate automobile stacking must be provided for the service window to
minimize conflict with traffic flow and required parking.
b) The stacking lane and its access must be designed to control traffic in a manner
to protect pedestrians, buildings and green area on the site.
c) No part of the public street or boulevard may be used for stacking of vehicles.
5) The stacking lane, order board intercom and service window shall be designed and
located to minimize automobile and communication noises, emissions and headlight glare upon
adjacent properties, particularly residential premises, and to maximize maneuverability of
vehicles on the site.
Q) Dwelling in conjunction with a business in commercial or industrial districts.
1) The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City Council that the
dwelling is necessary to the proper conduct of the business.
2) If located in a separate building, the dwelling shall meet the setback requirements
of the zoning district where it is located.
R) Farm and construction equipment sales, service and rental. Subject to applicable
standards for automobile and vehicle sales, as identified in division (A) above.
S) Firearms dealer.
1) No firearms or ammunition shall be displayed in window areas or any areas where
they can be viewed from the public right- of-way.
2) The use shall meet the required security standards mandated by Minnesota Statutes.
T) Funeral Home, with or without Crematory and Alkaline Hydrolysis
1) All applicable state and federal licenses and approvals must be obtained
including, but not limited to the State of Minnesota Department of Health and Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency rules, standards and policies.
Page 7 of 18
2) Noise emitted from the crematory shall not exceed 60 decibels measured at the
property line.
3) The crematory shall be located a minimum of 300 feet from the nearest property
line of a residential use.
4) The crematory shall not be used for the disposal of any waste materials, including
medical or industrial.
U) Greenhouse, lawn and garden supplies. Outdoor display of landscape plantings,
materials and
lawn and garden supplies are subject to the following.
1) Landscape materials and lawn and garden supplies are required to be located within
an outdoor display confinement area, as specified in division (Y) below.
2) Outdoor display and storage of landscape plantings, materials and supplies, and
lawn and garden supplies associated with retail nurseries and/ or lawn and garden supply stores
and not located within an outdoor display confinement area may be permitted on a permanent
basis with a conditional use permit obtained pursuant to the provisions of§ 152. 031.
V) Home occupations. Customary home occupations shall be permitted within all
residential zoning districts and within residential portions of mixed use developments, provided
that:
1) No more than 25% of the gross floor area of the residence is used for the
occupation;
2) Only persons residing in the residence shall be engaged in the occupation;
3) Only articles made or originating on the premises shall be sold on the premises
unless the articles are incidental to a permitted commercial service;
4) There shall be no exterior evidence of the occupation including:
a) No exterior display of articles for sale;
b) No sign except as permitted for a dwelling in the district;
c) No exterior storage of equipment or materials used in the occupation; and
d) Access to the use shall be from within the principal structure.
5) No mechanical or electrical equipment is used if the operation of the equipment
interferes with the desired quiet residential environment of the neighborhood;
Page 8 of 18
6) No commercial vehicle over 10, 000 pounds gross weight or which is 22 feet or
more in length shall be used in conjunction with a home occupation;
7) The amount of customer traffic does not detract from the residential character of
the neighborhood; and
8) No accessory building is used in the conduct of the occupation.
W) Industrial machinery and equipment sales, service and rental. Subject to applicable
standards for automobile and vehicle sales, as identified in division (A) above.
X) Laundry, self-service or commercial. Venting of odors, gas and fumes shall be directed
away from residential uses.
Y) Outdoor dining area. Outdoor dining areas include sidewalk cafes and outdoor seating
areas as defined by § 120. 01. Outdoor dining may be allowed by a conditional use permit in
conjunction with a permitted restaurant, coffee shop, or other eating and drinking establishment
subject to the following, except no conditional use permit is required for outdoor seating areas
with ten seats or less:
1) The outdoor dining area must be located in a controlled or cordoned area with at
least one opening to an acceptable pedestrian walk. If intoxicating liquor, beer or wine is served
in the outdoor dining area, an enclosure is required and access to the outdoor dining area shall be
only through the principal building.
2) The outdoor dining area shall be handicap accessible and must conform to all fire
and building codes.
3) All enclosures or barricades shall be constructed out of materials of a finished
quality, including but not limited to wrought iron or decorative metal fences, decorative planters
or picket fences.
4) No portion of the outdoor dining area shall be located or occur within any public
right-of-way without first obtaining a sidewalk cafe permit.
5) The outdoor dining area shall be subordinate to the principal restaurant, coffee shop
or other eating and drinking establishment and shall not exceed 40% in area of the square footage
of the principal restaurant, coffee shop or subject eating and drinking establishment.
6) A distance of at least 200 feet shall be maintained between the nearest point of the
outdoor dining area to the nearest point of property zoned for single- family residential.
7) The city may restrict the days, hours, nature and volume, and other aspects of
entertainment in any outdoor dining area, including a prohibition against all forms of music,
radio, television, and other entertainment, to protect the safety and welfare of residents,
businesses and other uses near the establishment.
Page 9 of 18
8) A pedestrian pathway of not less than six feet shall be kept free and clear for
pedestrians at all times.
9) Shall be located and designed so as to not interfere with pedestrian and vehicular
circulation.
10) Shall not be located to obstruct parking spaces. Parking spaces may be removed for
the use only if parking requirements are met.
11) The outdoor dining area shall be maintained in a neat, clean and sanitary condition
at all times and the owner of the establishment shall be responsible for keeping the area litter
free.
Z) Outdoor display. Outdoor display of items for sale or rent is allowed as a permitted
accessory use in designated zoning districts, provided that:
1) Outdoor display related to a greenhouse or nursery and to the sale of automobiles,
recreational vehicles, boats and similar items shall be subject to those standards identified
elsewhere in this section specific to the use;
2) Outside services, sales and equipment rental connected with the principal use is
limited to 30% of the gross floor area of the principal use; and
3) Outside display may be allowed in the following locations:
a) On the sidewalk immediately in front of the principal building, provided that a
minimum four-foot clearance is maintained for pedestrian access;
b) At the pump island of an automobile convenience facility, as specified in
division (B) above; and
c) Within an enclosure constructed of materials compatible to the building' s
architecture such as decorative fencing or a building wall, provided that:
1. The display area shall be surfaced with concrete or an approved
equivalent to control dust and shall meet all applicable building setbacks;
2. The sales and display area shall not take up, or interfere with access
to, any required parking spaces as established in §§ 152.490 through 152. 502;
3. The display area shall be clearly identified on the approved site plan
for the project, either within the side or rear yard, subject to the same setbacks as required for the
building;
4. Display merchandise shall be maintained in a neat and orderly
Page 10 of 18
fashion; and
5. The square footage of outdoor display areas shall be included in
calculation of required off-street parking for the use.
AA) Parkingfacilities and ramps.
1) Parking ramps shall comply with the setback requirements for principal structures.
2) Parking ramps shall utilize exterior facade building materials that are compatible
with surrounding buildings.
3) Ramps and other parking facilities shall be periodically inspected and maintained
by the owner to ensure structural integrity and public safety.
BB) Recycling facility.
1) The facility shall not abut a property zoned for residential use.
2) All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers or enclosures that are
covered, secured and maintained in good condition.
3) The City Council may limit hours of operation depending on proximity to
residential uses.
4) All material processing and vehicle or equipment repair shall take place in an
enclosed building.
CC) Rental ofhousehold goods and equipment. Subject to outdoor display standards
established in division (Y) above.
DD) Sexually-oriented uses. The City Council has made the following findings
regarding the effect of sexually- oriented businesses on the character of the city' s neighborhoods
and commercial areas and has established development standards in response to the findings.
1) The existence of a sexually- oriented business near a place of worship, school, park
and day care facility can deter enjoyment and use by families and children.
2) Sexually- oriented businesses can contribute to an increase in criminal activity in
the area in which the businesses are located, taxing city crime prevention programs and law
enforcement services.
3) Sexually- oriented businesses can significantly contribute to the deterioration of
residential neighborhoods and can impair the character and quality of the residential housing in
the area in which the businesses are located, thereby exacerbating the shortage of affordable and
habitable housing for city residents.
Page 11 of 18
4) The concentration of sexually- oriented businesses in one area can have a
substantially detrimental effect on the area in which the businesses are concentrated and on the
overall quality of urban life. A cycle of decay can result from the influx and concentration of
sexually-oriented businesses. Others perceive the presence of the businesses as an indication that
the area is deteriorating and the result can be devastating with other businesses moving out of the
vicinity and residents fleeing from the area. Declining real estate values, which can result from
the concentration of the businesses, erode the city' s tax base and contribute to overall urban
blight.
5) A person commits an offense if he or she operates or causes to be operated a
sexually- orientated business within 750 feet of the following:
a) A place of worship;
b) A school;
c) A library;
d) A boundary of a residential district;
e) A public park adjacent to a residential district;
f) The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use; or
g) Another sexually- oriented business.
6) For purposes of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structure of objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure
used as a part of the premises where a sexually- oriented business is conducted, to the nearest
property line of the premises of a place of worship, school, library park, residential district,
affected commercial zone or residential lot or other sexually- oriented business.
EE) Single-family dwellings, attached or detached.
1) The minimum dimension of the basic dwelling shall be 22 feet for at least 70% of
its length. This shall not be construed to prohibit smaller individual room additions or to restrict
architectural design flexibility or integrity.
2) The roof of every building constructed within or moved into the city with a roof
pitch less than three to 12 shall have a 20- year bond.
3) A basement as defined in § 152. 012 shall be required for each one- family and
two-family dwelling built or located within the city. Floor area calculations shall not include
basement space. Earth sheltered homes shall be exempt from this requirement.
Page 12 of 18
FF) Single-family dwelling on property not served by municipal water and sewer.
1) The dwelling shall be located on a separately owned parcel of record which meets
one of the following criteria:
a) The parcel was a parcel of record at least ten acres in size prior to July 27,
1989;
b) The city has approved a density transfer according to criteria set forth in the
city' s subdivision regulations;
2) The dwelling shall be located at least 120 feet from any other dwelling;
3) The owner has submitted an urban overlay plan to show, in concept, how the parcel
will in the future be served with street and public utilities;
4) A standard on- site sewer system shall be installed in conformance with the county
regulations;
5) The driveway serving the parcel shall be separated from adjacent driveways on the
same side of the road by the following distances measured between centerlines.
a) Local street: 100 feet.
b) Collector street and county and state highways: as regulated in § 152. 073( B).
c) Minimum distance from intersection of two of the above: 330 feet.
6) The dwelling, accessory buildings, driveways and all other structures or
improvements accessory to or associated with the dwelling shall be situated as approved by the
city so as to not adversely interfere with any future public improvements or services and
anticipated development pattern. In order to determine the location of the buildings and
improvements, reference shall be made to the comprehensive plan, existing public
improvements, topography of the land and other pertinent factors.
7) An interim use has been issued to allow a single-family dwelling on a lot less than
10 acres in size in cases where a property has been assessed for either trunk sewer or water and
the criteria identified in Section ( 1) above are not met. Such provision is intended to allow a lot
split whereby an existing home is placed on a lot and a second parcel created for future
development. The above requirements ( 2) through ( 6) shall apply, however the City Council
may allow a waiver from (2) and ( 5) where existing conditions make compliance infeasible. In
all cases, the following provisions must be met:
a) The proposed subdivision of land shall not result in more than two lots and
shall not require the dedication of public right-of-way for the purpose of gaining access to the
property.
Page 13 of 18
b) All necessary utility, drainage, and access easements are provided for.
c) The lot accommodating the residence shall be of sufficient size to provide
locations for two septic drain fields.
d) The newly created vacant parcel shall not be eligible for a building permit until
such time that the parcel is serviced by municipal water and sewer.
e) Upon approval of the interim use permit, the property owner shall file for
administrative subdivision approval as specified in Section 151. 10 of the Subdivision Ordinance.
Required findings identified in Section 15 1. 10 ( d) shall not apply.
GG) Stables, private or public.
1) A minimum lot size of ten contiguous acres shall be required for public stables.
2) Applicable animal densities may be increased for in-house operations pending
submittal of the stables' functional plans showing that the animals' needs will be adequately
cared for and including an area for daily exercise. In no event shall in-house confinement areas
be less than 100 square feet per horse.
3) All structures, parking lots and storage areas shall be located at least 300 feet from
an existing non-farm dwelling or from a residential district boundary.
4) The applicant shall submit a plan for removal and distribution of manure and other
waste materials that meets all requirements of the Minnesota Pollution Control Feedlot Rules.
The plan shall provide for the storage of manure and other waste materials at least 300 feet from
an existing non-farm dwelling or from a residential district boundary and at least 100 feet from a
well.
5) Depending upon the size of the operation, one or more caretaker units may be
allowed as part of a public stable operation.
6) In the event a non- conforming public or private stable changes ownership, the
stable operation shall be made to conform to the provisions of this subchapter.
HH) Towing Operations
1) The towing operation shall be located at least 250 feet away from any residential
property line.
2) Outside storage of parts, materials and equipment is not permitted.
3) Towed vehicles shall be stored (i) inside a building, or( ii) within an outside
designated area located in the rear or side yard in accordance with the following requirements:
Page 14 of 18
a) Fences or walls providing 90% opaque screening around the perimeter
measuring a minimum of 6- feet in height that is constructed of attractive,
permanent finished materials, compatible with the principal structure.
b) Hard-surfaced area with either bituminous, concrete or compacted bituminous
millings or other comparable dust- free surface may be used at the discretion of
the City Council.
c) The storage area shall not take up, or interfere with access to, any required
parking spaces as established in Section 152.490 through 152. 502.
d) The storage area shall not contain any scrap or cannibalized motor vehicles,
machinery or equipment nor shall it contain any semis or semi-trailers.
e) Any vehicle repair shall comply with the standards established within this
chapter related to automobile repair.
II) Truck, trailer or recreational vehicle sales, service and rental. Subject to applicable
standards for automobile and vehicle sales, as identified in division (A) above.
JJ) Veterinary clinic.
1) All areas in which animals are confined shall be located indoors and be properly
soundproofed from adjacent properties.
2) An animal kennel is permitted as an accessory use subject to the permitting
requirements established under § 91. 06 of the city code.
KK) Waste transfer or disposalfacility. The facilities are subject to Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency regulations and permitting requirements and shall be located at least 1, 500 feet
from a residentially zoned district, school or a food products storage processing or production
facility.
Prior Code, § 9- 5- 3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 577, passed 6- 21- 2004; Ord. 645, passed
9- 8- 2008; Ord. 673, passed 9- 7- 10; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11; Ord 734, passed 04- 07- 2014;
Ord. 745, passed 11- 17- 2014) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 098 BUILDING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
A) In general. All building materials utilized within commercial and industrial areas of the
city shall be attractive in appearance, of a durable finish, and of good aesthetic and architectural
quality to ensure they will maintain and enhance the property values of neighboring properties
and not adversely impact the community' s public health, safety and general welfare.
Additionally, all buildings shall meet current accepted industry standards and tolerances.
Page 15 of 18
B) Review procedures. For all new buildings and building exterior renovations, the
applicant shall submit color building elevations and associated drawings that illustrate the
construction techniques to be used in the installation of the materials as part of required site plan
submittals identified in § 152. 034.
C) Permitted exterior materials. The following materials shall be allowed as exterior
finishes for all buildings, except as specifically prohibited in division (D) below:
1) Face brick or stone;
2) Glass;
3) Stucco or synthetic stucco, provided that the material shall not be allowed within
24 inches from grade;
4) Architectural concrete and precast panels;
5) Color impregnated decorative block;
6) Wood or metal as an accent material, provided that no more than 25% of any
individual exterior wall shall consist of the material and that all materials shall be finished for
exterior use; and
7) Roofs that are exposed or an integral part of the building aesthetics shall be
constructed only of commercial grade asphalt shingles, wood shingles, standing seam metal,
slate, the or copper. Flat roofs, which are generally parallel with the first floor elevation, are not
subject to these material limitations.
D) Prohibited exterior materials. Unadorned pre- stressed concrete panels, non-decorative
concrete block, sheet metal, corrugated metal or unfinished metal shall not be used as exterior
materials. This restriction shall apply to all principal structures and to all accessory buildings
except those accessory buildings not visible from any property line.
E) Required design elements. No wall shall exceed 100 feet in length without visual relief,
defined as the incorporation of design features such as windows, horizontal and vertical patterns,
contrasting material colors or varying wall depths. Painting shall not be substituted for visual
relief, accenting or a required element. All new building elevations and refacing of existing
buildings shall include a minimum of three of the following elements:
1) Accent materials provided that the materials shall be wrapped around all walls
visible from public view;
2) A visually pleasing front entry that, in addition to doors, shall be accented a
minimum of 150 square feet around the door entrance for single occupancy buildings and a
minimum of 300 square feet total for the front of multi-tenant buildings ( this area shall be
counted as one element);
Page 16 of 18
3) Twenty-five percent window coverage on each front that faces a street;
4) Contrasting, yet complementary material colors;
5) A combination of horizontal and vertical design features;
6) Irregular building shapes; and/ or
7) Other architectural features in the overall architectural concept.
F) Other design provisions.
1) Garages, accessory structures, screen walls and exposed areas of retaining walls
shall be of a similar type, quality and appearance as the principal structure.
2) All rooftop and/ or ground mounted equipment and related piping, ducting,
electrical and mechanical utilities shall be subject to the screening requirements established in
152.522.
3) Pole buildings, as defined in § 152.012, shall not be permitted.
4) External loading and service areas must be completely screened from the
ground-level view from contiguous residential or commercial properties and adjacent streets,
except at access points.
G) Materials requiring special review. Building and roofing materials not specifically
approved in this section may be allowed by a conditional use permit, subject to the procedures
established in § 152.031 or planned unit development in accordance with the provisions of§§
152.420 through 152.431, and only after it is demonstrated that the proposed material meets five
or more of the following standards.
1) The building shall be an accessory structure.
2) The building shall not be occupied by personnel.
3) The building shall be used to house material, parts or equipment that would
otherwise constitute open storage.
4) The building shall be generally not visible from major arterial roadway corridors.
5) The landscaping of the area surrounding the location shall provide natural visual
barriers to the building.
6) The building shall be constructed of long-term maintenance free materials. A
manufacturer' s warranty shall be prima-facie evidence of compliance with this standard.
Page 17 of 18
7) The proposed building is an addition to a structure that currently utilizes the
materials and application of required design standards would be infeasible or impractical.
Prior Code, § 9- 5- 4) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
Page 18 of 18
1
R-1, LOWDENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
152. 110 Purpose
152. 111 Permitted uses
152. 112 Conditional uses
152. 113 Interim uses
152. 114 Permitted accessory uses
152. 115 Lot area, density and setback requirements
152. 116 Development and performance standards
152. 117 Prohibited uses
152. 110 PURPOSE.
The R- 1, Low Density Residential District, is established for the purpose of providing low
density residential development in areas where adequate public facilities and services exist and
where the development is appropriate given surrounding land uses.
Prior Code, § 9- 6- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 111 PERMITTED USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
permitted uses within the R- 1, Low Density Residential District, subject to all applicable
development and performance standards:
A) Single-family detached dwellings;
B) Public parks, trails, playfields, playgrounds and directed related buildings and
structures;
C) State-licensed residential facility serving six or fewer persons;
D) Public and private educational institutions, limited to accredited elementary, middle or
junior high and senior high schools; and
E) Religious institutions such as chapels, churches, temples and synagogues.
Prior Code, § 9- 6- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 112 CONDITIONAL USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
conditional uses within the R- 1, Low Density Residential District and require a conditional use
permit in accordance with the procedures identified in § 152. 031:
Page 1 of 5
2
A) Cemeteries;
B) Day care facilities as a principal or accessory use, except as provided for in this
subchapter and provided that the use complies with the provisions set forth in
152. 097;
C) Essential services as specified in § 152. 006;
D) Government buildings and structures;
E) Outdoor commercial recreation, including golf courses, tennis clubs, public swimming
pools and other similar uses;
F) Public, quasi-public or private recreational facilities, including community centers; and
G) Social services or other activities that are not directly worship related as an accessory
use within a religious institutional building.
Prior Code, § 9- 6- 3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11) Penalty, see §
152.999
152. 113 INTERIM USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
interim uses within the R- 1, Low Density Residential District and require an interim use permit
in accordance with the procedures identified in § 152.032.
A) Single- family dwelling on property not served by municipal sewer and water, subject to
the standards identified in § 152. 097.
B) Mining, excavation and land reclamation, subject to standards identified in §§ 152.560
through 152.575.
C) Private or public stables, subject to standards identified in § 152. 097.
D) Temporary classroom type structure for use by public or private institutions.
E) Other uses that satisfy both the purpose and findings criteria established in § 152. 032, as
determined by the City Council.
Prior Code, § 9- 6- 4) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 114 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
permitted accessory uses within the R- 1, Low Density Residential District, subject to all
Page 2 of 5
3
applicable provisions of this chapter:
A) Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental and directly related to
the uses allowed as permitted, conditional or interim within this chapter;
B) Administrative offices, meeting rooms, classrooms and service areas in private and
public recreational facilities, the uses of which are incidental and directly related to the primary
use;
C) Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two persons per dwelling unit;
D) Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the premises for a period
not to exceed the time necessary to complete construction;
E) Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons in a single- family detached dwelling;
F) Fences as regulated in § 152.077;
G) Gardening and other horticultural uses where no sale of products occurs on the
premises;
H) Home occupations and home offices as regulated in § 152. 097;
I) Keeping of animals in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 91 of this code;
J) Play and recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on
the same lot and which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the
principal use and their occasional guests;
K) Private garages and off-street parking and loading areas, as regulated in §§ 152.490
through 152.502;
L) Recreational vehicles and equipment parking and storage as regulated in § 152.494;
M) Signs as regulated in §§ 152.460 through 152.478;
N) Tool houses, sheds and other structures for storage of domestic supplies and equipment;
0) Towers and antennas as regulated in § 152. 079; and
P) Keeping of horses, provided that there are at least two net buildable acres of land for the
first horse and one net buildable acre for each additional horse up to a maximum of five horses
and provided that any accessory building used as stable facility or shelter for the horses maintain
a minimum setback of 100 feet from a front lot line and 50 feet from all side or rear lot lines. A
conditional use permit shall be required to exceed the maximum allowable number of horses as
Page 3 of 5
4
provided herein.
Prior Code, § 9- 6- 5) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 542, passed 2- 4- 2002; Ord. 747, passed
04- 20-2015) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 115 LOT AREA, DENSITY AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an R- 1, Low Density Residential
District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
chapter.
A) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
1) Single- family dwelling: 10,890 square feet.
2) Other uses: 15,000 square feet.
B) Minimum lot width.
1) Single- family dwelling: 82- 1/ 2 feet.
2) Other uses: 100 feet.
C) Minimum front yard: 30 feet from street right-of-way.
D) Minimum side yard.
1) Residential uses. Total side yards shall equal 20% of the width of the lot, with a
minimum of 8% required per side. In no case, however, shall more than 15 feet be required or
less than five feet be permitted.
2) Other uses. One- half the height of the building.
E) Minimum side corner yard: 30 feet.
F) Minimum rear yard: 20% of the lot depth. In no case, however, shall more than 40 feet
be required or less than 25 feet be permitted.
G) Maximum density: three units per net residential acre.
H) Parking setbacks. The required setback for driveways shall be five feet from the
property line, except that a ten- foot setback shall be required when the property abuts a
public street and unless further restricted by easements. Within the front boulevard area,
the required setback shall apply as measured from the side property line extended to the
curb line.
Page 4 of 5
5
I) Maximum impervious surface: 35% of lot area. Impervious surface may be increased
by conditional
use permit, in accordance with Section 152.031. Findings shall be made that the existing storm
water management system can handle additional run- off without erosion or exceedance of design
criteria.
Prior Code, § 9- 6- 6) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 577, passed 6- 21- 2004; Ord. 692, passed
10- 17- 11) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 116 DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
A) Single- and two-family residential structures. All single- and two-family residential
structures are subject to the development standards expressed in § 152. 097.
B) Landscaping and screening. Landscaping and screening requirements shall be as
established in §§ 152.515 through 152. 523.
C) Maximum height.
1) Residences: two and one-half stories, not exceeding 35 feet from finished grade.
2) Non-residential structures and uses: 45 feet, provided the structure is set back from
all property lines a distance equal to or greater than its height.
D) Minimum dwelling size. One thousand square feet of living space for one story
structures, 1,400 square feet of living space for two- story structures.
Prior Code, § 9- 6- 7) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 542, passed 2- 4- 2002) Penalty, see §
152. 999
152. 117 PROHIBITED USES.
The following are prohibited uses within R- 1, Low Density Residential District: Any use
that is not a permitted use or a conditional use in this district or any use not determined by the
Zoning Administrator to be substantially similar to a use listed as permitted or conditional. The
determination shall be made in the manner provided for in Section 152. 010 governing
determination of substantially similar uses.
Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11) Penalty, see § 152. 999
Page 5 of 5
R-2, MEDIUMDENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
152. 130 Purpose
152. 131 Permitted uses
152. 132 Conditional uses
152. 133 Interim uses
152. 134 Permitted accessory uses
152. 135 Development density
152. 136 Lot requirements and setbacks
152. 137 Exceptions to lot requirements and setbacks
152. 138 Development and performance standards
152. 139 Prohibited uses.
152. 130 PURPOSE.
The R-2, Medium Density Residential District, is established to provide for housing
development at densities between five units per acre and 12 units per acre, allowing for a greater
diversity of housing choices within the city and the potential for preservation of natural resources
through cluster development techniques.
Prior Code, § 9- 7- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 131 PERMITTED USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
permitted uses within the R-2, Medium Density Residential District, subject to all applicable
development and performance standards:
A) Single- family detached dwellings;
B) Two-family dwellings;
C) Townhomes, up to six units in a row or eight units back to back;
D) Multiple-family dwellings containing no more than eight units;
E) Public parks, trails, playfields, playgrounds and directed related buildings and
structures;
F) State-licensed residential facility serving 16 or fewer persons;
G) Public and private educational institutions, limited to accredited elementary, middle or
junior high and senior high schools; and
H) Religious institutions such as chapels, churches, temples and synagogues.
Pagel of 8
Prior Code, § 9- 7- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 132 CONDITIONAL USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
conditional uses within the R-2, Medium Density Residential District and require a conditional
use permit in accordance with the procedures identified in § 152. 031:
A) Cemeteries;
B) Day care facilities as a principal or accessory use, except as provided for in this chapter
and provided that the use complies with the provisions set forth in § 152. 097;
C) Essential services as specified in § 152. 006;
D) Government buildings and structures;
E) Outdoor commercial recreation, including golf courses, tennis clubs, public swimming
pools and other similar uses;
F) Public, quasi-public or private recreational facilities, including community centers; and
G) Social services or other activities that are not directly worship related as an accessory
use within a religious institutional building.
Prior Code, § 9- 7- 3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11) Penalty, see §
152.999
152. 133 INTERIM USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
interim uses within the R-2, Medium Density Residential District and require an interim use
permit in accordance with the procedures identified in § 152. 032:
A) Single- family dwelling on property not served by municipal sewer and water, subject to
the standards identified in § 152. 097;
B) Mining, excavation and land reclamation, subject to standards identified in §§ 152.560
through 152.575;
C) Private or public stables, subject to standards identified in § 152. 097;
D) Temporary classroom type structure for use by public or private institutions; and
E) Other uses that satisfy both the purpose and findings criteria established in § 152. 032, as
Page 2 of 8
determined by the City Council.
Prior Code, § 9- 7- 4) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 134 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
permitted accessory uses within the R-2, Medium Density Residential District, subject to all
applicable provisions of this chapter:
A) Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental and directly related to
the uses allowed as permitted, conditional or interim within this chapter;
B) Administrative offices, meeting rooms, classrooms and service areas in private and
public recreational facilities, the uses of which are incidental and directly related to the primary
use;
C) Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two persons per dwelling unit;
D) Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the premises for a period
not to exceed the time necessary to complete construction;
E) Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons in a single- family detached dwelling;
F) Fences as regulated in § 152.077;
G) Gardening and other horticultural uses where no sale of products occurs on the
premises;
H) Home occupations and home offices as regulated in § 152. 097;
I) Keeping of animals in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 91 of this code;
J) Play and recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on
the same lot and which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the
principal use and their occasional guests;
K) Off-street parking and loading areas, as regulated in §§ 152.490 through 152. 502;
L) Recreational vehicles and equipment parking and storage as regulated by § 152.494;
M) Signs as regulated in §§ 152.460 through 152.478;
N) Tool houses, sheds and other structures for storage of domestic supplies and equipment;
0) Towers and antennas as regulated in § 152. 079; and
Page 3 of 8
P) Keeping of horses, provided that there are at least two net buildable acres of land for the
first horse and one net buildable acre for each additional horse up to a maximum of five horses
and provided that any accessory building used as stable facility or shelter for the horses maintain
a minimum setback of 100 feet from a front lot line and 50 feet from all side or rear lot lines. A
conditional use permit shall be required to exceed the maximum allowable number of horses as
provided herein.
Prior Code, § 9- 7- 5) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 542, passed 2- 4- 2002; Ord. 747, passed
04- 20-2015) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 135 DEVELOPMENT DENSITY.
A) The maximum development density within the R-2, Medium Density Residential
District, is based on the net buildable area for either a single- family dwelling, two-family
dwelling, townhome or multiple- family subdivision exclusive of public street rights- of-way,
wetlands, major drainageways, waterbodies or slopes steeper than three to one ratio.
B) The maximum development density shall be determined by the following lot area per
unit standards.
1) Single- family detached dwellings: 8,500 square feet.
2) Two-family dwellings and townhomes: 6,500 square feet per unit.
3) Multiple-family dwellings: 4,000 square feet per unit.
C) A maximum 25% reduction in square feet per unit requirements shall be permitted
based upon the following features.
1) Single-family dwellings.
a) One-hundred square feet per unit for each additional 10% of park dedication
above the minimum required under the city' s subdivision regulations, up to a maximum of 45%.
b) One-hundred square feet per unit for each additional 5% of private, useable
open space developed above the minimum established in § 152. 136( B)( 5).
2) Two-family dwellings, condominiums, townhomes and multiplefamily structures.
a) Square foot reductions provided for in division ( C)( 1) above.
b) Two-hundred square feet per unit for each 2,000 square feet of indoor private
community center/recreation space up to a maximum of 4,000 square feet per each 50 units in
the project.
Page 4 of 8
c) Five-hundred square feet for each one bedroom and efficiency dwelling unit.
d) Five-hundred square feet for each unit that meets the Metropolitan Council' s
livable communities standards for affordability, provided that guarantees are in place that " for
sale" housing will meet the requirement for initial sales and " for rent" housing will meet the
requirement for the initial ten- year rental period.
e) Three-hundred square feet per unit when two-thirds of the required parking is
provided underground or within the principal structure, excluding attached or detached garages.
Prior Code, § 9- 7- 6) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 136 LOT REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an R-2, Medium Density
Residential District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in
this chapter and in § 152. 137.
A) Single-family dwellings.
1) Minimum lot area: 8,500 square feet.
2) Minimum lot width: 70 feet.
3) Minimum front yard: 25 feet from street right-of-way.
4) Minimum side yard: Total side yards shall equal 20% of the width of the lot, with
a minimum of 8% required per side. In no case, however, shall more than 15 feet be required or
less than five feet be permitted.
5) Minimum side corner yard: 25 feet.
6) Minimum rear yard: 20% of the lot depth. In no case, however, shall more than 40
feet be required or less than 25 feet be permitted.
7) Maximum impervious surface: 35% of lot area. Impervious surface may be
increased by conditional use permit, in accordance with Section 152.031. Findings shall be
made that the existing storm water management system can handle additional run- off without
erosion or exceedance of design criteria.
B) Other uses.
1) Base lot minimums. Within the R-2, Medium Density Residential District, the
following minimum base lot requirements shall be imposed. The base lot represents the
minimum lot size that may accommodate development in accordance with the permitted
densities allowed under § 152. 135.
Page 5 of 8
a) Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet.
b) Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
2) Individual unit lot minimums. The following minimum unit lot requirements shall
be applied to the subdivision of two-family dwellings and townhomes to permit individual
private ownership of a single dwelling within a structure.
a) Minimum lot area: Sufficient to include the living area, garages, decks, patios
or porches of the individual dwelling units.
b) Minimum lot width.
1. Two-family dwelling: 50 feet.
2. Townhome: 25 feet.
3) Base lot setbacks. A minimum setback of 30 feet shall be required at the periphery
of the base lot development. An additional 20 feet will be required when the lot adjoins a
designated arterial or collector roadway.
4) Building setbacks. The following minimum internal setbacks shall be required for
developments that include more than one principal structure on a base lot.
a) Setback between buildings: 25 feet or one-half the sum of the building heights
of the two adjoining buildings, whichever is greater.
b) Setback from curb line of private streets or public rights- of-way: 30 feet.
5) Useable open space per dwelling unit. 600 square feet.
6) Maximum building coverage. 30%.
7) Parking setbacks. The required setback for driveways shall be five feet from the
property line, except that a ten- foot setback shall be required when the property abuts a public
street and unless further restricted by easements. Within the front boulevard area, the required
setback shall apply as measured from the side property line extended to the curb line.
Prior Code, § 9- 7- 7) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 577, passed 6- 21- 2004; Ord. 692, passed
10- 17- 11) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 137 EXCEPTIONS TO LOT REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS.
For all lots platted within the R-2, Medium Density Residential District, prior to the
effective date of this chapter, the following minimum requirements shall be applicable.
Page 6 of 8
A) Single-family dwellings.
1) Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet.
2) Minimum lot width: 60 feet.
3) Minimum front yard: 20 feet from street right-of-way.
4) Minimum side yard: Total side yards shall equal 20% of the width of the lot, with
a minimum of 8% required per side. In no case, however, shall more than 15 feet be required or
less than five feet be permitted.
5) Minimum side corner yard: 20 feet
6) Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
7) Maximum impervious surface: 35% of lot area. Impervious surface may be
increased by conditional use permit, in accordance with Section 152.031. Findings
shall be made that the existing storm water management system can handle additional
run-off without erosion or exceedance of design criteria.
B) Two-family dwellings.
1) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
2) Minimum lot width: 80 feet.
3) Minimum front yard: 25 feet from street right-of-way.
4) Minimum side yard: Total side yards shall equal 20% of the width of the lot, with
a minimum of 8% required per side. In no case, however, shall more than 15 feet be required or
less than five feet be permitted.
5) Minimum side corner yard: 25 feet.
6) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
Prior Code, § 9- 7- 8) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 577, passed 6- 21- 2004; Ord. 692, passed
10- 17- 11) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 138 DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
A) Single- and two-family residential structures. All single- and two-family residential
structures are subject to the development standards expressed in § 152. 097.
B) Landscaping and screening. Landscaping and screening requirements shall be as
established in §§ 152.515 and 152.523.
Page 7 of 8
C) Maximum building height:
1) Residences: two and one-half stories, not exceeding 35 feet from finished grade.
2) Non-residential structures and uses: 45 feet, provided the structure is set back from
all property lines a distance equal to or greater than its height.
D) Minimum dwelling size:
1) Single- family detached dwelling: 816 square feet of living space for two bedroom
dwelling, 912 square feet of living space for three-bedroom dwelling.
2) Townhomes: 800 square feet of living space per dwelling.
Prior Code, § 9- 7- 9) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 139 PROHIBITED USES.
The following are prohibited uses within R-2, Low Density Residential District: Any use
that is not a permitted use or a conditional use in this district or any use not determined by the
Zoning Administrator to be substantially similar to a use listed as permitted or conditional. The
determination shall be made in the manner provided for in Section 152. 010 governing
determination of substantially similar uses.
Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11) Penalty, see § 152. 999
Page 8 of 8
R-3, HIGHDENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
152. 150 Purpose
152. 151 Permitted uses
152. 152 Conditional uses
152. 153 Interim uses
152. 154 Permitted accessory uses
152. 155 Development density
152. 156 Lot requirements and setbacks
152. 157 Development and performance standards
152. 158 Prohibited uses
152. 150 PURPOSE.
The R- 3, High Density Residential District is established to provide for housing
development at densities of eight units per acre and greater, in recognition of the need for higher
density housing arrangements that result in increased housing choices and affordability and the
potential for preservation of natural resources through cluster development techniques.
Prior Code, § 9- 8- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 151 PERMITTED USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
permitted uses within the R-3, High Density Residential District, subject to all applicable
development and performance standards:
A) Two-family dwellings;
B) Townhomes, up to six units in a row or 12 units back to back;
C) Multiple-family dwellings;
D) Nursing homes, convalescent homes, retirement homes and other housing options for
senior citizens;
E) Public parks, trails, playfields, playgrounds and directed related buildings and
structures;
F) State-licensed residential facility serving 16 or fewer persons;
G) Public and private educational institutions, limited to accredited elementary, middle or
junior high and senior high schools; and
H) Religious institutions such as chapels, churches, temples and synagogues.
Page 1 of 7
Prior Code, § 9- 8- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 152 CONDITIONAL USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
conditional uses within the R-3, High Density Residential District and require a conditional use
permit in accordance with the procedures identified in § 152. 031:
A) Cemeteries;
B) Day care facilities as a principal or accessory use, except as provided for in this
subchapter and provided that the use complies with the provisions set forth in § 152. 097;
C) Essential services as specified in § 152. 006;
D) Government buildings and structures;
E) Outdoor commercial recreation, including golf courses, tennis clubs, public swimming
pools and other similar uses;
F) Public, quasi-public or private recreational facilities, including community centers;
G) Social services or other activities that are not directly worship related as an accessory
use within a religious institutional building;
H) State-licensed residential facility serving more than 16 persons;
I) Commercial facilities within a multiple-family structure that are primarily for use by
residents of the principal use, provided that:
1) The use or uses are located within the principal structure and no more than 10% of
the floor area is devoted to the uses; and
2) No advertising or display relative to the use is directed toward adjacent properties
or streets.
Prior Code, § 9- 8- 3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11) Penalty, see §
152. 999
152. 153 INTERIM USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
interim uses within the R-3, High Density Residential District, and require an interim use permit
in accordance with the procedures identified in § 152.032:
Page 2 of 7
A) Single-family dwelling on property not served by municipal sewer and water, subject to
the standards identified in § 152. 097;
B) Mining, excavation and land reclamation, subject to standards identified in §§ 152. 560
through 152.575;
C) Private or public stables, subject to standards identified in § 152. 097;
D) Temporary classroom type structure for use by public or private institutions; and
E) Other uses that satisfy both the purpose and findings criteria established in § 152. 032, as
determined by the City Council.
Prior Code, § 9- 8- 4) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 154 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
permitted accessory uses within the R-3, High Density Residential District, subject to all
applicable provisions of this chapter:
A) Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental and directly related to
the uses allowed as permitted, conditional or interim within this chapter;
B) Administrative offices, meeting rooms, classrooms and service areas in private and
public recreational facilities, the uses of which are incidental and directly related to the primary
use;
C) Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two persons per dwelling unit in a
single- family detached dwelling;
D) Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons in a single- family detached dwelling;
E) Fences as regulated in § 152.077;
F) Gardening and other horticultural uses where no sale of products occurs on the
premises;
G) Home occupations and home offices as regulated in § 152. 097;
H) Keeping of animals in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 91 of this code;
I) Play and recreational facilities, only accessory to an existing principal permitted use on
the same lot and which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the
principal use and their occasional guests;
Page 3 of 7
J) Off-street parking and loading areas, as regulated by §§ 152.490 through 152. 502;
K) Recreational vehicles and equipment parking and storage as regulated by § 152.494;
L) Towers and antennas as regulated by § 152. 079;
M) Signs as regulated by §§ 152.460 through 152.478;
N) Tool houses, sheds and other structures for storage of domestic supplies and equipment;
and
0) Keeping of horses, provided that there are at least two net buildable acres of land for the
first horse and one net buildable acre for each additional horse up to a maximum of five horses
and provided that any accessory building used as stable facility or shelter for the horses maintain
a minimum setback of 100 feet from a front lot line and 50 feet from all side or rear lot lines. A
conditional use permit shall be required to exceed the maximum allowable number of horses as
provided herein.
Prior Code, § 9- 8- 5) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 542, passed 2- 4- 2002; Ord. 747, passed
04- 20-2015) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 155 DEVELOPMENT DENSITY.
A) The maximum development density within the R-3, High Density Residential District,
is based on the net buildable area for either a two-family dwelling, townhome or multiple-family
subdivision exclusive of public street rights- of-way, wetlands, major drainageways, waterbodies
or slopes steeper than three to one ratio.
B) The maximum development density shall be determined by the following lot area per
unit standards.
1) Two-family dwellings and townhomes: 5,000 square feet per unit.
2) Multiple-family dwellings: 3,000 square feet per unit.
3) Senior housing: 1,750 square feet per unit.
C) A maximum 25% reduction in square feet per unit requirements shall be permitted
based upon the following features.
1) Two-family dwellings, townhomes and multiplefamily structures with less than ten
units.
a) One-hundred square feet per unit for each additional 10% of park dedication
above the minimum required under the city' s subdivision regulations, up to a maximum of 45%.
Page 4 of 7
b) One-hundred square feet per unit for each additional 5% of private, useable
open space developed above the minimum established in § 152. 156( E).
c) Two-hundred square feet per unit for each 2,000 square feet of indoor private
community center/recreation space up to a maximum of 4,000 square feet per each 50 units in
the project.
d) Five-hundred square feet for each one-bedroom and efficiency dwelling unit.
e) Five-hundred square feet for each unit that meets the Metropolitan Council' s
livable communities standards for affordability, provided that guarantees are in place that " for
sale" housing will meet the requirement for initial sales and " for rent" housing will meet the
requirement for the initial ten- year rental period.
2) Multiple family structures with ten or more units.
a) Square foot reductions provided for in § 152. 155( C)( 1), except
151. 155( C)( 1)( d).
b) Seventy- five square feet per unit when an elevator is provided to serve each
floor.
c) Fifty square feet per unit when indoor recreation and social rooms are provided
equal to 25 square feet per unit or 750 square feet total, whichever is greater.
d) Seventy- five square feet per unit where major outdoor recreational facilities
such as swimming pools, tennis courts or similar facilities are provided equal to at least 5% of
the construction cost of the principal structure.
e) Three-hundred square feet per unit when two-thirds of the required parking is
provided underground or within the principal structure, excluding attached or detached garages.
f) Three-hundred square feet for each unit that meets the Metropolitan Council' s
livable communities standards for affordability, provided that guarantees are in place that " for
sale" housing will meet the requirement for initial sales and " for rent" housing will meet the
requirement for the initial ten- year rental period.
Prior Code, § 9- 8- 6) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 156 LOT REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an R-3, High Density Residential
District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
chapter:
A) Base lot minimums. Within the R- 3, High Density Residential District, the following
Page 5 of 7
minimum base lot requirements shall be imposed. The base lot represents the minimum lot size
that may accommodate development in accordance with the permitted densities allowed under
152. 155.
1) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
2) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
B) Individual unit lot minimums. The following minimum unit lot requirements shall be
applied to the subdivision of two-family dwellings and townhomes to permit individual private
ownership of a single dwelling within a structure.
1) Minimum lot area: Sufficient to include the living area, garages, decks, patios or
porches of the individual dwelling units.
2) Minimum lot width.
a) Two-family dwelling: 50 feet.
b) Townhome: 25 feet.
C) Base lot setbacks. A minimum setback of 30 feet shall be required at the periphery of
the base lot development. An additional 20 feet will be required when the lot adjoins a
designated arterial or collector roadway.
D) Building setbacks. The following minimum internal setbacks shall be required for
developments that include more than one principal structure on a base lot.
1) Setback between buildings: 25 feet or one-half the sum of the building heights of
the two adjoining buildings, whichever is greater.
2) Setback from curb line of private streets, public rights- of-way or guest parking
areas: 25 feet.
E) Useable open space per dwelling unit. 400 square feet.
F) Maximum building coverage. 30%.
G) Parking setbacks.
1) The required setback for driveways shall be five feet from the property line, except
that a ten- foot setback shall be required when the property abuts a public street and unless further
restricted by easements.
2) Within the front boulevard area, the required setback shall apply as measured from
the side property line extended to the curb line.
Page 6 of 7
Prior Code, § 9- 8- 7) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 577, passed 6- 21- 2004) Penalty, see §
152. 999
152. 157 DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
A) Two-family residential structures. All two- family residential structures are subject to
the development standards expressed in § 152. 097.
B) Landscaping and screening. Landscaping and screening requirements shall be as
established in §§ 152.515 through 152. 523.
C) Maximum building height.
1) Residences: three and one-half stories, not exceeding 45 feet from finished grade.
2) Non-residential structures and uses: 45 feet, provided the structure is set back from
all property lines a distance equal to or greater than its height.
D) Minimum dwelling size:
1) Single- family attached dwelling or townhomes: 800 square feet of living space per
dwelling unit.
2) Multiple-family dwellings.
a) Efficiency apartments: 400 square feet of living space per dwelling unit.
b) One bedroom apartments: 700 square feet of living space per dwelling unit.
c) Each additional bedroom over one: 100 square feet of living space.
Prior Code, § 9- 8- 8) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 158 PROHIBITED USES.
The following are prohibited uses within R-3, Low Density Residential District: Any use
that is not a permitted use or a conditional use in this district or any use not determined by the
Zoning Administrator to be substantially similar to a use listed as permitted or conditional. The
determination shall be made in the manner provided for in Section 152. 010 governing
determination of substantially similar uses.
Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11) Penalty, see § 152. 999
Page 7 of 7
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
152. 170 Purpose
152. 171 Principal uses in the Commercial Districts
152. 170 PURPOSE.
This subchapter is established to provide a listing of allowable principal uses within the
commercial districts and to identify those uses that have specific development standards.
Prior Code, § 9- 9- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 171 PRINCIPAL USES IN THE COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
A) In general. All permitted and conditional uses allowed in the commercial districts are
listed in Table 152. 171, Principal Uses in the Commercial Districts.
B) Permitted uses. Uses specified with a " P" are permitted in the district or districts where
designated, provided that the use complies with all other applicable provisions of this chapter.
C) Conditional uses. Uses specified with a" C" are allowed as a conditional use in the
district or districts where designated, provided that the use complies with all other applicable
provisions of this chapter. Persons wishing to establish or expand a conditional use shall obtain a
conditional use permit for the use as specified in § 152. 031.
D) Prohibited uses. Any use not listed as either " P" ( permitted) or " C" ( conditional) in a
particular district or any use not determined by the Zoning Administrator to be substantially
similar to a use listed as permitted or conditional shall be prohibited in that district. The
determination shall be made in the manner provided for in § 152. 010 governing determination of
substantially similar uses.
E) Specific development standards. Permitted and conditional uses specified with an " x"
under the specific development standards column shall be subject to the standards identified in
152.095 through 152. 098.
F) Generalized use categories. Table 152. 171 employs generalized use categories for some
types of commercial uses. A particular use may be determined to be within a generalized use
category if not listed specifically elsewhere in Table 152. 171 and if not determined to be within
another less restrictive generalized use category. Determination of whether a particular use is
included within a generalized use category shall be made by the Zoning Administrator in the
manner provided for in § 152. 010 governing determination of substantially similar uses.
1) General retail sales and services. General retail sales and services uses include the
retail sale of products or the provision of services to the general public that produce minimal
off-site impacts. General retail sales and services include the following uses:
Pagel of 8
a) Antiques and collectibles;
b) Bakery/catering service;
c) Barber shop/ beauty salon;
d) Bicycle sales and repair;
e) Books, magazines, newspapers;
f) Clothing and accessories;
g) Drug store;
h) Dry-cleaning establishment;
i) Electronics;
0) Film developing/photographic supplies;
k) Florist;
1) Gifts and novelties;
m) Hardware store;
n) Hobby store;
o) Household furnishings and appliances;
p) Locksmith;
q) Music store;
r) Office and school supplies;
s) Picture framing;
t) Pipe and tobacco shop;
u) Shoe repair/tailor; and
v) Sporting goods/bait and tackle.
Page 2 of 8
2) Limitedproduction andprocessing. Limited production and processing uses
include activities that are consistent and compatible with retail sales and services. These uses
produce minimal off-site impacts due to their limited nature and scale. Limited production and
processing is allowed as a principal use, and may include wholesale and off-premise sales,
subject to other restrictions established in this chapter. Limited production and processing
includes the following uses:
a) Apparel and other finished products made from fabrics;
b) Computers and accessories, including circuit boards and software;
c) Electronic components and accessories;
d) Film, video and audio recording;
e) Food and beverage products, except no live slaughter or grain milling;
f) Jewelry, ornamental ceramics and pottery;
g) Precision medical and optical goods;
h) Signs and advertising devices;
i) Visual arts, not including performances;
0) Watches and clocks;
k) Wood crafting and carving; and
1) Wood furniture and upholstery.
Table 152.171 - Principal Uses in the Commercial Districts
District Development
Use Standards
C-1 C-2 C-3
Commercial uses
Retail sales and services
General retail sales and services P P P
Automobile parts and accessories P P
Page 3 of 8
Table 152.171 - Principal Uses in the Commercial Districts
District Development
Use Standards
C-1 C-2 C-3
Bank or financial institution P P P x
Boat and marine sales P x
Building material sales P x
Day care/ child care center P P P x
Dog daycare facility C x
Cemeteries C C C
Copy services P P P
Firearms dealer P P x
Funeral home, excluding cremation and alkaline P P
hydrolysis
Greenhouse, lawn and garden supplies P x
Grocery or convenience store P P P
Household appliances P P
Laundry, self-service P P P x
Pawn shop P P
Performing, visual or martial arts school P P P
Pet store P
Photographic, art, music and similar studios P P
Recreational vehicle sales and service P x
Rental of household goods and equipment P x
Page 4 of 8
Table 152.171 - Principal Uses in the Commercial Districts
District Development
Use Standards
C-1 C-2 C-3
Repair services, minor P P
Research center P
Tattoo, body piercing establishments P
Veterinary clinic C P P x
Video rental P P P
Offices P P P
Automobile services
Automobile convenience facility C P P x
Automobile rental P x
Automobile repair, minor C C x
Automobile repair, major C x
Automobile sales C x
Car wash C P C x
Food and beverages
Bar, nightclub, liquor establishment P P x
Candy, ice cream and similar food sales P P P
Coffee shop P P P
Delicatessen P P P
Liquor store, municipal P P
Meat market P P P
Page 5 of 8
Table 152.171 - Principal Uses in the Commercial Districts
District Development
Use Standards
C-1 C-2 C-3
Restaurant, drive-through C P P x
Restaurant P P P
Commercial recreation and lodging facilities
Bowling alley P P
Hotel, motel P P
Indoor recreational facility P P
Sports and health facility P P
Theater, indoor P P
Institutional and public uses
Educational facilities
Schools and academies P P P
Parking facilities, ramps C C C x
Social, cultural, charitable and recreational facilities
Stadiums, arenas C
Clubs and lodges P P
Community center C P P
Library P P P
Museum C P P
Performing arts center P P
Page 6 of 8
Table 152.171 - Principal Uses in the Commercial Districts
District Development
Use Standards
C-1 C-2 C-3
Park P P P
Religious institutions
Place of assembly P P P
Health and medical facilities
Clinic, medical or dental P P P
Laboratory, medical or dental P P
Hospital C
Therapeutic massage P P
Production, processing and storage
Limited, production and processing P P
Building contractor services P P
Laundry, commercial P P x
Printing and publishing P P
Self-service storage facility C
Residential uses
Dwellings
Dwelling unit as part of mixed-use structure P
Dwelling in conjunction with business C C x
Congregate living
Residential care facility C C C
Page 7 of 8
Table 152.171 - Principal Uses in the Commercial Districts
District Development
Use Standards
C-1 C-2 C-3
Nursing home, senior housing facility C C
Public service and utilities
Communication facilities C P P
Communication towers C C C I x
Governmental buildings and structures C P P
Public utility buildings and structures C P P
Prior Code, § 9- 9- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 616, passed 11- 6- 2006; Ord. 692, passed
10- 17- 2011; Ord. 734, passed 04- 07- 2014, Ord. 745, passed 11- 17- 2014) Penalty, see § 152.999
Page 8 of 8
C-1, NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICE DISTRICT
152. 185 Purpose
152. 186 Permitted and conditional uses
152. 187 Interim uses
152. 188 Permitted accessory uses
152. 189 Lot and setback requirements
152. 190 Development and performance standards
152. 185 PURPOSE.
A) The C- 1, Neighborhood Service District is established to provide opportunity for city
residents to make day- to- day purchases at locations convenient to their place of residence.
B) The gross floor area of buildings is limited so that the intended neighborhood service
character does not give way to community-wide or regional service centers.
Prior Code, § 9- 10- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 186 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES.
Within the C- 1, Neighborhood Service District, no building, structure, land or premises shall
be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed,
moved or altered except for one or more of the uses identified in Table 152. 171, Principal Uses
in the Commercial Districts, subject to all applicable development and performance standards.
Prior Code, § 9- 10- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 187 INTERIM USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
interim uses within the C- 1, Neighborhood Service District, and require an interim use permit in
accordance with the procedures identified in § 152. 032:
A) Single- family dwelling on property not served by municipal sewer and water, subject to
the standards identified in § 152. 097;
B) Mining, excavation and land reclamation, subject to standards identified in §§ 152.560
through 152.575;
C) Private or public stables, subject to standards identified in §152. 097;
D) Temporary classroom type structure for use by public or private institutions; and
B) Other uses that satisfy both the purpose and findings criteria established in § 152. 032, as
Page 1 of 4
determined by the City Council.
Prior Code, § 9- 10- 3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 188 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
permitted accessory uses within the C- 1, Neighborhood Service District, subject to all applicable
provisions of this chapter:
A) Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental and directly related to
the uses allowed as permitted, conditional or interim within this chapter;
B) Any incidental repair, processing or storage necessary to the conduct of the principal
use, provided that no more than 30% of the gross floor area of the principal building is utilized
for those purposes;
C) Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the premises for a period
not to exceed the time necessary to complete construction;
D) Fences as regulated in § 152.077;
E) Off-street parking and loading areas, as regulated by §§ 152.490 through 152. 502;
F) Recreational vehicles and equipment parking and storage as regulated by § 152.494;
G) Towers and antennas as regulated by § 152. 079;
H) Signs as regulated within §§ 152.460 through 152.478; and
I) Keeping of horses, provided that there are at least two net buildable acres of land for the
first horse and one net buildable acre for each additional horse up to a maximum of five horses
and provided that any accessory building used as stable facility or shelter for the horses maintain
a minimum setback of 100 feet from a front lot line and 50 feet from all side or rear lot lines. A
conditional use permit shall be required to exceed the maximum allowable number of horses as
provided herein.
Prior Code, § 9- 10- 4) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 542, passed 2- 4- 2002; Ord. 747, passed
04- 20-2015) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 189 LOT AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the C- 1, Neighborhood Service,
subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter.
A) Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet.
Page 2 of 4
B) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
C) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
D) Minimum landscaped open space ratio: 20% of net site area.
E) Minimum setbacks.
1) Buildings.
a) Thirty feet from street right-of-way.
b) Twenty feet from property lines adjoining land zoned for residential or public
purposes. Buildings over 20 feet in height shall set back an additional one foot for every two feet
in height.
c) Ten feet from property lines adjoining land zoned for commercial, industrial or
mixed uses.
2) Parking/paving.
a) Ten feet from street right-of-way.
b) Ten feet from property lines adjoining land zoned for residential or public
purposes.
c) Five feet from property lines adjoining land zoned for commercial, industrial
or mixed uses.
Prior Code, § 9- 10- 5) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 190 DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
In addition to general performance standards identified in §§ 152. 065 through 152. 085 and
specific development standards for certain uses designated in §§ 152.095 through 152. 098, the
following standards shall apply within the C- 1, Neighborhood Service District.
A) Maximum combined gross floor area ofall buildings. The maximum combined gross
floor area of all buildings within any single C- 1, Neighborhood Service District, site shall not
exceed 50, 000 square feet.
B) Maximum height. Two stories, not exceeding 30 feet from finished grade.
C) Landscaping and screening. Landscaping and screening requirements shall be as
established in §§ 152.515 through 152. 523.
Page 3 of 4
D) Outdoor displays. Outdoor display of items for sale shall be subject to the standards
identified in § 152.097. No outside storage of merchandise, materials or equipment shall be
permitted.
E) Live entertainment. Live entertainment shall be allowed accessory to a restaurant,
coffee shop or similar facility, provided that no music or amplified sounds shall be audible from
adjacent residential properties.
F) All principal and accessory buildings shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the design standards identified in § 152. 098.
Prior Code, § 9- 10- 6) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
Page 4 of 4
1
C-2, GENERAL COMMERCE DISTRICT
152.205 Purpose
152.206 Permitted and conditional uses
152.207 Interim uses
152.208 Permitted accessory uses
152.209 Lot and setback requirements
152.210 Development and performance standards
152. 205 PURPOSE.
The C- 2, General Commerce District is established to provide appropriate areas, preferably
in clusters in proximity to major thoroughfares, for commercial retail establishments which are
orientated to the motoring public or which require large sites for display of merchandise, and
which are not necessarily compatible with the desired character of neighborhood or community
shopping centers.
Prior Code, § 9- 11- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 206 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES.
Within the C- 2, General Commerce District, no building, structure, land or premises shall be
used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved
or altered except for one or more of the uses identified in Table 152. 171, Principal Uses in the
Commercial Districts, subject to all applicable development and performance standards.
Prior Code, § 9- 11- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 207 INTERIM USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
interim uses within the C- 2, General Commerce District, and require an interim use permit in
accordance with the procedures identified in § 152. 032:
A) Single- family dwelling on property not served by municipal sewer and water, subject to
the standards identified in § 152. 097;
B) Mining, excavation and land reclamation, subject to standards identified in §§ 152.560
through 152.575;
C) Private or public stables, subject to standards identified in § 152. 097;
D) Temporary classroom type structure for use by public or private institutions; and
E) Other uses that satisfy both the purpose and findings criteria established in § 152. 032, as
Page 1 of 4
2
determined by the City Council.
Prior Code, § 9- 11- 3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 208 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
permitted accessory uses within the C- 2, General Commerce District, subject to all applicable
provisions of this chapter:
A) Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental and directly related to
the uses allowed as permitted, conditional or interim within this chapter;
B) Any incidental repair, processing or storage necessary to the conduct of the principal
use, provided that no more than 30% of the gross floor area of the principal building is utilized
for those purposes;
C) Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the premises for a period
not to exceed the time necessary to complete construction;
D) Fences as regulated in § 152.077;
E) Off-street parking and loading areas, as regulated by §§ 152.490 through 152. 502;
F) Recreational vehicles and equipment parking and storage as regulated by § 152.494;
G) Towers and antennas as regulated by § 152. 079;
H) Signs as regulated within §§ 152.460 through 152.478;
I) Outdoor dining area subject to the standards identified for that use in § 152. 097; and
J) Keeping of horses, provided that there are at least two net buildable acres of land for the
first horse and one net buildable acre for each additional horse up to a maximum of five horses
and provided that any accessory building used as stable facility or shelter for the horses maintain
a minimum setback of 100 feet from a front lot line and 50 feet from all side or rear lot lines. A
conditional use permit shall be required to exceed the maximum allowable number of horses as
provided herein.
Prior Code, § 9- 11- 4) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 542, passed 2- 4- 2002; Ord. 747, passed
04- 20-2015) Penalty, see § 152. 999
Page 2 of 4
3
152. 209 LOT AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the C- 2, General Commerce
District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
chapter.
A) Minimum lot area: one acre.
B) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
D) Minimum landscaped open space ratio: 20% of net site area.
E) Minimum setbacks.
1) Buildings.
a) Thirty feet from street right-of-way.
b) Thirty feet from property lines adjoining land zoned for residential or public
purposes. Buildings over 20 feet in height shall set back an additional one foot for every two feet
in height.
c) Ten feet from property lines adjoining land zoned for commercial, industrial or
mixed uses.
2) Parking/paving.
a) Ten feet from street right-of-way.
b) Ten feet from property lines adjoining land zoned for residential or public
purposes.
c) Five feet from property lines adjoining land zoned for commercial, industrial
or mixed uses.
Prior Code, § 9- 11- 5) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11) Penalty, see §
152. 999
152. 210 DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
In addition to general performance standards identified in §§ 152. 065 through 152. 085 and
specific development standards for certain uses designated in §§ 152.095 through 152. 098, the
following standards shall apply within the C- 2, General Commerce District.
Page 3 of 4
4
A) Minimum gross floor area ofprincipal buildings. The minimum gross floor area of
principal buildings shall be at least 20% of the lot area.
B) Maximum height. Three stories, not exceeding 40 feet from finished grade.
C) Landscaping and screening. Landscaping and screening requirements shall be as
established in §§ 152.515 through 152. 523.
D) Outdoor displays. Outdoor display of items for sale shall be subject to the standards
identified in § 152.097. Outside storage of equipment, materials or vehicles, other than passenger
vehicles, shall be allowed by conditional use permit, subject to the standards identified in
152.078.
E) Live entertainment. Live entertainment shall be allowed accessory to a restaurant,
coffee shop, nightclub or similar facility, provided that no music or amplified sounds shall be
audible from adjacent residential properties.
F) Trucks, vans and trailers. Trucks, vans and trailers that are regularly driven or towed as
a part of the operation of any permitted use may be parked but may not be used for the storage or
sale of merchandise. Semitrailers shall not be parked or stored on the same lot for more than ten
days in any 30- day period. Temporary storage buildings or storage structures designed to be
easily moved are not permitted as an accessory use or structure.
G) Principal and accessory buildings. All principal and accessory buildings shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the design standards identified in § 152.098.
Prior Code, § 9- 11- 6) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
Page 4 of 4
Zoning Code 1
C-3, DOWNTOWNDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
152.225 Purpose
152.226 Permitted and conditional uses
152.227 Interim uses
152.228 Permitted accessory uses
152.229 Lot and setback requirements
152.230 Development and performance standards
152. 225 PURPOSE.
The purpose of the C- 3, Downtown Development District is to recognize the existing
downtown" area of the city, to provide for a" filling-in" and " rounding- out" of the center with
uses similar to those which exist, but generally to discourage geographic expansion in view of its
non- central location relative to the city as a whole.
Prior Code, § 9- 12- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 226 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES.
Within the C- 3, Downtown Development District, no building, structure, land or premises
shall be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed,
moved or altered except for one or more of the uses identified in Table 152. 171, Principal Uses
in the Commercial Districts, subject to all applicable development and performance standards.
Prior Code, § 9- 12- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 227 INTERIM USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
interim uses within the C- 3, Downtown Development District, and require an interim use permit
in accordance with the procedures identified in § 152.032.
A) Temporary classroom type structure for use by public or private institutions.
B) Other uses that satisfy both the purpose and findings criteria established in § 152. 032, as
determined by the City Council.
Prior Code, § 9- 12- 3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 228 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
permitted accessory uses within the C- 3, Downtown Development District, subject to all
applicable provisions of this chapter:
Page 1 of 3
Zoning Code 2
A) Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental and directly related to
the uses allowed as permitted, conditional or interim within this chapter;
B) Any incidental repair, processing or storage necessary to the conduct of the principal
use, provided that no more than 30% of the gross floor area of the principal building is utilized
for those purposes;
C) Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the premises for a period
not to exceed the time necessary to complete construction;
D) Fences as regulated in § 152.077;
E) Off-street parking and loading areas, as regulated by §§ 152.490 through 152. 502;
F) Recreational vehicles and equipment parking and storage as regulated by § 152.494;
G) Towers and antennas as regulated by § 152. 079;
H) Signs as regulated within §§ 152.460 through 152.478; and
I) Outdoor dining area subject to the standards identified for that use in § 152. 097.
Prior Code, § 9- 12- 4) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 229 LOT AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
Height and area regulations for the C- 3, Downtown Development District are subject to the
standards identified in §§ 152. 380 through 152.389 for the Hamilton Overlay District.
Prior Code, § 9- 12- 5) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 230 DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
In addition to general performance standards identified in §§ 152. 065 through 152. 085 and
specific development standards for certain uses designated in §§ 152.095 through 152. 098, the
following standards shall apply within the C- 3, Downtown Development District.
A) All properties are further subject to the development standards identified in §§ 152. 380
through 152.389 for the Hamilton Overlay District.
B) Outdoor display of items for sale shall be subject to the standards identified in
152.097. No outside storage of merchandise, materials or equipment shall be permitted.
C) Live entertainment shall be allowed accessory to a restaurant, coffee shop or similar
facility, provided that no music or amplified sounds shall be audible from adjacent residential
Page 2 of 3
Zoning Code 3
properties.
Prior Code, § 9- 12- 6) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
Page 3 of 3
BUSINESS/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
152.245 Purpose
152.246 Principal uses in the Business/ Industrial Districts
152. 245 PURPOSE.
This subchapter is established to provide a listing of allowable principal uses within the
Business/ Industrial Districts and to identify those uses that have specific development standards.
Prior Code, § 9- 13- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 246 PRINCIPAL USES IN THE BUSINESS/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
A) In general. All permitted and conditional uses allowed in the industrial districts are
listed in Table 152.246, Principal Uses in the Business/ Industrial Districts.
B) Permitted uses. Uses specified with a " P" are permitted in the district or districts where
designated, provided that the use complies with all other applicable provisions of this chapter.
C) Conditional uses. Uses specified with a" C" are allowed as a conditional use in the
district or districts where designated, provided that the use complies with all other applicable
provisions of this chapter. Persons wishing to establish or expand a conditional use shall obtain a
conditional use permit for the use as specified in § 152. 031.
D) Prohibited uses. Any use not listed as either " P" ( permitted) or " C" ( conditional) in a
particular district or any use not determined by the Zoning Administrator to be substantially
similar to a use listed as permitted or conditional shall be prohibited in that district. The
determination shall be made in the manner provided for in § 152. 010 governing determination of
substantially similar uses.
E) Specific development standards. Permitted and conditional uses specified with an " x"
under the specific development standards column shall be subject to the standards identified in
152.095 through 152. 098.
F) Generalized use categories. Table 152.246 employs generalized use categories for some
types of industrial uses. A particular use may be determined to be within a generalized use
category if not listed specifically elsewhere in Table 152.246 and if not determined to be within
another less restrictive generalized use category. Determination of whether a particular use is
included within a generalized use category shall be made by the Zoning Administrator in the
manner provided for in § 152. 010 governing determination of substantially similar uses.
1) Limited industrial uses. Limited industrial uses are low impact uses which produce
little or no noise, odor, vibration, glare or other objectionable influences and which, given proper
controls, have little or no adverse effect on surrounding properties. Limited industrial uses
Page 1 of 7
include the production, processing, packaging or storage of the following:
a) Apparel, textiles and fabrics;
b) Electronic and electrical equipment, components and accessories;
c) Foods and food products, not including distilling or live slaughter;
d) Household goods and appliances;
e) Measuring, analyzing and controlling instruments;
f) Medical and optical goods and technology;
g) Novelty items, musical instruments, sporting and athletic equipment and other
personal goods;
h) Office and commercial equipment, furniture and fixtures;
i) Pharmaceuticals, health and beauty products;
0) Printing and publishing operations, including distribution;
k) Signs, including electric and neon signs, and other advertising devices;
1) Fabricated metal products such as cans and shipping containers, cutlery,
handtools and general hardware;
m) Fabricated plastic and rubber products, except tires and inner tubes;
n) Household, industrial and commercial machinery and equipment such as
engines and turbines, farm, lawn and garden equipment, heating, cooling and refrigeration
equipment and machine tools;
o) Metal working such as stamping, welding, machining, extruding, engraving,
plating, grinding, polishing, cleaning and heat treating;
p) Paper and paperboard products, except no pulp, paper or paperboard mills; and
q) Woodworking, lumber and wood products, not including saw mills.
2) General industrial uses. General industrial uses are those which may have a
substantial adverse effect on the environment or on surrounding properties and which require
special measures and careful site selection to ensure compatibility with the surrounding area.
General industrial uses often include processing of raw materials or production of primary
materials. General industrial uses include the production or processing of the following:
Page 2 of 7
a) Asphalt, paving and roofing materials;
b) Battery manufacture and reprocessing;
c) Chemicals and chemical products, including ammonia, chlorine, household
cleaners, detergent, fertilizer and industrial and agricultural chemicals;
d) Gypsum and plaster products;
e) Paints, varnishes, lacquers and enamels;
f) Petroleum and coal products, except no mining or extraction;
g) Plastics and synthetic resins and fibers;
h) Primary metals, including steelworks, rolling and finishing mills, forge or
foundry;
i) Pulp, paper or paperboard mills;
0) Sand and gravel, except no mining or extraction;
k) Sawmills;
1) Tires and inner tubes; and
m) Transportation equipment, including motor vehicle and aircraft parts and
equipment.
Table 152.246- Principal Uses in the Business/Industrial Districts
District Development
Use Standards
B-P I-1 I-2
Industrial uses
Limited industrial P P P
General industrial P
Specific industrial uses
Boat repair, maintenance and storage P P x
Page 3 of 7
Table 152.246- Principal Uses in the Business/Industrial Districts
District Development
Use Standards
B-P I-1 I-2
Cleaning services and laundries P P
Contractor office and yard P P x
Explosives, including use, storage or manufacturing C
Farm and construction equipment sales, service and P P x
rental
Furniture moving and storage P P P
Grain elevator or storage
P
Grain milling or distillation P
Greenhouse, wholesale P P x
Industrial machinery and equipment sales, service and - P P x
rental
Research, development and testing laboratory P P P
Recycling facility P P P x
Refuse disposal and incineration facility C x
Scrap/ salvage yard C x
Self service storage P P
Stone, clay and concrete products P P
Wholesaling, warehousing and distribution P P P
Commercial uses
Automobile services
Page 4 of 7
Table 152.246- Principal Uses in the Business/Industrial Districts
District Development
Use Standards
B-P I-1 I-2
Automobile repair, minor C C x
Automobile repair, major C C x
Automobile sales C x
Offices P P P
Retail sales and services
Auction establishment P P
Veterinary clinic or animal kennel C C x
Building material sales P P P x
Day care facility C C C x
Dog day care facility C C C x
Funeral Homes with or without crematory or alkaline
C x
hydrolysis
Commercial recreation, entertainment and lodging
Firearm range, indoor P P
Indoor recreational facility P P P
Outdoor recreation area
C C C
Sexually- oriented uses P x
Transportation
Bus garage or maintenance facility P P P
Cartage and express facility P P P
Towing operations C x
Page 5 of 7
Table 152.246- Principal Uses in the Business/Industrial Districts
District Development
Use Standards
B-P I-1 I-2
Transportation terminal P P P
Truck, trailer or recreational vehicle sales, service and - P P x
rental
Waste hauler P P
Institutional and public uses
Cemeteries C C C
Educational facilities
School, vocational or business P P P
Parking facilities, ramps C C C
Religious institutions P P P
Social, cultural and recreational facilities
Armories, convention centers P P P
Stadiums, arenas C C
Clubs and lodges P P P
Residential uses
Dwelling in conjunction with business C C x
Public service and utilities
Communication facilities P P P
Communication towers C C C x
Governmental buildings and structures P P P
Page 6 of 7
Table 152.246- Principal Uses in the Business/Industrial Districts
District Development
Use Standards
B-P I-1 I-2
Public utility buildings and structures P P P
Street and equipment maintenance facility C P P
Waste transfer or disposal facility C C x
Prior Code, § 9- 13- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 577, passed 6- 21- 2004; Ord. 692,
passed 10- 17- 2011; Ord. 734, passed 04- 07- 2014; Ord. 745, passed 11- 17- 2014) Penalty, see §
152. 999
Page 7 of 7
BP, BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT
152.260 Purpose
152.261 Permitted and conditional uses
152.262 Interim uses
152.263 Permitted accessory uses
152.264 Lot and setback requirements
152.265 Development and performance standards
152. 260 PURPOSE.
The purpose of the BP, Business Park District, is to provide for the establishment of
corporate headquarters, business offices, wholesale showrooms and related uses in an
environment that provides a high level of amenities, including landscaping, preservation of
natural features, architectural controls, pedestrian trails and other features.
Prior Code, § 9- 14- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 261 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES.
Within the BP, Business Park District, no building, structure, land or premises shall be used,
and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or
altered except for one or more of the uses identified in Table 152.246, Principal Uses in the
Business/ Industrial Districts, subject to all applicable development and performance standards.
Prior Code, § 9- 14- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 262 INTERIM USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
interim uses within the B- P, Business Park District, and require an interim use permit in
accordance with the procedures identified in § 152. 032:
A) Single-family dwelling on property not served by municipal sewer and water, subject to
the standards identified in § 152. 097;
B) Mining, excavation and land reclamation, subject to standards identified in §§ 152. 560
through 152.575;
C) Private or public stables, subject to standards identified in § 152. 097;
D) Temporary classroom type structure for use by public or private institutions; and
E) Other uses that satisfy both the purpose and findings criteria established in § 152. 032, as
determined by the City Council.
Page 1 of 4
Prior Code, § 9- 14- 3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 263 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
permitted accessory uses within the BP, Business Park District, subject to all applicable
provisions of this chapter:
A) Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental and directly related to
the uses allowed as permitted, conditional or interim within this chapter;
B) Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the premises for a period
not to exceed the time necessary to complete construction;
C) Fences as regulated in § 152.077;
D) Off-street parking and loading areas, as regulated by §§ 152.490 through 152. 502;
E) Towers and antennas as regulated by § 152. 079;
F) Signs as regulated within §§ 152.460 through 152.478;
G) Storage of merchandise and wholesaling when incidental to a permitted use;
H) Limited retail sales, provided that:
1) All sales are conducted in a clearly defined area of the principal building reserved
specifically for that use;
2) The sales area must be located on the ground floor of the principal building and
shall occupy no more than 15% of the gross floor area of the building. Retail sales in excess 15%
of the gross floor area of the building shall require a conditional use permit; and
3) Hours or operation are limited to 6: 00 a.m. to 10: 00 p.m.
I) Keeping of horses, provided that there are at least two net buildable acres of land for the
first horse and one net buildable acre for each additional horse up to a maximum of five horses
and provided that any accessory building used as stable facility or shelter for the horses maintain
a minimum setback of 100 feet from a front lot line and 50 feet from all side or rear lot lines. A
conditional use permit shall be required to exceed the maximum allowable number of horses as
provided herein.
Prior Code, § 9- 14- 4) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 542, passed 2- 4- 2002; Ord. 747, passed
04- 20-2015) Penalty, see § 152. 999
Page 2 of 4
152. 264 LOT AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the BP, Business Park District,
subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter.
A) Minimum lot area: 30,000 square feet.
B) Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
C) Minimum landscaped open space ratio: Not less than 20% of net site area when
adjacent to Department of Natural Resources Aquatic Management Area or, in all other cases,
25% of the net site area.
D) Minimum setbacks.
1) Buildings.
a) Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
b) Minimum side yard: ten feet, except 40 feet when abutting residential district.
c) Minimum side corner yard: 30 feet.
d) Minimum rear yard: 20 feet, except 40 feet when abutting a property zoned or
designated for residential use.
2) Parking/paving.
a) Ten feet from street right-of-way.
b) Twenty-five feet from property lines adjoining land zoned for residential
purposes.
c) Five feet from property lines adjoining land zoned for commercial, industrial
or mixed uses.
Prior Code, § 9- 14- 5) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 577, passed 6- 21- 2004) Penalty, see §
152.999
152. 265 DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
In addition to general performance standards identified in §§ 152. 065 through 152. 085 and
specific development standards for certain uses designated in §§ 152.095 through 152. 098, the
following standards shall apply within the BP, Business Park District.
A) Maximum building height. Thirty- five feet, except as allowed by conditional use
Page 3 of 4
permit.
B) Landscaping and screening. Landscaping and screening requirements shall be as
established in §§ 152.515 through 152. 523.
C) Outdoor displays. Outdoor display of items for sale shall be subject to the standards
identified in § 152.097. Outside storage of equipment, materials or vehicles, other than passenger
vehicles, shall be allowed by conditional use permit, subject to the standards identified in
152.078.
D) Trucks, vans and trailers. Trucks, vans and trailers that are regularly driven or towed as
a part of the operation of any permitted use may be parked but may not be used for the storage or
sale of merchandise. Semitrailers shall not be parked or stored on the same lot for more than ten
days in any 30- day period. Temporary storage buildings or storage structures designed to be
easily moved are not permitted as an accessory use or structure.
E) Principal and accessory buildings. All principal and accessory buildings shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the design standards identified in § 152.098.
Prior Code, § 9- 14- 6) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
Page 4 of 4
14, LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
152.280 Purpose
152.281 Permitted and conditional uses
152.282 Interim uses
152.283 Permitted accessory uses
152.284 Lot and setback requirements
152.285 Development and performance standards
152. 280 PURPOSE.
The purpose of the I-1, Limited Industrial District is to provide land for development of
traditional industrial activities, sufficient in size to meet employment and tax base requirements
of the city. The overall character of the district is intended to allow industrial development but to
assure that it is compatible with adjacent land uses.
Prior Code, § 9- 15- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 281 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES.
Within the I-1, Limited Industrial District, no building, structure, land or premises shall be
used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved
or altered except for one or more of the uses identified in Table 152.246, Principal Uses in the
Business/ Industrial Districts, subject to all applicable development and performance standards.
Prior Code, § 9- 15- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 282 INTERIM USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
interim uses within the I-1, Limited Industrial District, and require an interim use permit in
accordance with the procedures identified in § 152. 032:
A) Single-family dwelling on property not served by municipal sewer and water, subject to
the standards identified in § 152. 097;
B) Mining, excavation and land reclamation, subject to standards identified in §§ 152. 560
through 152.575;
C) Private or public stables, subject to standards identified in § 152. 097;
D) Temporary classroom type structure for use by public or private institutions; and
E) Other uses that satisfy both the purpose and findings criteria established in § 152. 032, as
determined by the City Council.
Page 1 of 4
Prior Code, § 9- 15- 3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 283 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
permitted accessory uses within the I-1, Limited Industrial District, subject to all applicable
provisions of this chapter:
A) Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental and directly related to
the uses allowed as permitted, conditional or interim within this chapter;
B) Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the premises for a period
not to exceed the time necessary to complete construction;
C) Fences as regulated in § 152.077;
D) Off-street parking and loading areas, as regulated by §§ 152.490 through 152. 502;
E) Towers and antennas as regulated § 152.079;
F) Signs as regulated within §§ 152.460 through 152.478.
G) Storage of merchandise and wholesaling when incidental to a permitted use; and
H) Limited retail sales, provided that:
1) All sales are conducted in a clearly defined area of the principal building reserved
specifically for that use;
2) The sales area must be located on the ground floor of the principal building and
shall occupy no more than 15% of the gross floor area of the building. Retail sales in excess 15%
of the gross floor area of the building shall require a conditional use permit; and
3) Hours or operation are limited to 6: 00 a.m. to 10: 00 p.m.
Prior Code, § 9- 15- 4) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 284 LOT AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the I-1, Limited Industrial
District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
chapter.
A) Minimum lot area: two acres.
Page 2 of 4
B) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
C) Maximum building coverage: 50%.
D) Minimum landscaped open space ratio: 20% of net site area.
E) Minimum setbacks.
1) Buildings.
a) Fifty feet from front street right-of-way, 30 feet from side street right-of-way.
b) Twenty feet from property lines adjoining land zoned for residential or public
purposes. Buildings over 20 feet in height shall set back an additional one foot for every two feet
in height.
c) Ten feet from property lines adjoining land zoned for commercial, industrial or
mixed uses.
2) Parking/paving.
a) Ten feet from street right-of-way.
b) Twenty-five feet from property lines adjoining land zoned for residential
purposes.
c) Five feet from property lines adjoining land zoned for commercial, industrial
or mixed uses.
Prior Code, § 9- 15- 5) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 285 DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
In addition to general performance standards identified in §§ 152. 065 through 152. 085 and
specific development standards for certain uses designated in §§ 152.095 and 152.098, the
following standards shall apply within the I-1, Limited Industrial District.
A) Minimum gross floor area. The minimum gross floor area of principal buildings shall
be at least 20% of the lot area.
B) Maximum building height. Forty-five feet, except as allowed by conditional use permit.
C) Landscaping and screening. Landscaping and screening requirements shall be as
established in §§ 152.515 through 152. 523.
D) Outdoor displays. Outdoor display of items for sale shall be subject to the standards
Page 3 of 4
identified in § 152.097. Outside storage of equipment, materials or vehicles, other than passenger
vehicles, shall be allowed by conditional use permit, subject to the standards identified in
152.078.
E) Trucks, vans and trailers. Trucks, vans and trailers that are regularly driven or towed as
a part of the operation of any permitted use may be parked but may not be used for the storage or
sale of merchandise. Temporary storage buildings or storage structures designed to be easily
moved are not permitted as an accessory use or structure.
F) Principal and accessory buildings. All principal and accessory buildings shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the design standards identified in § 152.098.
Prior Code, § 9- 15- 6) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
Page 4 of 4
I-2, PORTS OF SA" GE INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
152.300 Purpose
152. 301 Permitted and conditional uses
152.302 Interim uses
152. 303 Permitted accessory uses
152.304 Lot and setback requirements
152. 305 Development and performance standards
152. 300 PURPOSE.
The purpose of the I-2, Ports of Savage Industrial District is to recognize existing
water-oriented industrial development within the city and to provide sufficient land for possible
new, expanded or relocated industries of a similar nature; the industries to be generally
characterized by low employment levels and low building to land ratios in response to the
location of the district within the Minnesota River flood plain and to demand by certain
industries for water-oriented sites offering water transportation facilities. It is also the intent of
this section to provide for the existence of sexually- oriented uses in an area that minimizes the
secondary effects of the businesses. Sexually- oriented uses and secondary effects are defined in §
118. 03 of the city code.
Prior Code, § 9- 16- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 301 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES.
Within the I-2, Ports of Savage Industrial District, no building, structure, land or premises
shall be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed,
moved or altered except for one or more of the uses identified in Table 152.246, Principal Uses
in the Business/ Industrial Districts, subject to all applicable development and performance
standards.
Prior Code, § 9- 16- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 302 INTERIM USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
interim uses within the I-2, Ports of Savage Industrial District, and require an interim use permit
in accordance with the procedures identified in § 152.032:
A) Mining, excavation and land reclamation, subject to standards identified in §§ 152. 560
through 152.575;
B) Private or public stables, subject to standards identified in § 152. 097;
C) Temporary classroom type structure for use by public or private institutions; and
Page 1 of 4
D) Other uses that satisfy both the purpose and findings criteria established in § 152. 032, as
determined by the City Council.
Prior Code, § 9- 16- 3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 303 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
permitted accessory uses within the I-2, Ports of Savage Industrial District, subject to all
applicable provisions of this chapter:
A) Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental and directly related to
the uses allowed as permitted, conditional or interim within this chapter;
B) Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the premises for a period
not to exceed the time necessary to complete construction;
C) Fences as regulated in § 152.077;
D) Off-street parking and loading areas, as regulated by §§ 152.490 through 152. 502;
E. Towers and antennas as regulated by § 152. 079;
F) Signs as regulated within §§ 152.460 through 152.478;
G) Storage of merchandise and wholesaling when incidental to a permitted use; and
H) Limited retail sales, provided that:
1) All sales are conducted in a clearly defined area of the principal building reserved
specifically for that use;
2) The sales area must be located on the ground floor of the principal building and
shall occupy no more than 15% of the gross floor area of the building. Retail sales in excess 15%
of the gross floor area of the building shall require a conditional use permit; and
3) Hours or operation are limited to 6: 00 a.m. to 10: 00 p.m.
Prior Code, § 9- 16- 4) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 304 LOT AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the I-2, Ports of Savage
Industrial District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in
this chapter.
Page 2 of 4
A) Minimum lot area: four acres.
B) Minimum lot width: 300 feet.
C) Minimum setbacks.
1) Buildings.
a) Twenty feet from front street right- of-way.
b) Twenty-five feet from property lines adjoining land zoned for residential or
public purposes. Buildings over 20 feet in height shall set back an additional one foot for every
two feet in height.
c) Twenty feet from property lines adjoining land zoned for commercial,
industrial or mixed uses.
2) Parking/paving.
a) Ten feet from street right-of-way.
b) Ten feet from property lines adjoining land zoned for residential or public
purposes.
c) Five feet from property lines adjoining land zoned for commercial, industrial
or mixed uses.
Prior Code, § 9- 16- 5) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 305 DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
In addition to general performance standards identified in §§ 152. 065 through 152. 085 and
specific development standards for certain uses designated in §§ 152.095 through 152. 098, the
following standards shall apply within the I-2, Ports of Savage Industrial District.
A) Maximum building height. Forty-five feet, except as allowed by conditional use permit.
B) Landscaping and screening. Landscaping and screening requirements shall be as
established in §§ 152.515 through 152. 523.
C) Outdoor displays. Outdoor display of items for sale shall be subject to the standards
identified in § 152.097. Outside storage of equipment, materials or vehicles, other than passenger
vehicles, shall be allowed by conditional use permit, subject to the standards identified in
152.078.
D) Trucks, vans and trailers. Trucks, vans and trailers that are regularly driven or towed as
a part of the operation of any permitted use may be parked but may not be used for the storage or
Page 3 of 4
sale of merchandise.
E) Principal and accessory buildings. All principal and accessory buildings shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the design standards identified § 152. 098.
Prior Code, § 9- 16- 6) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
Page 4 of 4
1
P-1, PRESERVATION OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
152.320 Purpose
152. 321 Permitted uses
152.322 Conditional uses
152. 320 PURPOSE.
The purpose of the P- 1, Preservation Open Space District is to:
A) Preserve significant natural features and amenities such as lakes, rivers, marshes, steep
hills and extensive woodlands in their natural state in order to assure continuation of the existing
natural drainage system;
B) Prevent harmful soil erosion;
C) Maintain ecological balance; and
D) Assure their permanent use for their primary natural function as well as for enjoyment
by the general public. As a specific example, it is intended that the natural drainage ways of
Eagle Creek and Credit River and the Minnesota River bluff line shall not be encroached upon
by urban development.
Prior Code, § 9- 17- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 321 PERMITTED USES.
No building, structure, land or premises shall be used, and no building or structure shall
hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered except for one or more of the
uses listed below, subject to all applicable development and performance standards:
A) Agriculture, except for potentially offensive uses such as hog and cattle feeding lots;
B) Public parks and recreation areas, except for high intensity use facilities such as hockey
arenas; and
C) Customary accessory uses incidental to the foregoing permitted uses.
Prior Code, § 9- 17- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 322 CONDITIONAL USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
conditional uses within the P- 1, Preservation Open Space District and require a conditional use
permit in accordance with the procedures identified in § 152. 031:
Page 1 of 2
2
A) Recreational facilities of a commercial nature such as riding stables, golf courses,
camping and concessions; and
B) Towers and antennas as regulated by § 152. 079.
Prior Code, § 9- 17- 3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
Page 2 of 2
P-2, PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES DISTRICT
152. 335 Purpose
152. 336 Permitted uses
152.337 Conditional uses
152. 338 Interim uses
152.339 Lot and setback requirements
152. 340 Development and performance standards
152. 335 PURPOSE.
The purpose of the P- 2, Public Buildings and Facilities District, is to accommodate
large- scale governmental, public utility, recreational and educational facilities. It is the intent of
this district to provide a procedure for the orderly establishment of public facilities, expansion of
operations or change in the use of public facilities.
Prior Code, § 9- 18- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 336 PERMITTED USES.
No building, structure, land or premises shall be used, and no building or structure shall
hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered except for one or more of the
uses listed below, subject to all applicable development and performance standards:
A) Public facilities required by the resident or working population of the city area such as
schools, libraries and municipal administration and service buildings;
B) Accessory uses incidental to the foregoing principal uses; and
C) One single-family dwelling on minimum lot size of 3. 98 acres.
Prior Code, § 9- 18- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 337 CONDITIONAL USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
conditional uses within the P- 2, Public Buildings and Facilities District and require a conditional
use permit in accordance with the procedures identified in § 152. 031:
A) Any permitted structure over 45 feet in height; and
B) Cemeteries;
C) Towers and antennas as regulated by § 152. 079.
Prior Code, § 9- 18- 3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11) Penalty, see §
Page 1 of 3
152.999
152. 338 INTERIM USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are
interim uses within the P- 2, Public Buildings and Facilities District, and require an interim use
permit in accordance with the procedures identified in § 152. 032:
A) Temporary classroom type structure for use by public or private institutions; and
B) Other uses that satisfy both the purpose and findings criteria established in § 152. 032, as
determined by the City Council.
Prior Code, § 9- 18- 4) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 339 LOT AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the P- 2, Public Buildings and
Facilities District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in
this chapter.
A) Minimum lot area: one acre.
B) Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
C) Minimum open space: Not less than 25% of the lot area.
D) Minimum setbacks.
1) Buildings.
a) Minimum front yard: 30 feet.
b) Minimum side yard: 15 feet, except 40 feet when abutting residential district.
c) Minimum side corner yard: 30 feet.
d) Minimum rear yard: 20 feet, except 40 feet when abutting residential district.
2) Parking/paving.
a) Ten feet from street right-of-way.
b) Ten feet from property lines adjoining land zoned for residential or public
purposes.
Page 2 of 3
c) Five feet from property lines adjoining land zoned for commercial, industrial
or mixed uses.
Prior Code, § 9- 18- 5) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 340 DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
In addition to general performance standards identified in §§ 152. 065 through 152. 085 and
specific development standards for certain uses designated in §§ 152.095 through 152. 098, the
following standards shall apply within the P- 2, Public Buildings and Facilities District.
A) Maximum building height. Forty-five feet, except as allowed by conditional use permit.
B) Landscaping and screening. Landscaping and screening shall be as established in §§
152. 515 through 152.523.
C) Principal and accessory buildings. All principal and accessory buildings shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the design standards identified in § 152.098.
D) Building permits. Building permits shall not be issued until the time as the applicant
has received approval for site plan and building design review pursuant to § 152.034.
Prior Code, § 9- 18- 6) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
Page 3 of 3
1
FLOOD PLAIN 0VERLA YDISTRICT
152. 355 Statutory authorization, findings of fact and purpose
152. 356 General provisions
152.357 Establishment of Flood Zone Districts
152. 358 Floodway District (FW)
152.359 Flood Fringe District (FF)
152. 360 General Flood Plain District (GFP)
152. 361 Subdivisions
152. 362 Public utilities, railroads, roads and bridges
152. 363 Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks
152. 364 Administration
152. 365 Non-conforming uses
152. 366 Amendments
152. 355 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE.
A) Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the state has, in M.S. § 103F, as it may be
amended from time to time, delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt
regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
B) Findings offact. The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which results in potential loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and
relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect public health, safety and
general welfare.
C) Methods used to analyze flood hazards. The provisions of this subchapter are based
upon a reasonable method of analyzing hazards that is consistent with the standards established
by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
D) Statement ofpurpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare and to minimize those losses described above through the
establishment of the provisions contained herein.
Prior Code, § 9- 19- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 356 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
A) Application. The Flood Plain Overlay District shall be applied to and superimposed
upon all districts as existing or amended by the text and map of this subchapter. The Flood Plain
Overlay District regulations shall not be construed to allow any use or structure not otherwise
permitted within the underlying zoning district where the property is located. The regulations and
requirements imposed by the Flood Plain Overlay District shall be in addition to those
established based upon the specific information contained in the Flood Insurance Rate Map and
Page 1 of 17
2
the Flood Insurance Study for the city as adopted in division (B) below. The Flood Plain Overlay
District shall apply specifically to all lands as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map as being
located within the boundaries of the areas designated as Zone AE or Zone A.
B) Establishment ofofficial zoning map. The official zoning map together with all
explanatory matter attached thereto is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of
this subchapter. The attached material shall include the Flood Insurance Study and Flood
Insurance Rate Map for the city date June 18, 1980, as may be amended. The official zoning map
shall be on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator.
C) Regulatory floodprotection elevation. The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be
an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood level plus any
increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the flood plain that result from
designation of a floodway.
D) Interpretation. The boundaries of the Flood Plain Overlay District shall be determined
by scaling distances on the official zoning map. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the official zoning map, as for example
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the
City Engineer shall make the necessary interpretation. The persons contesting the location of the
district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case and to submit
technical evidence in support of their claim.
E) Warning and disclaimer of liability. This subchapter does not imply that areas outside
the Flood Plain Overlay District or land uses permitted within this district will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This subchapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this subchapter or
any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
Prior Code, § 9- 19- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 357 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOOD ZONE DISTRICTS.
The flood plain areas within the jurisdiction of this subchapter are hereby divided into three
districts.
A) Floodway District( FW). Includes the bed of a lake or wetland or the channel of a river
or stream and those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are intended to store or carry and
discharge, respectively, the regional flood. The Floodway District shall include those areas
designated as floodway on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in § 152. 356( B).
B) Flood Fringe District( FF). Includes the area outside of the floodway, but subject to
inundation by the 100- year regional floods. The Flood Fringe District shall include those areas
designated as floodway fringe on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in § 152. 356( B).
C) General Flood Plain District( GFP). Includes those areas designated as unnumbered
Page 2 of 17
3
A" zones on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in § 152. 356( B).
Prior Code, § 9- 19- 3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 358 FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW).
A) Permitted uses. The following uses have a low flood damage potential and do not
obstruct flood flows. These uses shall be permitted provided they do not require structures, fill or
storage of materials or equipment. In addition, no use shall adversely affect the capacity of the
channels or floodways or any tributary to the main stream or of any drainage ditch or any other
drainage facility or system:
1) Agriculture uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting;
2) Industrial/ commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas and airport loading
strips;
3) Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving
ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife
and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and
skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas and single- or multiple-purpose recreational trails; and
4) Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
B) Conditional uses. These following uses may be permitted in the Floodway District upon
issuance of a conditional use permit as provided in § 152.031. These uses are also subject to the
provisions of division (C) below, which applies to all floodway conditional uses:
1) Uses or structures accessory to open space or conditional uses;
2) Circuses, carnivals and similar transient amusement enterprises;
3) Drive-in theaters, new and used car lots, roadside stands, signs and billboards;
4) Extraction of sand, gravel and other materials;
5) Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves and water control structures;
6) Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and pipelines;
7) Storage yards for equipment, machinery or materials;
8) Kennels and stables;
9) Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes and floodwalls constructed
Page 3 of 17
4
to any height where the intent is to protect agricultural crops for a frequency flood event equal to
or less than the ten-year frequency flood event;
10) Accessory structures, materials and equipment (temporary or permanent) in
conjunction with the grain or oil handling industries, such as conveyor belts, barge moorings,
barge loading areas and equipment, or river oriented businesses which are essential to their
permitted use and must be placed in the floodway to be functional; and
11) Other uses similar in nature to uses described in division (A) above and this
division.
C) Standards forfloodway conditional uses. No structure (temporary or permanent), fill
including fill for roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or equipment or
other uses may be allowed as a conditional use which, acting alone or in combination with
existing or reasonably anticipated future uses, adversely affects the capacity of the floodway or
increases flood heights. In addition, all floodway conditional uses shall be subject to the
standards below.
1) Fill.
a) Any fill deposited in the floodway shall be no more than the minimum amount
necessary to conduct a conditional use listed in division (B) above. Generally, fill shall be
limited to that needed to grade or landscape for that use and shall not in any way obstruct the
flow or flood waters. Fill shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover, mulching, riprap
or other acceptable method.
b) Spoil from dredging or sand and gravel operations shall not be deposited in the
floodway unless a long-term site development plan is submitted which includes an
erosion/ sedimentation prevention element to the plan.
c) As an alternative, and consistent with division ( C)( 1)( b) above, dredge spoil
disposal and sand and gravel operations may allow temporary, onsite storage or fill or other
materials which would have caused an increase to the stage of the 100- year or regional flood but
only after the city has received an appropriate plan which assures the removal of the materials
from the floodway based upon the flood warning time available. The conditional use permit
must be registered with the property in the County Recorder' s office.
2) Accessory structures. Accessory structures ( temporary or permanent) permitted as
conditional uses by division (13)( 1) above:
a) Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation;
Page 4of17
5
b) Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of flood waters. Whenever
possible, structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of
flood flow and, so far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on the same flood
flow lines as those of adjoining structures;
c) Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or floodproofed in accordance
with the FP- 1 or FP- 2 standards of the State Building Code. As an alternative, an accessory
structure may be floodproofed to FP- 3 or FP- 4 standards provided the accessory structure
constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed 500 square feet in size, and for a detached
garage, the detached garage must be used solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage;
d) The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement of the structure and shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls; and
e) Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be elevated to or
above the regulatory flood protection elevation or properly floodproofed.
3) Storage ofmaterials and equipment. The storage or processing of materials that
are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive or potentially injurious to human, animal or plant
life is prohibited. Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily removable
from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in accordance with a plan
approved by the city.
4) Structural works forflood control. Levees, dikes and floodwalls intended to
remove areas from the regulatory flood plain shall not be constructed within the limits of the
Floodway District. Other structural works for flood control such as dams and channel
enlargements that will change the course, current or cross- section of a public water shall be
subject to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes and review by the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources and the Army Corps of Engineers. Structural works for flood control that are
constructed in the floodway must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a
stream.
5) Garbage and solid waste disposal. No conditional use permits for garbage and
waste disposal sites shall be issued for floodway areas and provided there shall be no further
encroachment upon the floodway at existing sites.
Prior Code, § 9- 19- 4) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 359 FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (FF).
A) Activities. Activities must be evaluated for impact on the 100- year ( 1%) flood plain
unless compensatory flood plain mitigation is provided at a one to one ratio by volume and it is
demonstrated that the 100- year flood plain will not be impacted. Compensatory flood plain
mitigation is defined as replacement volume for storage of flood waters within the 100- year
Page 5 of 17
6
flood plain but outside of any required stormwater management ponds.
B) Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the Flood Fringe District:
1) Any use permitted in § 152. 358( A);
2) Accessory structures provided they comply with the provisions of§ 152. 358( C)( 2);
3) Residences and other structures constructed on fill so that the basement floor or
first floor, if there is no basement, is at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The
finished fill elevation shall not be lower than one foot below the regulatory flood protection
elevation and shall extend at the elevation at least 15 feet beyond the limits of any structure or
building erected thereon. Fill shall be compacted and the slopes shall be protected by riprap or
vegetative covering. Residences constructed on fill shall be subject to the vehicular access
requirements in division (D)( 1) below;
4) No use shall be permitted which will adversely affect capacity of the channels or
floodways of any tributary to the main stream or of any drainage ditch or other drainage facility
or system; and
5) The cumulative placement of fill where at any one time in excess of 1, 000 cubic
yards of fill is located on the parcel shall be allowable only as a conditional use, unless the fill is
specifically intended to elevate a structure in accordance with division (C)( 3) below.
C) Conditional uses. The following uses are permitted only upon application to the Zoning
Administrator and the issuance of a conditional use permit as provided in § 152. 031, subject to
the following provisions.
1) Residences. Where existing streets, utilities and small lot sizes preclude the use of
fill, other methods of elevating the first floor( including basements) above the regulatory flood
protection elevation may be authorized consistent with the State Building Code. Residences that
do not have access at or above an elevation not more than one foot below the flood protection
elevation shall not be permitted unless granted a variance by the City Council. In granting a
variance, the City Council shall specify limitations on period of use or occupancy of the
residence.
2) Residential basements. Upon the granting of a waiver by the Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) to Savage or to the state, residential basements below the flood protection
elevation may be authorized if they are floodproofed to FP- 1 classification in accordance with
the State Building Code. No floor or portion of a residence below the flood elevation may be
used for human occupancy.
3) Structures other than residential. Commercial, manufacturing and industrial
structures shall ordinarily be elevated on fill so that their first floor (including basement) is above
the regulatory flood protection elevation but may in special circumstances be floodproofed in
accordance with the State Building Code. Any space in the structure that is not elevated to above
Page 6 of 17
7
the flood protection elevation shall be floodproofed to FP- 1 or FP- 2 classification in conformity
with the State Building Code. Spaces floodproofed to FP- 3 or FP- 4 classification shall not be
permitted prior to changes in Federal Insurance Administration regulations that would allow
those uses.
D) Standards forfloodfringe conditional uses.
1) Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be utilized to elevate a
structure' s lowest floor above the regulatory flood protection elevation. These alternative
methods may include the use of stilts, pilings, parallel walls or above- grade, enclosed areas such
as crawl spaces or tuck under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall be considered
above- grade and not a structure' s basement or lowest floor if the enclosed area is above- grade on
at least one side of the structure, is designed to internally flood and is constructed with flood
resistant materials, and is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. The
above noted alternative elevation methods are subject to the following additional standards.
a) The structure' s design and as- built condition must be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect as being in compliance with the general design standards of the
State Building Code and, specifically, that all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities must be at or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation or be designed to prevent flood water from entering or accumulating within
these components during times of flooding.
b) Areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages must be designed to
internally flood and the design plans must stipulate the minimum area of openings in the walls
where internal flooding is to be used as a floodproofing technique and that the enclosed area will
be designed of flood resistant materials in accordance with the FP- 3 or FP- 4 classifications in the
State Building Code and shall be used solely for building access, parking of vehicles or storage.
When openings are placed in a structure' s walls to provide for entry of flood waters to equalize
pressures, the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
2) Basements, as defined in § 152. 012, shall be subject to the following.
a) Residential basement construction shall not be allowed below the regulatory
flood protection elevation.
b) Non-residential basements may be allowed below the regulatory flood
protection provided the basement shall be floodproofed in accordance with the structurally dry
floodproofing classifications in the State Building Code. Structurally dry floodproofing must
meet the FP- 1 or FP- 2 floodproofing classification in the State Building Code and this shall
require making the structure water-tight with the walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. Structures floodproofed to the FP- 3 and FP- 4
classification shall not be permitted.
3) The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable,
Page 7 of 17
8
explosive or potentially injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of other
materials or equipment may be allowed if readily available after a flood warning and in
accordance with a plan approved by the City Council.
E) Standards for allfloodfringe uses.
1) Residential uses. Residences that do not have vehicular access at or above an
elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall not be
permitted unless granted a variance by the City Council. In granting a variance, the City Council
shall specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of the structure for times of flooding
and only after determining that adequate flood warning time and local flood emergency response
procedures exist.
2) Commercial uses. Accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad tracks and parking
lots may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation. However, a permit
for the facilities to be used by the general public or the employees shall not be granted in the
absence of a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would
inundate to a depth greater than two feet or be subject to flood velocities greater than four feet
per second upon occurrence of the regional flood.
3) Manufacturing and industrial uses. Measures shall be taken to minimize
interference with normal plant operations especially for streams having protracted flood
durations. Certain accessory land uses such as yards and parking lots may be at lower elevations
subject to requirements set out in division (D)( 2) above. In considering permit applications, the
City Council shall give due consideration to the needs of an industrial business establishment
including the grain or oil handling industry) whose business requires that it be located in the
flood plain areas.
4) Utilities, railroad tracks, streets, roads and bridges. Public utilities/ facilities such
as roads, railroad tracks, streets and bridges within the flood plain shall be designed to minimize
increases in flood elevations and shall be compatible with local comprehensive flood plain
development plans. Protection to the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be provided
where failure or interruption of these public facilities would result in danger to the public health
or safety or where the facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Where failure
or interruption of service would not endanger life or health, a lesser degree of protection may be
provided for minor auxiliary roads, railroads or utilities.
5) Waste treatment and waste disposal. Waste treatment and disposal facilities shall
be subject to the following provisions.
a) No new construction, addition or modification to existing waste treatment
facilities shall be permitted within the flood plain unless emergency plans and procedures for
action to be taken in the event of flooding are prepared, filed with, and approved by the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. The emergency plans and procedures must provide for
measures to prevent introduction of any pollutant or toxic material into the flood waters.
Page 8 of 17
9
b) There shall be no disposal of garbage or solid waste materials within flood
plain areas except upon issuance of a conditional use permit for sites approved by the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency and subject to the requirements of this division.
6) Flood control works. Flood control works shall be subject to the following
provisions.
a) The minimum height and design of any dikes, levees, floodwalls or similar
structural works shall be based upon the flood profile of the regional flood confined between the
structures subject to the following.
1. For urban areas, the minimum height and design of structural works shall
be at least three feet above the elevation of the regional flood, as confined by structures or at the
elevation of the standard projected flood, whichever is greater.
2. Modifications and additions to existing structural works shall assure that
the work will provide a means of decreasing the flood damage potential in the area. Any existing
structural work that potentially threatens public health or safety shall be modified or
reconstructed in order to meet the standards contained herein within a period of 90 days of the
effective date of this subchapter.
b) Flood protection elevations and floodway limits which reflect proposed
measures for flood control shall not be effective until the measures are constructed and operative
unless the proposed measures will increase flood heights, in which event, the regulatory flood
protection elevations and flood plain limits shall reflect the anticipated increases.
c) Detailed plans shall be submitted to the City Council for any new
developments placed on the flood plain landward from dikes, floodwalls and similar structures.
The plans must provide for ponding areas or other measures to protect against flooding from
internal drainage.
7) Fill. Fill shall be properly compacted and protected against erosion. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has specific criteria for removing the special flood
hazard area designation from certain structures that are properly elevated on fill above the 100-
year flood elevation. FEMA requirements include specific fill compaction and side slope
protection standards. These standards should be investigated prior to site preparation.
Prior Code, § 9- 19- 5) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 636, passed 10- 15- 2007) Penalty, see
152.999
152. 360 GENERAL FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT (GFP).
A) Permissible uses. The uses listed in § 152. 358( A) shall be permitted uses. All other uses
shall be subject to the floodway/flood fringe evaluation criteria pursuant to division (B) below.
Section 152. 358 shall apply if the proposed use is in the Floodway District and § 152.359 shall
apply if the proposed use is in the Flood Fringe District.
Page 9 of 17
10
B) Procedures forfloodway andfloodfringe determinations within the General Flood
Plain District.
1) Upon receipt of an application for a conditional use permit for a use within the
General Flood Plain District, the applicant shall be required to furnish that of the following
information as is deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator for the determination of the
regulatory flood protection elevation and whether the proposed use is within the Floodway or
Flood Fringe District:
a) A typical valley cross- section showing the channel of the stream, elevation of
land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross- sectional areas to be occupied by the
proposed development and high water information;
b) Plan ( surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent
structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and spatial arrangement of all proposed and
existing structures on the site; location and elevations of street; photographs showing existing
land uses and vegetation upstream and downstream; and soil type; and
c) Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the
stream for at least 500 feet in either direction from the proposed development.
2) The applicant shall be responsible to submit one copy of the above information to a
designated engineer or other expert person or agency for technical assistance in determining
whether the proposed use is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District and to determine the
regulatory flood protection elevation. Procedures consistent with Minnesota Regulations Parts
6120.5000 through 6120.6200 shall be followed in this expert evaluation. The designated
engineer or expert is strongly encouraged to discuss the proposed technical evaluation
methodology with the respective Department of Natural Resources Area hydrologist prior to
commencing the analysis. The designated engineer or expert shall:
a) Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood;
b) Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based upon a hydraulic
analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas; and
c) Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional flood without
increasing flood stages more than one-half foot. A lesser stage increase than one-half foot shall
be required if, as a result of the additional stage increase, increased flood damages would result.
An equal degree of encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach shall be assumed
in computing floodway boundaries.
3) The Zoning Administrator shall present the technical evaluation and findings to the
designated engineer or expert to the City Council. The City Council must formally accept the
technical evaluation and the recommended Floodway and/ or Flood Fringe District boundary or
deny the permit application. The City Council, prior to official action, may submit the
Page 10 of 17
11
application and all supporting data and analyses to the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
the Department of Natural Resources or the Planning Commission for review or comment. Once
the floodway and flood fringe boundaries have been determined, the City Council shall refer the
matter back to the Zoning Administrator who shall process the permit application consistent with
the applicable provisions of§§ 152. 358 and 152. 359.
Prior Code, § 9- 19- 6) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 361 SUBDIVISIONS.
A) No land shall be subdivided that is determined unsuitable by the Zoning Administrator
for reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. All lots
falling within the flood plain districts shall contain a building site at or above the regulatory
flood protection elevation. Water and sewage disposal facilities available to all subdivisions shall
comply with the provisions of this subchapter and shall have road access both to the subdivision
and to the individual building sites no lower than two feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation. For all subdivisions in the flood plain, the floodway and flood fringe boundaries, the
regulatory flood protection elevation and the required elevation of all access roads shall be
clearly labeled on subdivision and plat drawings.
B) In the General Flood Plain District, it shall be mandatory for all applicants for
subdivision to provide the information required in § 152. 364( C), which shall be evaluated by the
Zoning Administrator in accordance with the procedures and standards established therein.
C) In the General Flood Plain District, applicants shall provide the information required in
152.360 to determine the 100- year flood elevation, the floodway and flood fringe district
boundaries and the regulatory flood protection elevation for the subdivision site.
D) The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for
removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill
above the 100- year flood elevation. FEMA' s requirements incorporate specific fill compaction
and side slope protection standards for multi- structure or multi-lot developments. These
standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special
flood hazard area designation will be requested.
Prior Code, § 9- 19- 7) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 362 PUBLIC UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS AND BRIDGES.
A) Public utilities. All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer and water
supply systems to be located in the flood plain districts shall be floodproofed in accordance with
the State Building Code or elevated above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
Page 11 of 17
12
B) On-site sewage treatment and water supply systems. Where public utilities are not
provided on- site water systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the systems and new or replacement on- site sewage treatment systems must be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters and they shall not be subject to
impairment or contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment system designed in
accordance with the state' s current statewide standards for on- site sewage treatment systems
shall be determined to be in compliance with this section.
C) Public transportation facilities. Construction of all public transportation facilities such
as railroad tracks, roads and bridges to be located within the Floodway District shall comply with
152.358 and 152. 359. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be provided
where failure or interruption of these transportation facilities would result in danger to the public
health or safety or where the facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor
or auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or
interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health or safety.
Prior Code, § 9- 19- 8) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 363 MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS.
No new manufactured homes or manufactured home parks shall be permitted in the Flood
Plain Overlay District. Existing manufactured homes that are located in the district are
non-conforming uses and may be replaced only if in compliance with the following conditions,
in addition to those which the City Council shall prescribe if deemed necessary:
A) The manufactured home lies in the Flood Fringe District;
B) The manufactured home is anchored with tie-downs that comply with the requirements
of the state;
C) The manufactured home is elevated above the regulatory flood protection elevation; and
D) The manufactured home owner or renter is notified that the manufactured home site lies
in the flood plain and may be subject to flooding.
Prior Code, § 9- 19- 9) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 364 ADMINISTRATION.
A) Use permit.
1) Use permit required. A use permit inconformity with the provisions of this
subchapter shall be secured prior to the erection, addition to, or alteration of any building,
structure or portion thereof, prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure or land;
prior to the exchange or extension of a non-conforming use; and prior to the placement of fill,
excavation of materials or storage of materials within the flood plain.
Page 12 of 17
13
2) Application for use permit. Application for a use permit shall be made to the
Zoning Administrator on appropriate forms and shall include plans, drawn to scale, showing the
nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the lot, existing or proposed structures, fill or
storage of materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation to the channel.
3) State andfederal permits. Prior to granting a use permit or processing an
application for a conditional use permit or variance, the Zoning Administrator shall determine
that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal permits.
4) Certificate ofzoning compliancefor new, altered or non- conforming uses. It shall
be unlawful to use, occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises or both,
or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or
enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued
therefore by the city stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of
this subchapter. Where a non-conforming use or structure is extended or substantially altered, the
certificate of zoning compliance shall specifically state the manner in which the non-conforming
structure or use differs from the provisions of this subchapter.
5) Construction and use to be as provided in applications, plans, permits and
certificates ofzoning compliance. Use permits, conditional use permits or certificates of zoning
compliance issued on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use,
arrangement, and construction set forth in the approved plans and applications, and no other use,
arrangement or construction. Any use, arrangement or construction at variance with that
authorized shall be a violation of this subchapter. The applicant shall submit certification by a
registered professional engineer or architect that the finished fill and building elevations,
floodproofing or other flood protection measures were accomplished in compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter. A registered land surveyor may certify fill and building elevations.
6) Record offirstfloor elevations. The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record
of the elevation of the first floor (including basement) of all new structures or additions to
existing structures in the flood plain districts and a record of the elevations to which structures,
alterations and additions to structures are floodproofed.
B) Variances.
1) The City Council may authorize upon appeal in specific cases that relief or variance
from the terms of this subchapter as will not be contrary to the public interest and only for those
circumstances such as hardship, practical difficulties or circumstances unique to the property
under consideration, as provided for in the respective enabling legislation for planning and
zoning for the city. In the granting of the variance, the City Council shall clearly identify in
writing the specific conditions that exist consistent with the criteria specified in the respective
enabling legislation that justify the granting of the variance. No variance to the provisions of this
subchapter shall have the effect of allowing in any district uses that are prohibited in that district,
permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation for the
particular area or permit standards lower than those required by state law.
Page 13 of 17
14
2) The Zoning Administrator shall submit by mail to the Commissioner of Natural
Resources a copy of the application for the proposed variances sufficiently in advance so that the
Commissioner will receive at least ten days' notice of the hearing.
3) A copy of all decisions granting variances shall be forwarded by mail to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten days of the action.
4) The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant for a variance that:
a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level
will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance; and
b) The construction below the 100- year or regional flood level increases risks to
life and property. The notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. The
Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for
their issuance, and report the variances issued in his or her annual or biennial report submitted to
the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program.
C) Conditional use permits.
1) Any use requiring a conditional use permit shall be provided in accordance with
procedures set forth in § 152.031.
2) The Zoning Administrator shall submit by mail to the Commissioner of Natural
Resources a copy of the application for the proposed conditional or interim use sufficiently in
advance so that the Commissioner will receive at least ten days' notice of the hearing.
3) A copy of all decisions granting conditional and interim use permits shall be
forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten days of the action.
4) Upon receiving an application for a conditional use permit involving the use of fill,
construction of structures or storage of materials, the City Council shall, prior to rendering a
decision thereon:
a) Require the applicant to furnish that of the following information and
additional information as deemed necessary by the city for determining the suitability of the
particular site for the proposed use:
1. Ten copies of the plan drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials,
floodproofing measures and the relationship of the above to the location of the channel; and
2. Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing,
filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of materials, water supply and sanitary
facilities.
Page 14 of 17
15
b) Require the applicant to transmit one copy of the plan and specifications to an
engineer designated by the city or other expert person or agency for technical assistance where
necessary in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, the
seriousness of flood damage to the use, the adequacy of the plans for protection and other
technical matters. Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated engineer or expert, the
city shall determine the specific flood hazard at the site and evaluate the suitability of the
proposed use in relation to the flood hazard.
5) In reviewing conditional use applications, the city shall consider all relevant factors
specified in this subchapter and the following:
a) The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities
caused by encroachments;
b) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the
injury of others;
c) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these
systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions;
d) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage,
and the effect of the damage on the individual owner;
e) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community;
f) The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location;
g) The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed
use;
h) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future;
i) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain
management program for the area;
0) Access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
k) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of
the flood waters expected at the site; and
1) Other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this subchapter.
6) Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this subchapter,
Page 15 of 17
16
the City Council may attach conditions to the granting of conditional use permits or variances as
it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of the subchapter. The conditions may include, but are
not limited to, the following:
a) Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities;
b) Limitations on period of use, occupancy and operation;
c) Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed restrictions;
d) Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees and
other protective measures; and
e) Floodproofing measures in accordance with the State Building Code. The city
shall require that the applicant submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood
protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.
Prior Code, § 9- 19- 10) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 365 NON-CONFORMING USES.
Non-conforming uses and structures within the flood plain districts may be continued
subject to the following conditions.
A) No use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity.
B) No structural alteration or addition to any non-conforming structure over the life of the
structure shall exceed 50% of its value at the time of its becoming a non-conforming use, unless
the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming use or unless the alteration or
addition would substantially reduce potential flood damages for the entire structure.
C) Any alteration or addition to a non-conforming use that would result in substantially
increasing the flood damage potential of that use shall be floodproofed in accordance with the
State Building Code.
D) If any non-conforming use is destroyed by any means, including floods, to an extent of
50% or more of its assessed value, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the
provisions of this subchapter. However the City Council may issue a conditional use permit for
reconstruction if the use is located outside the floodway and, upon reconstruction, is adequately
floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected in conformity with this subchapter.
E) If any non- conforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of
the building premises shall conform to this subchapter. The assessor shall notify the Zoning
Administrator in writing of instances of non- conforming uses that have been discontinued for a
Page 16 of 17
17
period of 12 months.
F) Non-conforming uses located in the Floodway District shall be eliminated or brought
into conformity with the standards contained in this subchapter within a reasonable period of
time as determined by the City Council, after a hearing for each non-conforming use. The City
Council shall make its determination upon the basis of the normal useful life of any improvement
upon the premises. In addition, the monetary value of any competitive advantage derived by the
operation of the non- conforming use, by reason of the limitation on establishment of competing
businesses as a result of this subchapter, shall be considered as a reduction of losses resulting
from the requirement of termination of the use under this subchapter.
G) The Zoning Administrator shall prepare a list of those non-conforming uses which have
been floodproofed or otherwise adequately protected in conformity with this subchapter and
present the list to the City Council recommending the issuance of a certificate to the owner
stating that the uses, as a result of these corrective measures, are in conformity with the
provisions of this subchapter.
Prior Code, § 9- 19- 11) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 366 AMENDMENTS.
A) The flood plain designation on the official zoning map shall not be removed from flood
plain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error or that the area has been filled
to or above the elevation of the regional flood and is contiguous to lands outside the flood plain.
Special exceptions from this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner of Natural Resources if
it is determined that through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use.
B) All amendments to this subchapter including amendments to the official zoning map
must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of Natural Resources prior to adoption.
Changes in the official zoning map must meet the Federal Emergency Management Agency' s
FEMA) technical conditions and criteria and must receive prior FEMA approval before
adoption. The Commissioner of Natural Resources must be given ten days' written notice of all
hearings to consider an amendment to this subchapter and the notice shall include a draft of the
subchapter amendment or technical study under consideration.
Prior Code, § 9- 19- 12) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
Page 17 of 17
HAMILTON 0VERLA YDISTRICT
152.380 Purpose
152. 381 Application
152.382 Exceptions
152. 383 Review process
152.384 Lot and setback requirements
152. 385 Architectural standards
152.386 Screening
152. 387 Landscaping
152. 388 Parking
152. 389 Signage
152. 380 PURPOSE.
The purpose of the Hamilton Overlay District is to preserve and enhance the pedestrian
character of the Hamilton District by establishing provisions for the conversion of existing
buildings and the development of new buildings in a manner that establishes a new architectural
identity and promotes a sense of place, to promote the transformation of the downtown into a
compact pedestrian and transit oriented area with a traditional " main street" character and to
establish reasonable development standards and regulations which support these objectives.
Prior Code, § 9- 20- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 381 APPLICATION.
A) In addition to the regulations specified in this subchapter, all property located within the
Hamilton Overlay District shall be subject to all of the applicable standards, procedures and
regulations of this section and the primary zoning district in which the property is located. Where
the provisions of the overlay district and the primary zoning districts are in conflict, the
provisions of the overlay district shall govern.
B) The lands subject to the Hamilton Overlay District are those shown on the official
zoning map of the city.
Prior Code, § 9- 20- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 382 EXCEPTIONS.
The City Council may approve exceptions to the Hamilton Overlay District provisions upon
finding that the strict adherence to the requirements is impractical because of site location or
conditions.
Prior Code, § 9- 20- 3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
Page 1 of 11
152. 383 REVIEW PROCESS.
All new development, exterior remodeling, renovation or rehabilitation of existing buildings
within the Hamilton Overlay District shall comply with the provisions outlined in this
subchapter. Building permits shall not be issued for the aforementioned projects until a time as
the applicant has received approval for site plan and building design review pursuant to
152.034.
Prior Code, § 9- 20- 4) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 384 LOT AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
In order to unify the streetscape within the Hamilton Overlay District, requirements are
established for locating buildings on lots. The location of the setback areas is illustrated on the
attached map, Setback Areas in the Hamilton District, located at the end of this subchapter.
A) Build-to- line requirements. In the Hamilton Overlay District, a build-to- line is
established to provide minimum and maximum front setbacks for buildings and other structures
from the right-of-way or property line. For properties abutting 123rd Street, 123rd Street shall be
considered the front yard.
B) Build-out requirements. In the Hamilton Overlay District, a build-out requirement is
established which requires a portion of the primary street frontage which must be occupied by
the primary structure at the build-to- line.
Property Lint
I
Buil
o Foot Build !' I1
to lino
123rd Street
C) Special setback requirements. Minimum distance from the property line in which no
structure may encroach.
D) Minimum lot area. 5, 000 square feet.
Area A Area B Area C
Page 2 of 11
Area A Area B Area C
Principal structure
Front yard Build-to- line 15 feet 20 feet
Side yard/interior 0 feet 10 feet 8 feet
5 feet ( lots 60 feet or
less in width)
Side yard/corner Build-to- line 20 feet 20 feet
Rear yard 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet
Build-out 100% NA NA
Maximum height* 50 feet 40 feet 35 feet
Minimum height 2 stories None None
Accessory structure
Side yard/interior 10 feet 0 feet 8 feet
5 feet ( lots 60 feet or
less in width)
Side yard/interior 20 feet 0 feet 20 feet
Rear yard 10 feet 0 feet 10 feet
Build-out NA NA NA
Parking
Front yard NA Build-to- line 5 feet
Side yard/interior 0 feet 0 feet 5 feet
Side yard/corner Build-to- line 0 feet 5 feet
Rear yard 5 feet 0 feet 0 feet
Build-out 0 feet NA NA
Building heights shall conform to the average height of buildings on the block for those
buildings located in Setback Area A. The height of new buildings shall be a minimum of 2
stories and maximum of four stories or height of 50 feet, whichever is greater.
Page 3 of 11
Anev
ter-
Fy +
F
20 feet
thin.
Slrset. .
Prior Code, § 9- 20- 5) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 577, passed 6- 21- 2004; Ord. 616,
passed 11- 6- 2006) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 385 ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS.
A) Commercial properties.
1) All commercial buildings shall be designed to accomplish the goals and policies of
the comprehensive plan.
2) Building materials shall be attractive in appearance, durable, with a permanent
finish and of quality that is consistent with the downtown design standards.
3) Materials shall be scaled to pedestrians when structures are within ten feet of a
public right- of-way or a walkway that is intended for public use.
R
uatc»+'susEa+
4) All buildings shall include the following four elements:
a) Accent materials, which shall be wrapped around the walls that are visible
Page 4of11
from either the street or public open space;
b) Facades facing the street or public walkways shall consist of a minimum of
50% transparent window and door glass area at street level( sidewalk to 12 feet high) of the
street side of the building and 30% on side streets;
c) Complementary material colors; and
d) A combination of vertical and horizontal pattern designs in the building facade.
5) Any exterior building wall adjacent to or visible from a public street, public open
space or abutting property may not exceed 60 feet in length without significant visual relief
consisting of one or more of the following:
a) The facade shall be divided architecturally by means of significantly different
materials or textures;
b) Horizontal offsets at least four feet in depth. Vertical offsets in the roofline of
at least four feet;
c) Placement of vertical oriented windows at the first floor level that is recessed
horizontally at least one foot into the facade; and
d) Recessed entrances.
6) Building materials shall be classified primary, secondary or accent materials.
Primary materials shall cover at least 60% of the facade of a building. Secondary materials may
cover no more than 30% of the facade. Accent materials may include door and window frames,
lintels, cornices and other minor elements, and may cover no more than 10% of the facade.
Allowable materials are as follows:
BRICK, STONE
W CONCRETE
CORNICE
WNDOW
STONE OR
CONCRETE
SILL
AWNING MAu 7oN FI+ AOwARE
STONE BASE
a) Primary exterior building materials may be brick, stone or glass. Bronze-tinted
or mirror glass are prohibited.
Page 5 of 11
b) Secondary exterior building materials may be decorative block or integrally
colored stucco.
c) Synthetic stucco may be permitted as a secondary material on upper floors
only.
d) Accent materials may be wood or metal if appropriately integrated into the
overall building design and not situated in areas that will be subject to physical or environmental
damage.
e) All primary and secondary materials shall be integrally colored.
7) Decorative block shall be colored only by means of a pigment integral to the block
material, not applied to the surface.
8) Stand- alone buildings shall have roofs with a minimum pitch between four to12
and eight to 12 and shall have dormers to break up the roofline.
9) Sheet metal, corrugated metal, iron, shakes, plain flat concrete block( whether
painted or integrally colored or not) are not acceptable as exterior wall materials on buildings.
10) All buildings containing non-residential uses on the ground floor shall have
entrances to a street or public open space spaced no more than 60 feet apart.
11) Entrances shall be orientated conveniently to the street frontage and to on-street and
off-street parking serving the use.
B) Residential areas. All new residential buildings shall be designed to reflect those of the
traditional neighborhood development through craftsmanship that gives the buildings unique
character. Building materials shall be attractive in appearance, durable, with a permanent finish
and of quality that is consistent with the Hamilton Overlay District standards.
Human scale elements shall be implemented into the front design of the structures through the
use of porches, pillars, columns or posts.
1) Windows shall be more vertical than horizontal.
2) Principal building roofs shall be pitched between four to 12 and eight to 12.
3) Garages shall tie in architecturally with the principal structure.
Building materials shall be classified either primary, secondary or accent materials. Primary
materials shall cover at least 30% of the facade of a building. Secondary materials may cover no
more than 60% of the facade. Accent materials including planter boxes, shutters, decorative
window frames, windows with lattice, lintels, cornices and other minor elements, shall consist of
Page 6 of 11
a minimum of 10% of the facade. Allowable materials are as follows:
a) Primary exterior building materials may be masonry ( brick, stone, decorative
block or stucco). Bronze-tinted or mirror glass are prohibited.
b) Secondary exterior building materials may be wood (clapboard siding, four
inches to the weather minimum and eight inches to the weather maximum), vinyl and aluminum
siding.
c) Accent materials may be wood or metal and must be appropriately integrated
into the overall building design and not situated in areas that will be subject to physical or
environmental damage.
d) All primary and secondary materials shall be integrally colored.
Prior Code, § 9- 20- 6) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 386 SCREENING.
A) Trash storage areas and equipment for handling them must be located in the rear or side
yard and shall be completely enclosed and integrated as part of the building.
B) All mechanical and other equipment systems shall be integrated into the design of the
building and shall be fully screened from the ground- level view of adjacent properties and public
streets with the same materials and colors as the principal building.
C) Loading docks shall not be located in the front yard and shall be completely screened
from eye- level view of public streets and public open spaces, by means of landscaping which is
at least 80% opaque within two years or by a screen wall of the same materials and colors as the
principal building.
Prior Code, § 9- 20- 7) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 387 LANDSCAPING
A) Commercial landscaping requirements. All open areas not occupied by buildings,
parking, driveways, sidewalks or other hard surface shall be landscaped and incorporated in a
landscape plan, in accordance with the following.
1) The landscape plan shall include a full complement of overstory, ornamental and
evergreen trees, shrubbery and ground covers that are hardy and appropriate for the locations in
which they are planted and which provide year-round color and interest.
2) At least one overstory tree shall be provided for every 500 square feet of
landscaped area on the entire site.
Page 7 of 11
3) At least 10% of the total land area within the perimeter of private parking and
driveway areas shall be landscaped.
4) All uses shall provide water facilities to yard areas for maintenance and
landscaping.
B) Residential landscaping requirements. Landscaping for residential land uses shall be as
established in §§ 152.515 through 152. 523.
C) Maintenance. Regular maintenance of all landscaping shall be required. Failure to
provide regular and required maintenance to consistently comply with and meet the intent of this
section shall constitute a violation of this code.
Prior Code, § 9- 20- 8) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 388 PARKING.
A) Commercial parking requirements.
1) Required parking for commercial uses shall be determined by the Council
following review by the Planning Commission. Review and approval shall be based on:
a) The number of off-street parking spaces to be provided;
b) The number and accessibility of on- street parking in the area;
c) Provisions made by the owner or tenant for joint or shared parking; and
d) Other factors affecting the need for off-street parking.
2) On-grade parking is prohibited in the front yard directly in front of a building
within Setback Area A. Parking shall be provided in the side or rear yards.
3) Parking lots shall be screened from street and public walkways with walls or
decorative fences and plantings. Walls shall be constructed out of material that is compatible
with the existing building and should measure a minimum of four feet in height.
4) Where parking abuts the site perimeter there shall be provided at least one
overstory tree per 25 feet of site perimeter.
5) Parking structures shall maintain a setback equal to the setbacks required in this
section for other structures, except that when a parking structure is adjacent to other parking in a
side or rear yard, the parking structure may have a zero- foot setback. Where a new parking
structure is adjacent to an existing use in a side or rear yard, the parking structure must maintain
at least a ten- foot setback.
Page 8 of 11
6) Drive-through or drive-in lanes are not allowed within the build-to- line or in front
of any building. They must be located to the side or rear of a building.
7) Joint use parking shall be utilized where possible to achieve highest use of parking.
B) Residential parking requirements. Parking for residential uses shall be provided on site,
and shall be calculated as required under § 152.498 of this chapter. These residential parking
spaces shall be specifically reserved for the use of residents and visitors only, separate from any
commercial, office or other uses on site or nearby, and shall not be counted as part of any shared
parking or joint parking arrangement.
Prior Code, § 9- 20- 9) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 389 SIGNAGE.
Signs are permitted in accordance with the regulations in §§ 152.460 through 152.478 of this
chapter except that the following regulations apply to commercial uses within the Hamilton
Overlay District.
A) Wall signs. Wall signs are allowed on buildings with a horizontal band no more than
three feet in height, at least ten feet and no more than 15 feet above the ground.
B) Wall signage. Wall signage may be either:
1) Attached. Flat and parallel to the surface of the building and projecting no more
than one foot from it; or
2) Projecting. Perpendicular to the surface of the building and no more than one foot
in thickness.
C) Attached wall signage. Attached wall signage shall consist of one of the following:
1) Individual letters or script logos that can be either internally illuminated or
non- illuminated mounted on the building; or
2) Externally illuminated wall signage that is professionally designed and constructed
out of materials compatible with the building. Internally illuminated cabinet signs are prohibited.
D) Projecting signs. Projecting signs may project no more than four feet from the front
edge of the building and be no more than 12 square feet in area.
E) Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs, permanent or temporary, shall not be
permitted, except for the following:
1) One monument sign shall be allowed for those properties with a minimum of 100
feet of frontage abutting Highway 13; or
Page 9 of 11
2) Monument signs no higher than six feet and for areas on 123rd Street west of
Palmer Avenue and east of Lynn Avenue.
F) Mural scenes or designs. Mural scenes or designs painted directly on an exterior
building wall that are intended are decorative or ornamental features are permitted with prior
approval from the City Council. Murals that include text, numbers, trademarks, logos or other
forms of business advertisement shall be considered painted wall signs and must comply with the
regulations of this code.
G) Sandwich board signs. Sandwich board signs, one per business establishment, are
permitted provided that they do not exceed six square feet and are only visible during business
hours. All sandwich board signs must maintain a five-foot wide pedestrian access at all times.
H) Signs on awnings. Signs on awnings are allowed if all other requirements of this
section as to area and location are adhered to. Awnings shall not be illuminated from behind.
Canvas awnings or extensions of the roof material are allowed materials for awnings. Nylon,
polyester or other synthetic materials for awnings are prohibited.
I) Size and materials.
1) The maximum total area of all signs on a facade of a business establishment shall
not exceed one and one- half square feet of signage per lineal foot of building frontage on a
public street, public open space or private parking area, not to exceed 100 square feet.
2) Window signs shall not be included in the above calculation and shall not exceed
one-third of the glazed area of the window.
Page 10 of 11
HAMILTON OVERLAY DISTRICT
SETBACK AREAS
STATE TRUNK HM. 13
I
a
6
V, 1XI11111
LEGEND
Setback Area A
Setback Area B
a
Setback Area C
0:
x00
BOHN CT
U
McCOtt DFL
Prior Code, § 9- 20- 10) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 632, passed 9- 10- 2007; Ord. 641,
passed 4- 7- 2008) Penalty, see § 152. 999
Page 11 of 11
ENVIRONMENTAL OVERLAYDISTRICTS
152.400 Purpose
152.401 Scope
152.402 Establishment of districts
152.403 Legislative findings
152.404 Overlay administration
152.405 Shoreland Overlay District standards
152.406 Shoreland protection - local
152.407 Wetlands Overlay District standards
152.408 Bluffland Overlay District standards
152. 400 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this subchapter is to protect environmentally sensitive areas within
designated areas of the city.
Prior Code, § 9- 21- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 401 SCOPE.
These districts shall overlay the established zoning districts so that any parcel of land lying
in an overlay district shall also lie in one or more of the established zoning districts. Land within
an environmental overlay district shall be subject to the requirements established in this
subchapter, as well as restrictions and requirements established by other applicable ordinances
and regulations of the city. Within each adopted environmental overlay district, all uses shall be
permitted in accordance with the regulations for the underlying zoning district( s); provided,
however, that the uses must satisfy the additional requirements established within this subchapter
before development will be allowed.
Prior Code, § 9- 21- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 402 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
The following environmental overlay districts are hereby established:
A) Shoreland Overlay District;
B) Wetland Overlay District; and
C) Bluffland Overlay District.
Prior Code, § 9- 21- 3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
Page 1 of 30
152. 403 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.
A) Shoreland Overlay District.
1) Statutory authorization. This Shoreland Overlay District is adopted pursuant to the
authorization and policies contained in M.S. Chapter 103F, as it may be amended from time to
time, Minnesota Rules Parts 6120.2500 to 6120.3900, and the planning and zoning enabling
legislation in M.S. Chapter 462, as it may be amended from time to time.
2) Policy. The uncontrolled use of shorelands affects the public health, safety and
general welfare not only by contributing to pollution of public waters, but also by impairing the
local tax base. Therefore, it is in the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare to
provide for the wise subdivision, use and development of shorelands of public waters. The
Legislature of Minnesota has delegated responsibility to local governments of the state to
regulate the subdivision, use and development of the shorelands of public waters and thus
preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve the economic and natural
environmental values of shorelands, and provide for the wise use of waters and related land
resources.
3) Jurisdiction. The Shoreland Overlay District provisions of this subchapter shall
apply to the shorelands of the public water bodies as classified in § 152.406( A). Pursuant to
Minnesota Rules Parts 6120.2500 to 6120.3900, no lake, pond or flowage less than ten acres in
size in a municipality needs to be regulated in a local government' s shoreland regulations. A
body of water created by a private user where there was no previous shoreland may, at the
discretion of the city, be exempt from this subchapter.
4) Compliance. The use of any shoreland of public waters; the size and shape of lots;
the use, size, type and location of structures on lots; the installation and maintenance of water
supply and waste treatment systems, the grading and filling of any shoreland area; the cutting of
shoreland vegetation; and the subdivision of land shall be in full compliance with the terms of
this subchapter and other applicable regulations.
B) Bluffland Overlay District. There are areas within the city which, due to steep slopes or
unstable soils, create ecological problems including siltation and pollution of water bodies and
streams due to excessive erosion and runoff and present threats to the public safety in the form of
landslide and mudslide dangers. Therefore, the purposes of this subchapter are:
1) To promote public safety by minimizing the hazards of steep slopes and unstable
soils and promote public health by reducing the siltation and pollution of water bodies and
streams; and
2) Promote the general welfare by preserving significant features of the natural
character of slopes and conditioning development in a manner that minimizes the above
enumerated threats to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.
C) Wetlands Overlay District. Wetlands and public waters help maintain water quality,
Page 2 of 30
serve to reduce flooding and erosion, act as sources of food and habitat for a variety of fish and
wildlife, and are an integral part of the community' s natural landscape. Wetlands provide the
aesthetic benefits of open space and can be used to provide a natural separation of land uses. It is
the intent of this overlay district to establish a policy of sound stewardship through coordination
of regulations, which conserve, protect, enhance and result in the no net loss of these
environmentally sensitive resources. In addition, it is the intent of the city to promote the
restoration of degraded wetlands. This overlay district is adopted in part to implement the
Wetland Conservation Act of 1991 ( Minnesota Laws 1991, Chapter 354, as amended) including,
but not limited to, the wetlands provisions set forth in M.S. Chs. 103A through 103I, and the
accompanying rules of the Minnesota Board of Water and Soil Resources ( Minnesota Rules
Chapter 8420, as amended).
Prior Code, § 9- 21- 4) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 404 OVERLAY ADMINISTRATION.
A) Administration. Except as hereinafter provided, no one may perform any development
in an environmental overlay district without first having demonstrated that the proposed activity
will meet or exceed the additional performance standards contained in this subchapter. Any
application for a development permit on land that is covered, in whole or in part, by this
subchapter shall include a site plan. Other engineering data, such as surveys, soil studies and
other descriptive information, may also be required at the direction of the city. A specific
description of the type, amount and location of the development and a description of the
ecological characteristics of the natural features contained on the property, as well as the
conservation plan describing actions to be taken to mitigate detrimental effects of development
may also be required. When the proposed development includes the construction or alteration of
a structure, eight sets of plans shall be submitted with the application.
B) Exceptions.
1) Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. A person may commence
emergency work necessary to preserve life or property, provided that within ten days following
the commencement of that activity, he or she submit a site plan for review along with any other
information, requested by the city necessary to determine if the performance standards contained
in this subchapter were met. If upon this review it is determined that all of the performance
standards were not met, a plan shall be submitted and implemented, following city approval, to
restore the natural resources to meet the intent of the performance standards contained in this
subchapter.
2) Repair or normal maintenance.
C) Enforcement. The Zoning Administrator, or his or her designee, is responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this subchapter. Any violation of the provisions of this
subchapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements ( including violations of conditions
and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or conditional and interim
uses) shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law. Violations of this
Page 3 of 30
subchapter can occur regardless of whether or not a permit is required for a regulated activity
pursuant to this subchapter.
D) Variances. Variances may only be granted in accordance with M.S. Chapter 462, as it
may be amended from time to time. A variance may not circumvent the general purposes and
intent of this subchapter. No variance may be granted that would allow any use that is prohibited
in the zoning district in which the subject property is located. Conditions may be imposed in the
granting of a variance to ensure compliance and to protect adjacent properties and public interest.
The City Council shall hear and decide requests for variances in accordance with § 152. 033.
When a variance is approved after the Department of Natural Resources has formally
recommended denial in the hearing record, the notification of the approved variance shall also
include the City Council' s summary of the public record/testimony and the findings of facts and
conclusions that supported the issuance of the variance.
E) DNR notification. Copies of all notices of public hearings to consider variances,
rezonings, preliminary plats, amendments or conditional uses under local shoreland management
controls must be sent to the Commissioner of Natural Resources or the Commissioner' s
designated representative and postmarked at least ten days before the hearing. A copy of
approved amendments and subdivision plats and final decisions granting variances or conditional
uses under local shoreland management controls must be sent to the Commissioner and
postmarked within ten days following final action.
F) Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this subchapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the city
and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by Minnesota
Statutes.
G) Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this subchapter to repeal,
abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this
subchapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this subchapter shall prevail. All other
provisions of this chapter inconsistent with this subchapter are hereby repealed to the extent of
the inconsistency only
Prior Code, § 9- 21- 5) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 405 SHORELAND OVERLAY DISTRICT STANDARDS.
A) Shoreland management classification. In order to guide the wise development and
utilization of shorelands of protected waters for the preservation of water quality, natural
characteristics, economic values and the general health, safety and welfare, certain protected
waters in the city have been given a shoreland management classification. These protected
waters of the city have been given shoreland classifications as follows and are depicted on the
Department of Natural Resources Protected Waters map for the county.
Page 4 of 30
DNR LD. Number
Natural Environment
Rice Lake 70- 25
Recreational Development
Dan Patch Lake 70- 16
Cate' s Lake 70- 18
Hanrehan Lake 70- 19
Twin Lakes 259W
McColl Pond
70- 17
General Development
Credit River NA
Eagle Creek NA
Transitional River
Minnesota River - adjacent to P- 1 zoning NA
Urban River
Minnesota River - adjacent to I-2 zoning NA
B) Shoreland Overlay District. The shorelands of the city are hereby designated as a
Shoreland Overlay District. The purpose of the Shoreland Overlay District is to provide for the
wise utilization of shoreland areas in order to preserve the quality and natural character of these
protected waters of the city.
1) Permitted uses. All permitted uses allowed and regulated by the applicable zoning
district underlying this shoreland overlay district as indicated on the official zoning map of the
city.
2) Conditional uses. All conditional uses and applicable attached conditions allowed
and regulated by the applicable zoning district underlying this shoreland overlay district as
indicated on the official zoning map of the city.
Page 5 of 30
3) Substandard uses. Any uses of shorelands in existence prior to the date of
enactment of this section which are permitted within the applicable zoning district, but do not
meet the minimum lot area, setbacks or other dimensional requirements of this subchapter, are
substandard uses. Substandard uses, excluding substandard sanitary facilities, shall be allowed to
continue; however, any structural alterations or additions to a substandard use that will increase
the substandard dimensions shall not be allowed.
4) Prohibited uses. Any uses that are not permitted or conditional uses as regulated by
the applicable zoning district underlying this shoreland overlay district as indicated on the
official zoning map of the city.
C) Lot and building requirements. The following standards shall apply to all shorelands of
the protected waters listed in § 152. 405( A) within the city. Where the requirements of the
underlying zoning district as shown on the official zoning map are more restrictive than those set
forth herein, then the more restrictive standards shall apply. It is noted that the only natural
environment water in Savage is Rice Lake, whose shoreland area is entirely within a federally
protected wildlife area.
1) Unsewered areas. Only single- family uses are allowed as new development within
unsewered areas, in accordance with the following standards.
Unsewered Areas
Recreational General Development
Development Waters Waters
Lot area( sq. ft.) 40,000 20, 000
Water frontage and lot width at building line 150 feet 100 feet
Structure setback from ordinary high water 100 feet 75 feet
mark
Structure setback from roads and highways 50 feet - federal, state or county
20 feet - municipal or private
Structure height limitations 35 feet 35 feet
Impervious surface maximum 30% 30%
Sewage system setback from ordinary high 75 feet 50 feet
water mark
2) Sewered areas. All provisions for unsewered areas shall apply to sewered areas
except for the following, which shall supersede the provisions applied to unsewered areas.
Page 6 of 30
Sewered Areas
Recreational Development General Development Waters
Waters
Single- Duplex Multi- Single- Duplex Multi-
Family Family Family Family
Lot area( sq. feet.)
Water front lots 20,000 35, 000 15, 000 15, 000 26,000 12, 000
Other lots 15, 000 26, 000 10, 000 10, 000 17, 500 8, 000/ 1)
U
Water frontage and lot width 75 feet 135 feet 250 feet 75 feet 135 feet 250 feet
at building line
Structure setback from 75 feet 75 feet 75 feet 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet
ordinary high water mark
Structure setback from top of 30 feet
bluff
Structure height maximum 25 feet
Impervious surface maximum 30%
3) Water-oriented accessory structure. One water-oriented accessory structure may
be located no closer than ten feet from the ordinary high water mark of protected waters.
4) Structures and accessory structures. Structures and accessory structures, except
stairways, landings and docks, must not be placed within shore and bluff impact zones.
5) Non-water oriented commercial, industrial, public and semi-public uses.
Non-water oriented commercial, industrial, public and semi-public uses must have either a
setback double the normal ordinary high water level setback or be substantially screened from
view from the water by vegetation or topography.
D) Substandard lots.
1) Lots of record in the office of the County Registrar of Deeds prior to January 12,
1989, which do not meet the requirements of division (C) above, may be allowed as building
Page 7 of 30
sites, provided:
a) The use is permitted in the zoning district;
b) The lot is in separate ownership from abutting lands. If, in a group of two or
more contiguous lots under the same ownership any individual lot does not meet the
requirements of division (C) above, the lot must not be considered as a separate parcel of land for
the purposes of sale or development. The lot must be combined with the one or more contiguous
lots so they equal one or more parcels of land, each meeting the requirements of division (C)
above as much as possible; and
c) All other sanitary and dimensional requirements of these shoreland regulations
are complied with insofar as practical.
2) The minimum size and length of water frontage for substandard lots of record to be
considered buildable shall be 10, 000 square feet in area and 60 feet in width.
E) Roads andparking areas. Roads and parking areas shall be located to retard the runoff
of surface waters and nutrients in accordance with the following criteria:
1) Where feasible and practical, all roads and parking areas shall meet the setback
requirements established for structures in division (C) above;
2) In no instance shall these impervious surfaces be placed less than 50 feet from the
ordinary high water mark unless deemed necessary by the City Engineer;
3) Roads, driveways and parking areas are not allowed in bluff or shoreland impact
zones; with the exception of boat launching ramps that have vegetative screening; and
4) Natural vegetation or other natural materials shall be used to screen parking areas
when viewed from the water.
F) Design criteria/elevation of lowest floor.
1) Structures shall be placed at an elevation consistent with the city' s flood plain
management controls.
2) In areas not regulated by flood plain management controls, the elevation to which
the lowest floor, including basements, shall be placed shall be determined as follows.
a) For lakes, ponds and flowages by:
1. An evaluation of available flood information and consistent with
Statewide Standards and Criteria for Management ofFlood Plain Areas ofMinnesota, or
2. Placing the lowest floor at a level at least two feet above the highest
Page 8 of 30
known water level. In those instances where sufficient data on known high water levels are not
available, the ordinary high water mark shall be used.
b) For rivers and streams, by an evaluation of available flood information and
consistent with Statewide Standards and Criteria for Management ofFlood Plain Areas of
Minnesota.
c) Water-oriented accessory structures may have the lowest floor placed lower
than the elevation determined in this item if the structure is constructed of flood-resistant
materials to the elevation and electrical and mechanical equipment is placed above the elevation.
G) Exceptions to structure setback requirements.
1) Setback requirements from the ordinary high water mark shall not apply to piers
and docks. Location of piers and docks shall be controlled by applicable state and local
regulations.
2) On undeveloped shoreland lots that have two adjacent lots with existing principal
structures on both adjacent lots, any new residential structure may be set back the average
setback of the adjacent structures from the ordinary high water mark or 50 feet, whichever is
greater, provided all other provisions of the shoreland overlay district are complied with.
H) Conditional uses.
1) Conditional uses allowable within shoreland areas shall be subject to the review
and approval procedures and criteria and conditions for review of conditional uses established
community-wide. Also applicable for shoreland areas are evaluation of the waterbody,
topography, vegetation and soil conditions to ensure:
a) The prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of public waters, both
during and after construction;
b) The visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed from public waters is
limited;
c) The site is adequate for water supply and on- site sewage treatment; and
d) The types, uses and numbers of watercraft that the project will generate are
compatible in relation to the suitability of public waters to safely accommodate these watercraft.
2) The City Council, upon consideration of the criteria listed above and the purposes
of this subchapter, shall attach conditions to the issuance of the conditional use permit as it
deems necessary to fulfill the purpose of this chapter. The conditions may include, but are not
limited to:
a) Increased setbacks from the ordinary high water level;
Page 9 of 30
b) Limitations on the natural vegetation to be removed or the requirement that
additional vegetation be planted; and
c) Special provisions for the location, design and use of structure, sewage
treatment systems, watercraft launching and docking areas and vehicular parking areas.
I) Shoreland alterations. The removal and alteration of natural vegetation shall be
restricted to prevent erosion into protected waters, fix nutrients in the soil, preserve shoreland
aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping and protect fish and wildlife habitat.
Removal of natural vegetation in the shoreland overlay district shall be subject to the following
provisions.
1) Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of structures and sewage
treatment systems and the construction of roads and parking area regulated by division (E) above
are exempt from the vegetation alteration standards that follow.
2) Removal or alteration of vegetation, except for agricultural cultivating and grazing
and forest management uses, is allowed subject to the following standards:
a) Intensive vegetation clearing within the shore and bluff impact zones and on
steep slopes is not allowed; and
b) In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes, limited clearing of trees
and shrubs and cutting, pruning and trimming of trees is allowed to provide a view to the water
from the principal dwelling site and to accommodate the placement of stairways and landings,
access paths, bench and watercraft access areas and permitted water-oriented accessory
structures or facilities, provided that:
1. The screening of structures, vehicles or other facilities as viewed from the
water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, is not substantially reduced;
2. Along rivers, existing shading of water surfaces is preserved;
3. The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of trees, limbs or
branches that are dead, diseased or pose safety concerns; and
4. All tree removal shall be in accordance with the requirements of Chapter
102 of this code.
J) Grading andfilling.
1) A separate grading/ filling permit is not required for the construction of structures,
sewage treatment systems and driveways that are under validly issued construction permits.
However, the standards of this section shall be applied to the issuance of the permits.
Page 10 of 30
2) Notwithstanding division (J)( 1) above, a permit will be required for the grading or
filling of material in accordance with §§ 152.560 through 152. 575.
3) Grading and filling in shoreland areas or any alteration of the natural topography
must only be allowed if they are accessory to permitted or conditional uses and do not adversely
affect adjacent or nearby properties. A permit for the work may be granted subject to the
conditions that:
a) The smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for as short a time as feasible;
b) Temporary ground cover, such as mulch, is used and permanent ground cover,
such as sod, is established;
c) Methods to prevent erosion and trap sediment are employed;
d) Fill is stabilized to accepted engineering standards; and
e) Fill or excavated material shall not be placed in bluff impact zones.
4) The placement of natural rock riprap, including associated grading of the shoreline
and placement of a filter blanket, is permitted if the finished slope does not exceed three feet
horizontal to one foot vertical, the landward extent of the riprap is within ten feet of the ordinary
high water level, and the height of the riprap above the ordinary high water level does not exceed
three feet.
5) Excavations on shorelands where the intended purpose is connection to a protected
water shall require a permit from the City Engineer before construction is begun. The permit may
be obtained only after the Commissioner of Natural Resources has issued a permit to work in the
beds of protected waters.
K) Protected water alteration. Any work that will change or diminish the course, current or
cross- section of a protected water or wetland shall be approved by the Commissioner of Natural
Resources, and the approval shall be construed to mean the issuance by the Commissioner of
Natural Resources of a permit under the procedures of M.S. Chapter 103G, as it may be amended
from time to time, and other related statutes.
L) Sewage treatment required. Any premises intended for human occupancy shall be
provided with an adequate method of sewage treatment to be maintained in accordance with
acceptable practices.
M) Public/municipalfacilities. Public or municipal collection and treatment facilities shall
be used where available.
Page 11 of 30
N) MPCA standards. All private sewage treatment systems must meet or exceed the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency' s standards for individual sewage treatment systems
contained in the document titled, Individual Sewage Treatment Systems Standards, Chapter
7080, adopted by reference and made part of this chapter. On-site systems must be set back from
the ordinary high water level in accordance with the setbacks contained in division (C) above.
0) Permit requirement- individual systems. No person, firm or corporation shall install,
alter, repair or extend any individual sewage treatment system without first obtaining a permit
from the Building Official.
1) Application for permits shall be made in writing upon printed forms furnished by
the Building Official and shall be signed by the applicant.
2) Each application for a permit shall include: a correct legal description of the
property on which the proposed installation, alteration, repair or extension is to take place; a plan
of the site of reasonable scale and accuracy showing the location of any proposed or existing
buildings, sewage treatment facilities, property lines; a complete plan of the water supply system
showing the location, size and design of all parts of the system to be installed, altered, repaired or
extended; the name of the person, firm or corporation who is to install the system; any further
information as required by the Building Official.
3) All individual sewage treatment systems within the shoreland overlay district shall
be designed, installed, and maintained in accordance with the MPGA.
4) Any installation, alteration, repair or extension of an individual sewage treatment
system shall be inspected to ensure compliance by the Building Official or a qualified inspector
following completion of the work but prior to covering of the system.
P) Non-conforming individual sewage systems. All existing sewage treatment systems
within shoreland areas which are inconsistent with the standards referenced in division (N)
above, as well as any sanitary facility found to be a public nuisance, shall be brought into
conformance or discontinued, at any time a permit or variance of any type is required for any
improvement on, or use of, the property. For the purposes of this division, a sewage treatment
system shall not be considered non- conforming if the only deficiency is the sewage treatment
system' s improper setback from the ordinary high water level. The procedures and timeframes
for the corrections when a variance or permit is not requested shall in accordance with city
regulations regarding sewage disposal systems, or as set forth by City Council from time to time.
Q) Water supply. Public or private supplies of water for domestic purposes shall conform
to Minnesota Department of Health standards for water quality.
R) Private well permit. No person, firm or corporation shall install, alter, repair or extend
any private well without first obtaining a permit from the Building Official.
Page 12 of 30
1) Application for permits shall be made in writing upon printed blanks or forms
furnished by the Building Official and shall be signed by the applicant.
2) Each application for a permit shall include: a correct legal description of the
property on which the proposed installation, alteration, repair or extension is to take place; a plan
of the site of reasonable scale and accuracy showing the location of any proposed or existing
buildings, sewage treatment facilities, property lines; a complete plan of the water supply system
showing the location, size and design of all parts of the system to be installed, altered, repaired or
extended; the name of the person, firm or corporation who is to install the system; any further
information as required by the Building Official.
S) Private wells - flooding. Private wells shall be located in a manner to be free from
flooding and the top shall be so constructed and located as to be above all possible sources of
pollution. Wells already existing in areas subject to flooding shall be floodproofed.
T) Private wells - location. No private well shall be located closer than three feet to the
outside wall of a dwelling. The outside basement footings shall be continuous across the opening
of the well alcove. No well shall be located closer than 15 feet to a property line.
U) Private wells - MPCA standards. Private wells shall be located in accordance with the
standards of the Minnesota Health Department standards MHD 217 Location of Wells, ( c)( 1).
V) Subdivisions. No land shall be subdivided which is held unsuitable by the city for the
proposed use because of flooding, inadequate drainage, soil and rock formations with severe
limitations for development, severe erosion potential, unfavorable topography, inadequate water
supply or sewage treatment capabilities or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health,
safety or welfare of future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the community.
1) Submittal required. Copies of all plats within the shoreland overlay district shall be
submitted to the Commissioner of Natural Resources no later than ten days prior to the public
hearing by the city.
2) Planned unit development( PUD). Altered zoning standards may be allowed as
exceptions to this chapter for PUDs provided preliminary plans are approved by the
Commissioner of Natural Resources prior to their approval by the city, and further provided:
a) The PUD is connected to a municipal sanitary sewer;
b) Open space is preserved through the use of restrictive deed covenants, public
dedications or other methods; and
c) The following factors are carefully evaluated to ensure the increased density of
development is consistent with the resource limitations of the protected water:
1. Suitability of the site for the proposed use;
Page 13 of 30
2. Physical and aesthetic impact of increased density;
3. Level of current development;
4. Amount and ownership of undeveloped shoreland;
5. Levels and types of water surface use and public accesses; and
6. Possible effects on overall public use.
d) Any commercial, recreational, community or religious facility allowed as part
of the planned development shall conform to all applicable federal and state regulations
including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Licensing provisions or procedures;
2. Waste disposal regulations;
3. Water supply regulations;
4. Building codes;
5. Safety regulations;
6. Regulations concerning the appropriation and use of protected waters as
defined in M.S. Chapter 105, as it may be amended from time to time; and
7. Applicable regulations of the Minnesota Environmental Quality Board.
e) The final plan for a planned unit development shall not be modified, amended,
repealed or otherwise altered unless approved in writing by the developer, the municipality and
the Commissioner.
f) There are centralized shoreline recreation facilities such as beaches, docks and
boat launching facilities.
Prior Code, § 9- 21- 6) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 636, passed 10- 15- 2007) Penalty, see
152.999
152. 406 SHORELAND PROTECTION - LOCAL.
In addition to shoreland requirements for DNR Protected Waters as set forth in this chapter,
the following regulations shall apply to parcels of land bordering other lakes and ponds that
normally contain standing water.
A) Application ofrequirements. Application of the requirements listed below shall be to
type 4 and 5 wetlands according to the standard classification system of the Department of the
Page 14 of 30
Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. A summary classification is as follows.
1) Type 4 - inland deepfresh marsh. Soil is covered by six inches to three feet of
water during the growing season. May comprise shallow lake basins or may border open water.
Best breeding habitat in the country, and important feeding places.
2) Type 5 - inland open fresh water. Shallow ponds and reservoirs usually less than
ten feet deep, and fringed by a border of vegetation used extensively for nesting.
B) Building setback. No principal building shall be located within 50 feet of the ordinary
high water mark of the above wetlands.
Prior Code, § 9- 21- 7) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 407 WETLANDS OVERLAY DISTRICT STANDARDS.
A) Intent. This Code hereby incorporates by reference the Wetland Conservation Act of
1991 [ Minnesota Statutes 103G.221 et seq. ( herein referred to as WCA)] as amended and
Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420 as amended. All wetlands, as defined in Section 152.407( C),
including those governed by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, are covered by
this Code. Standards outlined in this Code have precedence over Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420
as amended in situations where the City Code is more restrictive than Minnesota Rules Chapter
8420 as amended.
B) Purpose. Through the adoption of this Code, the City shall promote the general health,
safety, and welfare of its residents by both conserving and protecting wetlands and requiring
sound management practices as provided for in Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420 . The intent of
this Code is to avoid alteration and destruction of wetlands. By implementation of this Code, the
City seeks to accomplish the following:
1) Balance the need to preserve and protect natural resources and systems with both the
rights of private property owners and the need to support the efficient use of land within the City.
2) Promote water quality by maintaining the ability of wetlands to recharge ground
water and receive the discharge of ground water, to prevent soil erosion, and to retain sediment,
nutrients and toxicants in wetland buffer strip areas before it discharges into community
wetlands, lakes and streams, thus avoiding the contamination and eutrophication of these water
features;
3) Reduce human disturbances to wetlands by providing a visual and physical
transition from surrounding yards; and
4) Provide wildlife habitat and thereby support the maintenance of diversity of both
plant and animal species within the City.
C) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
Page 15 of 30
requires a different meaning.
BOG. A bog is a Type 8 Wetland as defined by US Fish and Wildlife Circular
BUFFER. An upland area adjacent to a wetland that is covered in natural vegetation that
experiences little to no human impact.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT. The local government Unit (LGU) is the city council
under Minnesota Statutes Section 103B. 205.
MNRAM. The Minnesota Routine Assessment Methodology (MNRAM) as referenced in
Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420. MNRAM is a field tool used to assess wetland functions on a
qualitative basis. Functions include items such as vegetative diversity and integrity; wildlife
habitat; water quality protection; flood & storm water attenuation; recreation, aesthetics,
education & science; fishery habitat; shoreline protection; groundwater interaction; and
commercial uses.
NATIVE VEGETATION. Plant species indigenous to Minnesota, or that expand their range
into Minnesota without being intentionally or unintentionally introduced by human activity, and
are classified as native in the Minnesota Plant Database ( Minnesota DNR, 2002 or as amended).
Native Vegetation does not include weeds.
NO-LOSS DETERMINATION. An application to the Local Government Unit (LGU) to
evaluate whether the proposed work will result in a loss of wetland within the property. This
would include activities listed in Minnesota Rules Section 8420.0415. The landowner is
responsible for submitting the proof necessary to show qualification for the claim. The LGU may
evaluate evidence for a no- loss claim without making a determination.
NURP POND. A stormwater pond constructed to meet National Urban Runoff Program
NURP) requirements.
REPLACEMENT WETLAND. A wetland restored or created or an area designated in part
under Minnesota Rule 8420. 0500 or the equivalent, to replace wetland area or the public value of
wetland functions lost at an impacted wetland.
SEQUENCING. A five step process outlined in the Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420 that
evaluates the necessity of a projects impact on a wetland.
TECHNICAL EVALUATIONPANEL. A Technical Evaluation Panel( TEP) is established
for each LGU under Minnesota Rules 8420. 0240. The TEP assists the LGU in making technical
findings and provides recommendations for projects involving wetland alteration or wetland
impacts at the request of the LGU, landowner or a member of the TEP. The TEP must include at
least one technical representative from Board of Water and Soil Resources ( BWSR); Scott Soil
and Water Conservation District (SWCD); and Local Government Unit (LGU). The panel also
includes a technical professional employee of the Department of Natural Resources for projects
affecting public waters, public water wetlands, or wetlands within the shoreland protection zone.
Page 16 of 30
WEEDS. Noxious weeds as defined and designated pursuant to the Minnesota Noxious
Weed Law, M.S. §§ 18. 75 through 18. 91, as they may be amended from time to time; or any
volunteer plants, such as but not limited to garlic mustard ( Alliaria Petiolata), spotted knapweed
Centaurea Maculosa) or burdock( Arctium Minus). The city weed inspector shall maintain a
current list of weeds/ volunteer plants that are prohibited.
WETLAND. Transitional land between terrestrial and aquatic systems, where the water table
is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow water. Wetlands must have a
predominance of hydric soils; be inundated or saturated with surface water or ground water at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and under normal circumstances, support a
prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation.
WETLAND ALTERATION. Alteration of a wetland includes changes to the wetland and/ or
wetland buffer strip in regards to size, depth or contour; dredging; tilling; damming; alteration of
the watercourse; ditching; tiling; grading; draining; discharge of water; appropriation of water;
changes in vegetation; or otherwise altering or destroying a wetland or wetland buffer or their
functions. Alterations would not include native vegetation plantings or selective clearing or
pruning of prohibited or restricted noxious weeds as defined in Minnesota Noxious Weed Law,
M.S. §§ 18. 75 through 18. 91, unless within a conservation easement in which case submission of
and written approval by the City of a vegetation management plan is required.
WETLAND BANKING. The state wetland banking system is a convenient method that
provides a market-based structure to replace unavoidable impacts to wetlands by purchasing
wetland credits from a pre- established bank that has already restored or created wetlands for the
purpose of allowing credits to be deposited in the Minnesota Wetland Bank.
WETLAND BUFFER STRIP. An area of vegetated ground cover around the perimeter of a
wetland that, either in its natural condition or through intervention, has the characteristics of a
Buffer as defined in Section 152.407( C) " Buffer'.
WETLAND BUFFER STRIP EVALUATIONREPORT. A report summarizing the results
of an evaluation of a wetland and wetland buffer strip in relation to the requirements defined in
152.407( F) of this Code.
WETLAND DELINEATION. An assessment tool utilized to determine the boundary of a
wetland using the US Army Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual (January 1987) as
well as any additional boundary determination requirements established in Minnesota Rules
Chapter 8420. A "Wetland Delineation Report" is a document that summarizes the observations,
results and conclusions performed during the assessment when wetlands are present on the
property.
WETLAND PRESENCE REPORT. An assessment conducted utilizing the US Army Corps
of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual( January 1987) to determine whether a wetland is
present within the property that may be impacted by a proposed project. A " Wetland Presence
Report" documents the conditions that lead to the conclusion that wetlands may or may not be
Page 17 of 30
present on the property.
WETLAND REPLACEMENT PLAN. A summary of all work items to be completed in
relation to any wetland alteration or wetland or wetland buffer strip restoration, replacement, or
construction and the estimated cost for each item. Work items include, but are not limited to,
wetland buffer strip monument purchase and installation; Weed control; landscaping within the
wetland or wetland buffer strip; wetland or wetland buffer strip restoration; wetland and wetland
buffer strip monitoring; wetland replacement monitoring; or any items determined to be
incomplete during the development review process.
WETLAND, PRESERVE. Preserve wetlands have an exceptional vegetative diversity and
integrity function, based on the results ofMNRAM. They typically have an undisturbed plant
community or a plant community that is sufficiently recovered from past disturbances such that it
closely represents pre-European settlement conditions. The wetlands contain an abundance of
different plant species with dominance evenly spread among several species. They will contain
very few non-native species and they may have or previously had rare, threatened or endangered
plant species. Invasive or exotic plant species are either absent or limited to small areas where
some disturbance has occurred. These wetlands exhibit no evidence of significant man- induced
water level fluctuation.
WETLANDS, MANAGE ONE. Manage One wetlands have a high vegetative diversity and
integrity function, based on the results ofMNRAM, and are still generally in their natural state.
They tend to show less evidence of adverse effects of surrounding land uses. Exotic and invasive
plant species may be present and species dominance may not be evenly distributed among
several species. There tends to be little evidence of water level fluctuation due to storms and
their shorelines are stable with little evidence of erosion. They show little if any evidence of
human influences resulting in higher levels of species diversity, wildlife habitat and ecological
stability.
WETLANDS, MANAGE TWO. Manage Two wetlands have a moderate vegetative
diversity and integrity function, based on the results of MNRAM. They have a slightly higher
number of native, non-invasive plant species present than low quality wetlands, often with small
pockets of indigenous species within larger areas dominated by non- native, invasive, exotic or
weed species. Their relatively greater species diversity results in slightly better wildlife habitat.
They exhibit evidence of relatively less fluctuation in water level in response to storms and less
evidence of shoreline erosion than low quality wetlands. They also exhibit relatively less
evidence of human influences and therefore, tend to be of a higher aesthetic quality than low
quality wetlands.
WETLANDS, MANAGE THREE. Manage Three wetlands have a low vegetative diversity
and integrity functions, based on MNRAM, and have been substantially altered by activities such
as agricultural or urban development that caused over-nitrification, soil erosion, sedimentation
and/ or water quality degradation. As a result of these factors these wetlands exhibit low levels of
vegetation diversity; overcrowding and dominance of invasive or non-native species such as reed
canary grass, cattails and purple loosestrife; and a related reduction in the quality of wildlife
habitat. These wetlands may also tend to exhibit extreme water level fluctuations in response to
Page 18 of 30
rain events and show evidence of shoreline erosion. These wetlands do provide for water quality
and serve an important role in protecting water quality downstream.
WETLAND TYPE. The " Wetland Type" for each water regime will be determined in
accordance with United States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39 ( 1971 Edition),
Classification of Wetlands and Deepwater Habitats of the United States ( Cowardin et al. 1979),
Eggers and Reed ( 1997) and Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420. Each wetland type, which
represents at least 10% of the vegetated wetland, including submergent vegetation, must be
classified. For Wetland Replacement Plans, the wetland community classification listed in
Minnesota Rules 8420.0111 Subp. 75 must be used to determine wetland replacement ratios.
D) Official Wetland Map. The City shall maintain the official wetland inventory, which is
hereby adopted by reference. The wetland inventory shall identify each basin as one of four
management categories:
1) Preserve
2) Manage One
3) Manage Two
4) Manage Three
The presence or absence of a wetland on the City Wetland Map does not represent a
definitive determination as to whether a wetland covered by this Code is or is not present. The
City Wetland Map does not depict delineated wetland boundaries and shall not be used as such.
Wetlands that are identified during site specific delineation activities but do not appear on the
City Wetland Map are still subject to the provisions of this Code. It will be the responsibility of
the property owner or an applicant to delineate the exact wetland boundary or to determine that
no wetland exists on a subject property. All delineations must be reviewed and approved by the
City in accordance with Section 152.407( E).
E) Wetland Identification and Delineation. Any time an application is filed or work is
done that may affect a wetland, it is the responsibility of the applicant or property owner to
determine whether a wetland exists on a subject property or if the property is located within the
setback from a wetland on an adjacent property. The following report( s) must be provided based
on the site conditions:
1) If no wetlands are present, the applicant or property owner must provide written
documentation of the site conditions in a wetland presence report utilizing the US Army Corps of
Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual( January 1987) to determine whether a wetland is
present within the property. The wetland presence report shall document the conditions that lead
to the conclusion that wetlands may or may not be present on the property.
2) If a wetland is present, the applicant or property owner must delineate and document
the boundary of the wetland(s) and the wetland type( s) in a wetland delineation report in
Page 19 of 30
accordance with City and Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420 requirements and document the
conditions of the wetland buffer strip in a wetland buffer strip evaluation report. The wetland
delineation shall be completed by a professional wetland delineator and is subject to verification
by the City.
3) A determination of the function and value of the wetlands( s) using the most recent
version ofMNRAM or other approved assessment methodology under Minnesota Rules Chapter
8420 must be completed for the following:
a) For wetlands which are not identified on the City Wetland Map;
b) For wetlands in which the wetland information is significantly different in
function, size or position from the City' s assessment; or
c) If required by the City.
4) It is the responsibility of the property owner or applicant to utilize the MNRAM
functional assessment to assign a wetland classification if not previously assigned.
5) Wetland presence report, wetland delineation and wetland buffer strip evaluation
reports shall be valid for no more than 3 years from the date of the field delineation for these
reports unless required earlier due to changes in site conditions such as hydrology, soils or
vegetation.
6) Wetland delineations shall be prepared as outlined in Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420
and in the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers " Guidelines for Submitting Wetland Delineations to
the St. Paul District Corps of Engineers and Local Units of Government in the State of
Minnesota" and must include information necessary for the City to determine the wetland
boundary and wetland type, including wetland delineation field data sheets, survey of the
wetland evaluation area, soil analysis data, vegetation data and hydrology information both
within and outside of the proposed wetland boundary.
7) Wetland presence reports, wetland delineation reports and MNRAM assessments
conducted or completed outside of the growing season will not be accepted for final review and
approval by the City until the following growing season. Determination of non- growing season
conditions will be in accordance with the " Guidelines for Submitting Wetland Delineations to
the St. Paul District Corps of Engineers ( COE) and Local Units of Government in the State of
Minnesota" issued on April 17, 1996 ( Publication 96- 01078- SDE), unless the vegetation
cataloging or hydrology conditions are deemed unreliable by the City.
8) Approvals may be granted for wetland presence reports, wetland delineation reports,
and MNRAM assessments conducted during the growing season, but submitted during the nongrowing
season, if the City determines there is sufficient information in the report and visible in
the field at the time of the field verification to assess the three wetland parameters ( hydrophytic
vegetation, hydric soils and hydrology) in relation to placement of the wetland delineation line. If
proper assessment of the delineation is not possible during the non-growing season, the City
Page 20 of 30
would consider the application incomplete until such time that appropriate field verification is
possible. Preliminary approvals granted during the non- growing season must be verified during
the growing season. If a MNRAM assessment is not provided during the growing season, the
quality will be assumed as Manage One.
9) An applicant or property owner shall not be required to delineate wetlands or
determine wetland type on adjacent property. An applicant or property owner will be required to
review available information, including but not limited to the City Wetland Map, County Soil
Survey Map, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetland Inventory (NWI) Maps, and
visual information such as the presence of wetland vegetation and hydrologic evidence on an
adjacent property which can be viewed from the subject property, to estimate the wetland
boundary and wetland type.
10) An applicant or property owner must contact the City to obtain a wetland or water
body identification number and any information regarding the documented wetland, including
any existing MNRAM information, for inclusion with documentation provided to the City by the
applicant or property owner. The applicant or property owner must also contact the City to
obtain a water body identification number for any existing or proposed stormwater pond or
stormwater infiltration areas within the development.
11) Wetland presence reports, wetland buffer strip evaluations, wetland delineations
and sequencing flexibility reports and wetland replacement plans supplied by the applicant or
property owner shall be prepared by a Minnesota Certified Wetland Delineator in accordance
with current state and federal regulations. Wetland delineators must satisfy all certification
requirements that are established by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and/ or BWSR.
12) All wetland identification and delineation shall comply with the additional
requirements for wetland identification, delineation, replacement, testing, reporting and bonding
set forth in Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420 as amended.
F) General Provisions. This Section shall apply to all lands containing wetlands and all
lands within the setback and wetland buffer strips required by this Code. Wetlands shall be
subject to the requirements established herein, as well as restrictions and requirements
established by other applicable Federal, State, and City ordinances and regulations.
1) Activities including, but not limited to, wetland alteration, digging, building, storm
water management, draining, paving, filling, mowing, cutting, dumping, yard waste disposal,
fertilizer application, placing debris and dredging are prohibited in wetlands and buffer strips.
2) Structures intended to provide access to or across a wetland or wetland buffer strips
shall be prohibited unless a permit is obtained from the City and is in conformance with
Minnesota Statutes and applicable state rules and regulations. Docks shall be elevated six to
eight inches above the water surface.
3) Septic and soil absorption system must be setback a minimum of 75 feet from a
wetland.
Page 21 of 30
4) The lowest ground floor elevation shall be a minimum of two feet above the
elevation of the wetland boundary.
5) The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency' s Best Management Practices shall be
followed in relation to all wetlands.
6) Wetlands and their buffer strips, as required in Section 152.407( G), shall be kept
free of all structures and features, including but not limited to, fences, recreational and play
equipment, patios, landscape structures, fire pits and retaining walls.
7) Wetlands and their buffer strips, as required in Section 152.407( G), shall not be used
for outside storage of household or personal items, lawn equipment, furniture, firewood, parts,
yard waste and the like.
8) Clearing, mowing, chemical treatment or removal of vegetation in the wetland and
buffer is prohibited, except for the selective clearing and pruning of individual trees and shrubs
which are dead or diseased, constitute noxious weeds, or are hazards, all as approved by the City
Engineer or his or her designee.
9) Stormwater runoff shall not be discharged into wetlands without pre-settlement of
the runoff
10) Before a building permit will be issued for a lot with a required wetland buffer, the
following shall be required:
a) Record a notice of the wetland buffer strip requirement against the title to the lot
with the office of the Scott County Recorder.
b) Install wetland buffer monumentation according to Section 152. 407( G)( 12).
G) Wetland buffer strips and setbacks established. For lots of record or development
permits approved by the City Council after May 20, 2013 a wetland buffer strip and structure
setback shall be provided and maintained around the perimeter of all wetlands and stormwater
ponds according to the following standards.
Permanent Accessory
Wetland
Permanent Buffer Structure Setback Structure Setback
Classification
Width from Buffer Edge from Buffer Edge
feet) feet)
Page 22 of 30
Savage Fen/Preserve
50 feet average/30
25 15
feet minimum
Manage 1
40 feet average/25
g 25 15 feet minimum
Manage 2
30 feet average/25
g 25 15
minimum
Manage 3 16. 5 minimum 25 15
For lots of record or development permits approved by the City Council from January 18, 2000
through May 20, 2013, the following wetland buffer strip requirements shall be provided and
maintained around the perimeter of all wetlands and stormwater ponds:
Wetland Classification Permanent Buffer Width
Savage Fen/Preserve
50 feet
Manage 1
40 feet
Manage 2
30 feet
Manage 3
16. 5 feet
1) Wetland buffers and structure setbacks shall apply to all parcels of land whether or
not the wetland is on the same parcel. For parcels in which the wetland is on an adjacent parcel,
the setback and wetland buffer strip requirements for the parcel shall be reduced by the distance
between the property line of the parcel and the wetland on the adjacent parcel. This provision in
no way reduces or eliminates any other setbacks required by the City Code or any other law or
regulation.
2) The locations of buffer strips and wetland setbacks shall be surveyed and included
on the certificate of survey. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until this has been
completed and approved by city staff
3) In cases where a site is not subject to the wetland buffer strips and setbacks required
by Section 152.407( G), buildings, swimming pools, patios, driveways and parking lots shall be
set back a minimum of 16. 5 feet from a wetland edge.
4) All principal structures shall be setback 25 feet from the wetland buffer strip edge.
Decks, patios, sport courts, tennis courts, pool aprons, stairways, walkways, and like features
may extend up to 10 feet into the wetland setback but may not extend into buffers.
5) Parking, driveway and other hard surface areas shall not be located within 16. 5 feet
of a wetland or any required wetland buffer strip.
Page 23 of 30
6) A setback is not required for fences or retaining walls as long as they are not located
within the wetland buffer strip.
7) Notwithstanding anything else in this Section the City Engineer may determine
existing wetland and/ or buffer strip vegetation to be unacceptable if the wetland and/or buffer:
a) Is composed of weeds ( including but not limited to common buckthorn, purple
loosestrife, leafy spurge and/ or other noxious weeds as defined by Minnesota State Statutes,
Section 18. 75- 18. 91;
b) Has topography that tends to channelize the flow of surface runoff,
c) For some other reason it is unlikely to retain nutrients and sediment.
8) Areas with unacceptable vegetation shall be re-graded, re- seeded and/ or re-planted
and maintained as needed. The wetland and wetland buffer planting requirements must be
identified in the wetland delineation report or wetland buffer strip evaluation report. Wetland and
wetland buffer strip landscaping shall be according to the following standards:
a) Planted with a diverse native, non-invasive seed mix appropriate for the specific
site conditions that contains 100 percent perennial native vegetation. A one- time planting of an
annual nurse or cover crop such as oats or rye may be included.
b) Seed mix used shall be a BWSR seed mix appropriate for the area requiring
reseeding or other alternative pre-approved in writing by the City Engineer. The seeding rate
shall be at the rate recommended by the BWSR or Minnesota Department of Transportation seed
mix criteria or other City pre-approved alternative.
c) Native shrubs may be substituted for the native seed mix where appropriate. All
substitutions must be preapproved in writing by the City. Such shrubs may be bare root seedlings
and shall be planted at a minimum rate of 60 plants per acre. Shrubs shall be distributed so as to
provide a natural appearance and shall not be planted in rows.
d) Any groundcover or shrub plantings installed within the wetland or wetland
buffer strip are independent of landscaping required elsewhere by the City Code.
e) Native prairie grasses and forbs shall be seeded or planted in accordance with
Restoring & Managing Native Wetland & Upland Vegetation" ( published January 2006 by the
Minnesota Department of Transportation (MnDOT) and BWSR) or other alternate method preapproved
by the City Engineer. Determination of the contractor' s qualifications shall be made by
the City Engineer. It is the responsibility of the Applicant to have the contractor and method used
approved by the City Engineer prior to planting or seeding.
0 No fertilizer shall be used in establishing new wetland buffer strips, except
when deemed necessary to establish acceptable wetland and/ or wetland buffer strip vegetation
Page 24 of 30
and then limited to amounts indicated by an accredited soil testing laboratory. Determination of
proper accreditation shall be made by the City Engineer.
g) All seeded areas shall be mulched immediately with clean straw at a rate of 1. 5
tons per acre. Mulch shall be anchored with a disk or tackifier.
h) Wetland and wetland buffer strip areas ( both natural and created), shall be
protected by erosion control during construction in accordance with Section 152.407( G) of this
Code.
i) The erosion control shall remain in place until the cover crop is established.
9) The property owner or applicant shall establish and maintain the wetland and
wetland buffer strip vegetation in accordance with the requirements found in this Section, both
during establishment and for two full growing seasons after establishment as determined by the
City. During this time, the applicant must replant any wetland and/ or wetland buffer strip
vegetation that does not survive.
10) After the second full growing season following establishment, as determined by the
City, if the condition of the wetland and/ or wetland buffer strip diminishes, the applicant shall
not be required to reestablish the wetland and/ or wetland buffer strip to meet the standards
contained in Section 152.407( G)( 7). Wetlands created for wetland replacement must be
monitored and maintained by the applicant until the wetland is reviewed and approved by the
City in accordance with the requirements established by this Code and Minnesota Rules Chapter
8420. After such times, the owner of the property on which the wetland and/ or wetland buffer
strip is located shall be responsible for the maintenance of the wetland and/ or wetland buffer
strip areas and must:
a) Maintain and repair damage to wetland and/ or wetland buffer strip areas from
activities such as mowing, cutting, grading or other prohibited activities unless approved by the
City in writing as a vegetation management plan.
b) Maintain only vegetation permitted in the vegetation management plan or as
found in 152.407( G) of this Code in the wetland and wetland buffer strip, including the removal
of all weeds, unless allowed otherwise in writing by the City.
c) Ensure that all soil surfaces in wetland and wetland buffer strip areas are planted
with permitted vegetation and that there are no open soil surfaces that may result in erosion.
d) Maintain the wetland and wetland buffer strip as a" no mow" area.
11) If a structure, driveway or other hard surface area exists prior to the identification
and delineation of a wetland it shall be considered legal nonconforming.
12) Monumentation is required at each lot line where it crosses a wetland buffer strip.
Monuments shall be placed along the edge of the wetland buffer strip with a maximum spacing
Page 25 of 30
between monuments of 200 feet. Additional monuments shall be placed as necessary to
accurately define the edge of the wetland buffer strip. If no wetland buffer strip is required,
monuments shall be placed at the wetland boundary with a maximum spacing between
monuments of 200 feet.
H) Wetland Alterations. Except as provided below, the alteration of land within a wetland
or a wetland buffer is prohibited unless a wetland permit has been issued. Activities that
constitute alteration include changes to the size, depth or contour of the wetlands or its buffer,
draining, excavating, dredging, or alterations of wetland or buffer vegetation. A wetland permit
is not required for the following:
1) To remove or alter vegetation from the wetland or its buffer pursuant to a restoration
management plan approved by the City Engineer;
2) To selectively clear or prune individual trees and shrubs which are dead or diseased,
constitute noxious weeds, or are hazards, all as approved by the City Engineer or his or her
designee.
3) To repair and maintain existing public facilities such as ponds, trails and utilities if
the work does not result in an increased impact to the wetland or its buffer, as determined by the
City Engineer or his or her designee;
4) To remove sediment and debris from the wetland that has resulted from erosion or
from work done near the wetland, as approved by the City Engineer or his or her designee.
I) Wetland Review Procedures. The following procedures shall be adhered to when
evaluating potential impacts to wetlands:
1) Wetland Presence Report. Every development permit application must submit a
wetland presence report in accordance with this Section if no wetlands are present.
2) Wetland Delineation Review. If a wetland is present, the applicant or property
owner must delineate and document the boundary of the wetland(s) and the wetland type( s) in a
wetland delineation report in accordance with City and Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420
requirements and document the conditions of the wetland buffer strip in a wetland buffer strip
evaluation report in accordance with Section 152.407. An application for a wetland delineation
review shall be made to the City on an approved form and shall be accompanied by the
applicable review fee and three ( 3) hard copies and an electronic copy of the delineated wetland
boundaries submitted in a format compatible with the City' s GIS database.
J) Wetland Alteration Permit. Prior to the alteration of any wetland or wetland buffers, a
wetland replacement plan shall be approved by the City Council. The applicant must provide
written documentation that the sequencing steps set forth in Minnesota Rule 8420. 0520 have
been met. Any alteration to a wetland must result in a zero net loss of wetlands.
1) An applicant for a permit to alter a wetland shall adhere to the following principles in
Page 26 of 30
descending order of priority:
a) Avoiding the direct or indirect impact of the activity that may destroy or degrade
the wetland;
b) Minimizing the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the wetland
activity and its implementation;
c) Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected
wetland activity and its implementation;
d) Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance
operations during the life of the activity; and
e) Filling in wetland areas must be mitigated in accordance with the requirements
of this Section and the city's wetland protection and management plan.
K) Wetland Replacement Permit. Prior to any wetland replacement, an application shall be
submitted to the City in accordance with Minnesota Rules Chapter 8040. The application shall
set forth the location and plan for the proposed project. The applicant must provide one printed
and one electronic version in color. The application must include:
1) The name and address of the applicant.
2) The name and address of the property owner of the land where the project will occur.
3) The name and address of the managing agents or consultants that are or may be
involved with the wetland alteration and/ or replacement activities.
4) The estimated time period within which the project will be conducted.
5) A topographical map of the proposed project area to a minimum scale of one inch
equals 50 feet showing existing ground elevation contours at two-foot intervals. The map shall
show:
a) The size and location of the wetland in relation to the property boundaries,
including a scaled certificate of survey with the coordinates of the approximate wetland center
and sample locations.
b) The property and a minimum of 50 feet of land abutting the property, as it
existed prior to the proposed land alteration.
c) The proposed ground elevation contours at two foot intervals on the property
when the land alteration is complete.
d) Pre- and post- drainage areas for all existing and all proposed wetlands.
Page 27 of 30
e) Photographic reference points and proposed transect or sampling locations for
wetland replacement or wetland banking plans.
f) Survey data in a digital shapefile or other file format compatible with ArcGIS
software.
6) Wetland type of all existing and proposed wetlands, including a comparison to the
Eggers and Reed " Wetland Plant Community Types" document.
7) Recent color aerial photographs of the proposed impact area.
8) A list of dominant or abundant vegetation in each stratum, utilizing the " 50/20 rule".
9) Requests for approval of wetland replacement plan applications shall be accompanied
by a fee and cash escrow as set forth in City Code. Cost of city time and materials expended in
reviewing and processing wetland applications shall be charged against the cash escrow.
L) Additional Permit Requirements.
1) All permit holders must comply with all relevant National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) requirements and City stormwater management requirements to
minimize direct impacts due to erosion and construction practices and to safeguard wildlife
habitat.
2) All permit holders must provide to the City a letter of credit in the amount of the
estimated costs of altering or replacing the wetland as determined by the City. The letter of credit
may be reduced if the city approves the work completed under the permit.
3) All permit holders shall conduct a monitoring program in accordance with the
requirements of the Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420. On an annual basis, the permit holder shall
submit a monitoring report prepared by a certified wetland professional to the City for review
that contains the following:
a) As- built plans ( first year only) to a minimum scale of one inch equals 50 feet
showing existing ground elevation contours at two-foot intervals. As- built information shall also
be submitted in digital shapefile or other file format compatible with ArcGIS software.
b) Brief description of the wetland and buffer areas, including location, size,
vegetative and hydrologic monitoring reports, current wetland types and desired wetland types.
c) A comparison of proposed versus actual wetland types with the wetland and
replacement wetland areas.
d) Map of the plant communities within the wetland, replacement wetland and
buffer areas included in the wetland replacement plan.
Page 28 of 30
e) Monthly color photographs from photographic reference points from April to
October.
f) All information required by Minnesota Rules 8420 for wetland replacement
reporting.
4) Wetland Monitoring Reports must be submitted by November 1 each monitoring
year. If the City does not receive the report by such date, the City will charge the applicant for
cost incurred by the City, including staff time, to collect the information needed to complete the
monitoring report.
5) The annual monitoring report shall be required until the site meets the intent of the
permit as determined by the City. At the end of the monitoring period, the City will release the
letter of credit if the permit holder demonstrates that the functions and values of the impacted
wetland have been replaced. Where feasible, the city shall require the permit holder to satisfy
long-term management requirements.
J) Expiration ofPermits. Unless otherwise specified by City, wetland permits shall expire
three ( 3) years from date of approval if the work authorized by the permit is not completed. The
permit shall be considered void unless a petition for a time extension has been granted by the
City Council. The extension request shall be submitted in writing at least 30 days prior to
expiration of the permit and shall state facts showing a good faith effort to complete work
permitted under the original approval. The City Council may renew a void permit at its
discretion. If the City Council does not renew the permit, the holder of the void permit may make
original application for a new permit.
Prior Code, § 9- 21- 8) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 720, passed 5- 20- 2013; Ord. 734,
passed 04- 07- 2014) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 408 BLUFFLAND OVERLAY DISTRICT STANDARDS.
A) It is the intent of this subchapter to preserve significant landforms such as river and
stream valleys and bluffs and other steep areas in their natural state. In furtherance of this intent,
the placement of structures upon land having a vertical slope in excess of 33- 1/ 3% shall be
prohibited. Removal of natural vegetation and alterations to the existing land contour in areas
over 33- 1/ 3% shall also be prohibited.
B) A setback of 40 feet shall be required along the Minnesota River bluff from the point at
which the gradient reaches 33- 1/ 3%.
C) A setback of 25 feet shall be required along the Credit River bluff and the bluff areas
adjacent to other wetlands within the community from the point at which the natural gradient is
33- 1/ 3%.
Page 29 of 30
D) Within planned unit development districts, setbacks may be modified further with
consideration given to construction methods that will preserve the natural features and prevent
erosion as well as considerations related to building height. If a building exceeding three stories
in height is proposed, the setback from the established bluff line shall be increased so that the
setback is not less than one-half the height of the building.
E) The City Engineer must evaluate possible soil erosion impacts and development
visibility from public waters before issuing a permit for construction of sewage treatment
systems, roads, driveways, structures or other improvements on steep slopes. When determined
necessary, conditions may be attached to issued permits to prevent erosion and to preserve
existing vegetation screening of vehicles, structures and other facilities as viewed from the
surface of public waters.
F) A minimum setback of 50 feet is required for ponds, infiltration areas and individual
sewage treatment systems ( ISTS) from the point at which the natural gradient is 33- 1/ 3%.
G) No new discharge points are allowed on any bluff face where the natural gradient is 33-
1/ 3% or steeper.
Prior Code, § 9- 21- 9) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 636, passed 10- 15- 2007) Penalty, see
152.999
Page 30 of 30
PLANNED UNITDEVELOPMENTDISTRICT
152.420 Purpose
152.421 Allowed Planned Unit Development Districts
152.422 Applicability of provisions
152.423 Pre- application meeting
152.424 Preliminary PUD plan
152.425 Final plan
152.426 Construction and maintenance
152.427 Planned Unit Development review and revisions
152.428 Planned Residential District (PRD)
152.429 Planned Mixed-Use District (PMD)
152.430 Planned Commercial District (PCD)
152.431 Planned Industrial District (PID)
152. 420 PURPOSE.
The purpose of the planned unit development (PUD) district is to provide for greater
flexibility in the development and redevelopment process as compared to rather rigid
development regulations common to traditional zoning districts. The PUD process provides for a
joint planning/design effort by developers and city officials rather than the city establishing
maximum limits within which developers may perform. It is not the intent of this subchapter to
allow for reductions or waivers to standard zoning requirements solely for the purpose of
increasing overall density or allowing development that otherwise could not be approved. The
PUD process shall encourage the following:
A) Flexibility in land development and redevelopment in order to utilize new techniques of
building design, construction and land development;
B) Provision of life cycle housing to all age and income groups;
C) Energy conservation through the use of more efficient building designs and siting and
the clustering of buildings and land uses;
D) Preservation of desirable site characteristics and open space and protection of sensitive
environmental features, including but not limited to, steep slopes, trees and poor soils;
E) More efficient and effective use of land, open space and public facilities through mixing
of land uses;
F) High quality of design and design compatible with surrounding land uses, including
both existing and planned; and
G) Use of traffic management and design techniques to reduce the potential for traffic
Page 1 of 16
conflicts. Improvements to area roads and intersections may be required as appropriate.
Prior Code, § 9- 22- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 421 ALLOWED PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS.
Each PUD District shall only be used for the use or uses for which the site is designated in
the comprehensive plan, except that the city may permit up to 25% of the gross floor area of all
buildings in a PUD to be used for land uses for which the site is not designated in the
comprehensive plan if the City Council finds that the use is in the best interests of the city and is
consistent with the requirements of this section. The provisions of the Hamilton Overlay District
and all other applicable overlay districts shall govern the PUD requirements. All PUDs shall be
zoned to one of the following planned unit development districts as outlined in this section:
A) Planned Residential District (PRD);
B) Planned Commercial District (PCD);
C) Planned Industrial District (PID); or
D) Planned Mixed-Use District (PMD).
Prior Code, § 9- 22-2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 422 APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
Procedures for applying for approval of a planned unit development project shall be
essentially the same for all planned development districts whether residential, commercial,
industrial or mixed use. All land proposed for planned unit development shall be platted or
replatted in accordance with the city' s subdivision regulations. For the purposes of this
subchapter, the preliminary plan shall include the necessary information to serve as a preliminary
plat for the development.
Prior Code, § 9- 22-3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 423 PRE-APPLICATION MEETING.
Prior to submission of any plan for consideration to the Planning Commission, the potential
applicant shall meet with the Zoning Administrator to discuss the contemplated project relative
to community development objectives for the area in question and to learn what procedural steps
and exhibits shall be required. If, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, the proposed
development is in conflict with community development objectives, the applicant shall have the
option to informally discuss the contemplated project with the Planning Commission or proceed
pursuant to the provisions of Section 154. 424.
Prior Code, § 9- 22-4) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11)
Page 2 of 16
152. 424 PRELIMINARY PUD PLAN.
A) General application requirements. Applicant shall complete the PUD rezoning
application form obtained from the Zoning Administrator, submit six full-size copies and one
reduced- size copy of the required exhibits, and pay the filing fee.
B) Required exhibits. The applicant shall cause to be prepared the following exhibits for
presentation to and review by the city staff, Planning Commission and City Council.
1) Supporting material.
a) A narrative description of the developer' s interest in the property in question.
b) Abstractor' s certified property certificate showing the names and addresses of
property owners within 350 feet of the outer boundaries of the property (one copy).
c) Location map showing property in relation to the city as a whole and to the
city' s primary elements such as thoroughfares, schools, parks and shopping areas.
d) A legal description of the property including approximate total acreage.
e) Boundary survey prepared by a registered surveyor of the property and 100
feet beyond showing:
1. Existing property lines and dimensions;
2. Ownership of all parcels;
3. Platting and easements;
4. Street and railroad rights- of-way;
5. Buildings; and
6. Utility lines and facilities.
f) Natural features map or maps of the property in question and 100 feet beyond
showing:
1. Contour lines at no more than two- foot intervals;
2 Steep slopes of 18% or more;
3 Hydrologic information including drainage patterns, wetlands and land
subject to periodic flooding;
Page 3 of 16
4 Soil and subsoil conditions; and
5. Vegetation including classification of tree cover by species.
g) Map or maps of the property in question and 100 feet beyond showing:
1. Existing zoning; and
2. Land use and occupancy.
h) Any other material requested by the City Council, Planning Commission or
city staff
2) Preliminary plan and related data.
a) Map or maps and supporting narrative indicating in a schematic manner the
proposed development including:
1. Broad development objectives;
2. Proposed land uses;
3. Vehicular and pedestrian circulation;
4. Housing types and densities, if applicable;
5. Schematic architectural drawings showing exterior design treatment;
6. Open space uses, ownership and method of maintenance, if applicable;
7. Drainage, grading and utility plans;
8. Stormwater calculations;
9. Landscaping and lighting; and
10. Preliminary plat, if applicable.
b) Economic and related development data including:
1. Method and schedule of development;
2. Financial capability of owner and/ or developer;
3. Economic and fiscal resources available for development; and
Page 4of16
4. Market area of project and demand trends within the area.
c) Any other material requested by the City Council, Planning Commission or
city staff
C) Optionalfinalplan. At the applicant' s option, a final plan of a portion of the proposed
development may be prepared and submitted simultaneously with the overall preliminary plan
for purposes of expediting the review process.
D) Review and approval.
1) Action by Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall refer the
application to appropriate staff/consultants for review and comment and shall transmit the
application and staff reports to Planning Commission for consideration.
2) Action by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing on the application as required for rezoning applications, and after considering staff and
consultant reports shall either recommend denial, recommend approval subject to revisions or
recommend approve the application.
3) Action by City Council. The City Council shall review the application and either
deny, approve subject to revision and conditions or approve the application.
E) Approvedplan. The City Council approval of the preliminary plan with or without
modification shall constitute zoning approval as well as permission to file the final plan or plans.
The approved preliminary plan shall serve as the basis for all future development within the
designated PUD District unless substantially modified according to the same procedures required
for initial approval; however, the preliminary plan approval shall not constitute permission to
initiate site improvement or building construction. The activities must await final plan and
building permit approvals.
F) Expiration ofplan approval. If a final plan covering at least ten dwelling units or 10%
of the area in the preliminary plan, whichever is greater, has not been filed within six months
from the date Council grants preliminary plan approval, the approval shall expire. The Council,
at its discretion, may extend the filing deadline for additional periods not in excess of six months
each when the extension is shown to be for good cause.
G) Planned development agreement. Prior to final plan approval, the applicant shall enter
into a planned unit development agreement with the city relating to the terms of the PUD and
shall also provide financial guarantees as the city deems necessary.
H) Zoning map amended. The official zoning of the city shall be revised to incorporate the
new designation according to PUD numerical designation. The description of the new district
will consist of all submissions for preliminary plan approval.
Page 5 of 16
I) PUD amendments. The ordinance rezoning any property to planned unit development
may reference various plans, documents, maps or drawings and incorporate the items by
reference. The City Council is authorized to approve any amendments to the plans, documents,
maps or drawings. The City Council shall not have to adopt an ordinance amendment to change
any plans, documents, maps or drawings.
Prior Code, § 9- 22-5) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 425 FINAL PLAN.
The final plan conveys essentially the same information as the approved preliminary plan in
a more specific and complete manner. The final plan is the permanent public record of the PUD
and may consist of all or a portion of the area encompassed by the preliminary plan, and shall
include revisions of the preliminary plan as requested by the Planning Commission and/ or City
Council or city staff The final plan shall implement the development objectives established by
the approved preliminary plan and may be submitted in project stages for the entire PUD.
A) Required exhibits. The following required exhibits shall be prepared and submitted to
the Zoning Administrator for presentation and review by city staff, Planning Commission and
City Council( six full sets, one reduced copy):
1) Plan or plans at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet and supporting narrative
description depicting in a detailed manner the proposed site development including:
a) Broad development objectives;
b) Proposed land uses;
c) Location of structures;
d) Vehicular and pedestrian circulation facilities;
e) Parking and loading and unloading facilities;
f) Housing types and densities, if applicable;
g) Open space uses, ownership and method of maintenance;
h) Grading plan;
i) Landscaping plan including species and size;
0) Lighting systems; and
k) Typical dimensions for the above shall be included.
Page 6 of 16
2) Utilities plans at scale of one inch equals 100 feet indicating size and placement of
water, sanitary and storm sewer lines and facilities:
a) Preliminary architectural plans at one- eighth inch equals one foot, showing
floor plans and elevations of all buildings except one- and two- family detached dwellings;
b) A tabulation indicating the proposed number of dwelling units by number of
bedrooms for each density area in the final plan, if applicable;
c) A final plat, if applicable; and
d) Any other materials requested by the Planning Commission, City Council or
city staff
B) Review and approval. Procedures for staff, Planning Commission and City Council
review and action shall be the same as required for preliminary plan review, except that a public
hearing shall not be required.
C) Duration ofapproval. The approval of a final plan shall be valid for a one- year period
following the date of the approval. At its discretion, the Council may extend a final plan approval
for an additional six- month period. If final plans have not been submitted after a period of 18
months from the date of City Council' s approval of the preliminary plan for either a phase of or
the entire development, the approval of the preliminary plan will be considered null and void by
the Council, and the PUD zoning designation shall revert to the previous designation.
D) Site improvements. Subsequent to Council approval of final plans, grading permits may
be issued to the applicant by the Zoning Administrator.
E) Model housing units. At the City Council' s option, building permits may be issued to
the applicant for the purpose of constructing model housing units, provided the Building
Inspector certifies to the Council that the architectural plans meet all requirements of this
subchapter and the State Building Code.
F) Effect ofapproval. Approval of final plan or plans shall allow the city and developer to
enter into contractual agreements for the construction of public improvements such as streets and
utilities. Completion of water and sewer installations and rough grading of streets shall constitute
permission for the Building Inspector to issue building permits.
Prior Code, § 9- 22-6) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 426 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
A) Required exhibits. The applicant shall cause to be prepared the following minimum
exhibits showing substantial compliance with the final plan, and shall submit two copies of the
exhibits to the Zoning Administrator:
Page 7 of 16
1) Any PUD proposed to be constructed in stages shall include full details relating
thereto, and the City Council may approve or modify, where necessary, any proposal;
2) The staging shall include the time for beginning and completion of each stage. The
timing may be modified by the City Council on the showing of good cause by the developer; and
3) The landowner or developer shall make the easements, covenants and other
arrangements and shall furnish a bank letter of credit or other financial security as may be
determined by the City Council to be reasonably required to assure performance in accordance
with the plan and to protect the public interest in the event of abandonment of the plan before
completion.
B) Covenant, easements and restrictions. The final plan shall contain the proposed
covenants, easements and other provisions relating to the bulk, location and density of residential
units, nonresidential uses and public facilities as are necessary for the welfare of the planned
development district and are consistent with the best interests of the entire city.
C) Streets, utilities and services.
1) The uniqueness of each proposal for planned development requires that
specifications and standards for streets, utilities and services shall be subject to minor
modifications from the specifications and standards established in this chapter and other city
ordinances governing their construction. The City Council may therefore waive or modify the
specifications or standards where it is found that they are not required in the interests of the PUD
occupants or of the entire city. The plans and profiles of all streets, utilities and services shall be
reviewed, modified if necessary and approved by the City Engineer, Fire Chief and Building
Inspector prior to approval of the final plan by the City Council.
2) All PUD projects shall be served by the municipal water and sewer systems.
Prior Code, § 9- 22-7) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 427 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND REVISIONS.
A) Annual review. The Zoning Administrator shall review all uncompleted PUD Districts
within the city at least once each year and shall make a report to the City Council on the status of
the development in each of the PUD Districts. If the City Council finds that development has not
occurred within a reasonable time after the original approval of the PUD District, the Council
may instruct the Planning Commission to initiate rezoning to the original zoning district by
removing the PUD classification. In any event, it shall not be necessary for the Council to find
that the rezoning was in error.
B) Final plan revisions.
1) Minor revisions. Minor changes in the location, placement and heights of buildings
or structures may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator if required by engineering or other
Page 8 of 16
circumstances not foreseen at the time the final plan was approved. Approval by the City Council
shall be required for other minor changes such as rearrangement of lots, blocks and building
tracts. These changes shall be consistent with the purpose and intent of the approved final plan.
2) Substantial revisions. Any substantial changes in the approved final plan,
especially a change in land use or an increase in development density or intensity or a change in
the provision for common open space shall require a public hearing. Any changes shall be
recorded as amendments to the recorded copy of the final plan after Council approval.
Prior Code, § 9- 22- 8) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 428 PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (PRD).
A) Purpose. In addition to the general purpose of planned unit development described in §
152.420 of this subchapter, the purposes of the PRD District are:
1) To allow greater variety in the types of residential environment available to the
residents of the city;
2) To respond to changes in housing demand and in new housing concepts;
3) To encourage the provision of privately controlled common open space ancillary to
new housing developments; and
4) To allow a more efficient allocation and maintenance of public facilities such as
streets and utility lines serving new housing developments.
B) Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted generally in PRD Districts; however,
individual PRD Districts may and usually will be more restrictive by limiting the type of
dwellings permitted:
1) Dwelling units in detached, semi-detached, attached or multi-storied structures or
combinations thereof, and
2) Accessory uses as permitted in the zoning district in which the proposed
development is to be located.
C) Development andperformance standards. The following uses are permitted generally in
PRD Districts; however, individual PRD Districts may and usually will be more restrictive by
limiting the type of dwellings permitted. By definition, the PRD District emphasizes a regulatory
process rather than regulations; however, certain minimal development standards are deemed
necessary and shall apply to all PRD proposals. The standards are as follows.
1) Building setbacks. Building setbacks from all property lines which form the
perimeter of the total property in the PRD or from all exterior dedicated street right-of-way lines
shall be at least 25 feet or the height of the building, whichever is greater. Minimum spacing
Page 9 of 16
between principal buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings shall be 25 feet.
2) Lot coverage. The total ground area occupied by buildings in a PRD shall not
exceed 20% of the total site area in the project. If the total project is to be staged over a period of
time, open space shall be provided so that the ground coverage of any one stage shall not exceed
30% of the applicable site.
3) Floor area ratio (FAR). There shall be a maximum floor area ratio of 0. 5. Floor
area ratio shall be determined by dividing the sum total of the gross area of all floors of the
principal structures on a site by the gross area of the total site.
4) Building and site design.
a) More than one building may be placed on one platted or recorded lot in a PRD.
Areas for single- family detached dwellings must comply with the city' s subdivision regulations
in all respects not specifically noted in this subchapter as appropriate variances or waivers.
b) A PRD that only involves one housing type, such as all detached or all attached
units, shall not be considered as inconsistent with the stated purposes and objectives of this
subchapter.
c) Architectural style of buildings shall not solely be a basis for denial or
approval of a plan; however, the overall appearance and compatibility of individual buildings to
other site elements or to surrounding development will be primary considerations in the review
stages of the Planning Commission and Council.
5) Common open space. Common open space shall be provided within each PRD
according to the following schedule:
a) One-thousand square feet of land per single-family attached unit, such as
townhouses, quads, twin homes and similar uses;
b) Four-hundred square feet per multiple- family unit, including walk-up
apartments, high rise apartments and similar uses; and
c) In addition, 10% of the gross residential land within the PRD shall be
dedicated for public use as parks or playgrounds or a cash equivalent as determined by the city.
6) Open space standards. The City Council shall not approve a PRD unless it meets
the following standards applicable to common open space.
a) The location, shape, size and character of the common open space shall be
provided in a manner to meet the needs of the PRD and shall be consistent with the city' s
proposed parks and open space standards.
b) Common open space shall be used for amenity or recreational purposes. The
Page 10 of 16
uses authorized for the common open space must be appropriate to the scale and character of the
planned development, considering its size, density, expected population, topography and the
number and type of dwellings to be provided.
c) Common open space must be suitably improved for its intended use, but
common space containing natural features, existing trees and ground cover worthy of
preservation may be left unimproved.
7) Dedication ofland. All land shown on the final plan as common open space shall
be conveyed in either of the following ways, at the discretion of the City Council. In any event,
the common open space, after being approved on the final plan, shall be used thereafter for no
other purpose than as specified on the final plan.
a) To the city; or
b) To an organization for the ownership and maintenance of the common open
space, which organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it dispose of the common open space
by sale or otherwise without first offering to dedicate the same to the city.
Prior Code, § 9- 22-9) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 429 PLANNED MIXED-USE DISTRICT (PMD).
A) Purpose. In addition to the general purpose of the planned unit development described
in § 152.420, the purpose of the Planned Mixed-Use District is to support the development of a
mix of land uses which combine residential and non-residential land uses through the use of
innovative planning and design.
B) Interim uses. In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this
subchapter, the following are interim uses within the PMD, Planned Mixed-Use District, and
require an interim use permit in accordance with the procedures identified in § 152. 032:
1) Single-family dwelling on property not served by municipal sewer and water,
subject to the standards identified in § 152.097;
2) Mining, excavation and land reclamation, subject to standards identified in §§
152.560 through 152.575;
3) Private or public stables, subject to standards identified in § 152. 097;
4) Temporary classroom type structure for use by public or private institutions; and
5) Other uses that satisfy both the purpose and findings criteria established in
152.032, as determined by the City Council.
C) Permitted uses. Within the PMD District, no building, structure, land or premises shall
Page 11 of 16
be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed,
moved or altered except for one or more of the uses listed below, subject to all applicable
development and performance standards:
1) Multiple-family dwellings;
2) Office and administrative facilities;
3) Retail business;
4) Professional and personal service business;
5) Conference centers;
6) Public transit facilities;
7) Indoor commercial recreation;
8) Child care center; and
9) Essential services as defined in § 152. 006.
D) Permitted accessory uses. The following are permitted accessory uses within the PMD,
Planned Mixed-Use District, subject to all applicable provisions of this subchapter:
1) Fences as regulated in § 152.077;
2) Towers and antennas as regulated by § 152. 079;
3) Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the premises for a
period not to exceed the time necessary to complete construction;
4) Outdoor dining area subject to the standards identified for the use in § 152. 097;
5) Parking and loading facilities as regulated by §§ 152.490 through 152. 502; and
6) Keeping of horses, provided that there is at least two acres of land for the first horse
and one acre for each additional horse up to a maximum of five horses and provided that any
accessory building used as stable facility or shelter for the horses maintain a minimum setback of
100 feet from a front lot line and 50 feet from all side or rear lot lines. A conditional use permit
shall be required to exceed the maximum allowable number of horses as provided herein.
E) Lot requirements. Lot requirements for the PMD District shall be established at the time
of zoning. However, the following shall apply in all instances except within the Hamilton
Overlay District.
Page 12 of 16
1) Maximum height: four stories, not exceeding 50 feet from finished grade.
2) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
F) Development andperformance standards. Due to the nature of the Planned Mixed-Use
District, the regulations governing development and performance standards shall be established
at the time of zoning. However, the following shall apply in all instances.
1) Landscaping and screening requirements shall be as established in §§ 152. 515
through 152.523.
2) No merchandise shall be stored or displayed outside a building and no equipment
or vehicles other than passenger vehicles shall be stored outside a building.
3) A business may have no more than two delivery vehicles, provided that the
vehicles shall be customary passenger vehicles or small pickup trucks or vans. All principal and
accessory buildings shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the design standards
identified in §§ 152.095 through 152. 098.
Prior Code, § 9- 22- 10) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 542, passed 2- 4- 2002) Penalty, see
152.999
152. 430 PLANNED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (PCD).
A) Purpose. In addition to the general purpose of planned development districts as
described in § 152.420 of this subchapter, the purpose of the Planned Commercial Development
District (PCD) is to provide for the development of predominately retail commercial uses, but
also including a wide range of complementary uses in a cohesive arrangement.
B) Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted generally in PCD Districts; however,
individual PCD Districts may be more restrictive than the general use.
1) Commercial establishments including, but not limited to, the following:
a) Business services such as printing and computer services;
b) Entertainment and amusement services such as motion picture theaters and
bowling alleys;
c) Finance, insurance and real estate services;
d) Lodging services such as hotels and motels;
e) Personal services such as laundry, barber, shoe repair shop and photography
studio;
Page 13 of 16
f) Professional services such as medical and dental clinics and attorneys' offices;
g) Repair services such as jewelry and radio and television repair shops; and
h) Retail establishments such as grocery, hardware, drug, department stores,
clothing and furniture stores, eating and drinking places, auto dealers and gas stations. Used car
lots shall be permitted only when an integral part of a new car dealership.
2) Offices for administrative, executive, professional, research or similar organization
and laboratories having only limited contact with the general public.
3) Public and semi-public facilities serving all or major portions of the city such as
municipal offices, library, post office, fire station and YWCA/YMCA.
4) Accessory uses incidental to the foregoing principal uses such as off-street parking
and loading areas, signs, storage of merchandise, wholesaling when incidental to a permitted use
and radio and television antennas as permitted in the C- 2, General Commerce District.
C) Development standards.
1) Building setbacks.
a) From perimeter streets: 40 feet.
b) From interior public streets: 30 feet.
c) From adjoining residential uses or zoning districts: 75 feet.
d) Between principal detached structures: one- half of the average height of the
two structures.
2) Lot coverage. No more than 40% of any lot or tract shall be covered by buildings.
3) Floor area ratio (FAR). Maximum floor area ratio for any single lot or tract shall
be 2. 0 provided the entire PCD of which it is a part shall not exceed 1. 0.
Prior Code, § 9- 22- 11) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 431 PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (PID).
A) Purpose. In addition to the general purpose of planned unit development described in §
152.420 of this subchapter, the purposes of the PID District are:
1) To provide an area or areas within the city where industrial and related uses of a
generally " clean and quiet" nature can be developed and operated in a high quality physical
environment;
Page 14 of 16
2) To promote uses which will be complementary to and compatible with the
predominantly low density residential character of the city;
3) To promote uses which will insure to the owners and occupants of permitted uses
the full use, benefit and prestige of a planned industrial district of exemplary standards;
4) That industrial and related activities be the predominant use in the PID District but
that complementary uses such as certain kinds of commercial activity may also be appropriate if
properly designed and developed; and
5) To promote industrial development that is to be characterized by relatively high
employment levels and building to land ratios, both of which support the objectives of increasing
employment opportunities within the city and of strengthening the city' s nonresidential tax base.
B) Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted generally in PID Districts; however,
individual PID Districts may be more restrictive:
1) Manufacturing, fabrication, compounding, processing, packaging, treatment and
assembly of goods, products and materials;
2) Office and administrative facilities;
3) Retail commercial facilities providing goods and services for the day to day needs
of PID district workers and visitors;
4) Retail commercial facilities beyond those specified in division (13)( 3) above
provided that the Council shall find prior to any retail use being made of any premises and prior
to any substantial change therein, that the use is compatible with the Planned Industrial
Development District in which located;
5) Scientific research, investigation, testing or experimentation;
6) Wholesaling and warehousing; and
7) Customary accessory uses such as off-street parking and signs and radio and TV
antennas as permitted in the I-1, Limited Industrial District.
C) Development standards.
1) Building setbacks.
a) From perimeter public streets: 50 feet.
b) From interior public streets: 30 feet.
Page 15 of 16
c) From adjoining residential uses or zoning districts: 100 feet.
d) Between principal detached structures: one- half the average height of the two
structures.
2) Lot coverage. No more than 40% of any lot or tract shall be covered by buildings.
3) Floor area ratio (FAR). Maximum floor area ratio for any single lot or tract shall
be 2. 0, provided the entire PID of which it is a part shall not exceed 0. 75.
Prior Code, § 9- 22- 12) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
Page 16 of 16
COUNTYROAD 42 OVERLAYDISTRICT
152.445 Purpose
152.446 Application
152.447 Permitted uses
152.448 Design standards
152.449 Additional considerations
152. 445 PURPOSE
The purpose of the County Road 42 Overlay District is to provide additional regulations,
coordinated with the minimum requirements of the underlying zoning district, to ensure
enhanced and coordinated site and building design standards within the city' s primary and most
visible commercial corridor, including but not limited to:
A) Provision of higher quality building materials, architectural design and landscape
elements than that minimally required within other areas of the city;
B) Site design that accounts for minimization of public street exposure to drive-through
facilities, loading docks, expansive parking areas and similar visual features; and
C) Protection and enhancement of property values by ensuring that site design is
compatible with surrounding land uses.
Prior Code, § 9- 28- 1) ( Ord. 589, passed 3- 7- 2005)
152. 446 APPLICATION.
A) In addition to the regulations specified in this subchapter, all property located within the
County Road 42 Overlay District shall be subject to all of the applicable standards, procedures
and regulations of this subchapter and the base zoning district in which the property is located.
Where the provisions of the overlay district and other requirements of this subchapter are in
conflict, the provisions of the overlay district shall govern.
B) The area subject to the regulations of the County Road 42 Overlay District shall include
those properties as identified on the official zoning map of the city, dated January 18, 2005, as
amended by the text of this subchapter. Amendments to the boundaries of the district shall be
processed as a rezoning, in accordance with the provisions of§ 152. 030.
C) Uses and structures within the County Road 42 Overlay District that were conforming
prior to the effective date of this subchapter will remain conforming. However, all new
development and building expansions approved by the City Council after the effective date of
this subchapter shall be subject to the standards expressed herein, except as may otherwise be
provided for under the provisions of this subchapter.
Prior Code, § 9- 28- 2) ( Ord. 589, passed 3- 7- 2005)
Pagel of 8
152. 447 PERMITTED USES.
Permitted uses within the County Road 42 Overlay District, both primary and accessory,
shall be as specified within the base zoning district in which the property is located.
Prior Code, § 9- 28- 3) ( Ord. 589, passed 3- 7- 2005) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 448 DESIGN STANDARDS.
A) Applicability. The following standards shall apply to development within the County
Road 42 Overlay District, unless specifically modified as part of a planned unit development
approved by the City Council. Single- and two- family residences shall be exempt from these
regulations.
B) Affect on existing properties. Where additions are proposed for buildings constructed
prior to the effective date of this subchapter, and the buildings do not comply with the
architectural standards identified in this section, the additions need not comply provided that the
additions do not exceed 30% of the existing floor area of the building. Additions in excess of
30% of the existing building floor area shall require that the entire building come into
compliance with the standards expressed in this section. Non-architectural standards shall be
applied whenever a building permit is required for work at the property.
C) Building architecture - residential uses. All non- exempt residential buildings to be
developed within the County Road 42 Overlay District shall meet the following standards.
1) Primary residential construction materials such as brick, stone, wood, lap siding
and architectural shingles shall be utilized in the design. All front elevations, and any elevation
directly adjacent to and facing onto County Road 42, of all buildings and structures shall
incorporate, at a minimum, 30% brick or stone. The percentage requirement shall be calculated
on the total exterior surface area exclusive of glazed surfaces.
2) All building facades shall include features to break up the visual expanse of flat
walls and rooflines, including, but not limited to, staggered recesses and projections, dormers,
varied window styles, mixing of materials and colors and similar architectural approaches.
D) Building architecture- non- residential uses. All non-residential buildings to be
developed within the County Road 42 Overlay District shall meet the following standards.
1) Architectural style shall be appropriate to the site context and shall display
sensitivity to the best aspects of the character, quality and scale of those structures already
existing in the immediate area.
2) All buildings and structures shall incorporate, at a minimum, 50% brick or stone
into the overall building design. Allowable exterior materials shall be as follows:
Page 2 of 8
a) Face brick or stone;
b) Glass;
c) Stucco or synthetic stucco, provided that the material shall not be allowed
within 24 inches from grade;
d) Color impregnated decorative block;
e) Wood or metal as an accent material, provided that no more than 20% of any
individual exterior wall shall consist of that material and that all the materials shall be finished
for exterior use;
f) Architectural precast concrete panels, only when integrally treated with an
exterior finish that matches or simulates those materials listed above. Other finishes shall be
evaluated by the City Council only as part of a planned unit development, in accordance with the
objectives specified in § 152.420. In all cases, the applicant shall provide building material
samples for review to demonstrate that the materials meet or exceed the standards specified in
this section; and
g) The percentage requirement expressed for minimum brick/stone coverage shall
be calculated on the total exterior surface area exclusive of glazed surfaces.
3) Building facades shall be staggered with recesses and projections, incorporating
windows, colonnades and major entry features/ canopies to break up the visual expanse of flat
walls. A minimum of 50% of the length of the building facade facing County Road 42 shall have
windows, awnings or arcades or a combination thereof. A minimum 30% of any building facade
facing internal access drives or public streets shall have windows, awnings or arcades or a
combination thereof. False glass windows and display windows may be considered in meeting
this requirement.
4) All buildings shall be designed with architectural continuity and visual interest so
that no facade of the building appears to be the " rear" of the building. Architectural details such
as materials, texture, pattern, color and building form used on the front features shall be
incorporated on all building facades. However, the requirements shall not apply to any facade
facing service courts or other areas generally not visible to the public, provided that there be
continuity in color scheme with the remaining facades.
5) Roof types and pitch shall relate to the roof types of surrounding buildings
wherever a dominant character or pattern is present. In cases where an overlay property directly
abuts a residential district, roof design shall incorporate elements that are common to residential
construction.
6) Any car wash facilities associated with a convenience store shall be attached to the
main building and designed to be integral with the appearance of the building.
Page 3 of 8
7) Exterior trash receptacle or recycling areas shall be designed to be integral with the
building design and adjacent to the building.
E) Exterior color. The building' s exterior color scheme shall consider and respect the
character and quality of structures in the surrounding area. The primary use of bright, intense or
extreme colors not consistent with adjoining development shall not be permitted in any zoning
district.
F) Building orientation. For non-residential properties, the following standards must be
met.
1) The fronts of buildings must orient towards County Road 42.
2) Loading docks or delivery doors shall not be visible from residential areas or other
public streets. In cases where buildings are surrounded by public streets, the facilities shall be
placed adjacent to the least visible roadway, with screening to minimize visual impact. Screening
of loading docks shall be accomplished in the form of one of the following:
a) A screen wall with decorative headers connected to the building, constructed
of the same materials and pattern of the building, at a height at least 12 feet to screen the entire
truck from view;
b) A combination of berming and landscaping to a minimum height of 12 feet,
provided that the maximum height of the berm shall not exceed eight feet. Screen plantings shall
consist of coniferous trees, no less than six feet in height, spaced ten feet on center in a sawtooth
pattern. Downslopes shall be planted with over-story trees and medium spread flowering
deciduous trees and shrubs; or
c) As an alternative for larger sites, greater five acres, screening may be
accomplished through provision of a decorative wall at the building setback line, as a means to
enclose large expanses of loading docks or product staging areas. The wall shall be at least 12
feet in height and shall be constructed of the same materials and pattern used on the building.
3) Buildings with overhead doors, drive-through canopies or open bays shall face
away from any public street, unless the elements are oriented and designed as part of an overall
building design so they are not visible from the roadways, in combination with year round
screening where applicable. Overhead doors shall be designed to complement the building
architecture both in color and material.
4) Where multiple principal buildings will exist on a single parcel, the buildings shall
be designed and positioned so as to complement one another, providing for minimization of front
to rear building visibility, reasonable and safe traffic/pedestrian circulation and continuity of
building architecture and landscape themes.
Page 4 of 8
G) Landscaping.
1) Minimum landscaped green space shall equal at least 25% of the net site area. The
requirement may be reduced to 20% when plazas, gathering spaces, fountains and similar
amenities are incorporated into the site design.
2) A minimum two-foot berm shall be incorporated within green areas immediately
adjacent to highway right-of-way, except where infeasible due to topographic or other site
conditions, as determined by the City Engineer. No berm shall have a slope greater than three to
one ratio without the use of a retaining wall.
3) Required landscaping shall be in accordance with §§ 152. 515 through 152. 523,
except for the following.
a) Interior landscaping ofparking lots. Design of parking areas shall incorporate
green area as specified in § 152. 520( B), except that the parking areas occupied by planting
islands shall be a minimum of7% and that the islands shall be no smaller than 350 square feet in
size and shall include at least two trees.
b) Perimeter landscape requirements. In addition to the planting requirements
specified in § 152. 520( C), all yards adjoining County Road 42 shall incorporate tree plantings at
a rate of one deciduous shade or coniferous/ evergreen tree for every 30 feet of linear street
frontage of one deciduous ornamental tree for every three required deciduous shade or evergreen
trees. Preference shall be given to evergreen varieties in cases where landscaping is being
utilized for the purpose of screening.
4) Landscaping shall follow established " theme plans" adopted by the City Council.
Where no plan exists, required tree plantings shall make use of the selected species identified in
the chart below, provided that non-listed species may comprise up to 10% of required plantings
and that alternative compatible species may be permitted at the discretion of the city forester.
Shade Trees ( 40- 60feet) Characteristics
Hackberry Native tree, unique bark
Northern Red Oak Fall color, fast- growing native tree
Honeylocust Tolerant of urban conditions, fall color
Sugar Maple Needs well drained soil, fall color
Gingko Fall color, tolerant of urban conditions
Bicolor Oak Tolerant of poor soils, urban conditions
Page 5 of 8
Shade Trees ( 40- 60feet) Characteristics
Elm Choose cultivars resistant to Dutch elm disease
Bur Oak Tolerates a wide variety of site conditions
White Oak Native, fall color, resistant to oak wilt
Evergreen Trees
Black Hills Spruce Fast growing, soils/ salt tolerant
White Spruce Prefers well drained soils
Scots Pine Unique growth, soils/ salt tolerant
Red Pine Limited use, needs good soils
Austrian Pine Fast growing, soils/ salt tolerant
Understor Trees ( 15-40 eet Characteristics
River Birch Exfoliating bark, tolerates wet soils
Flowering Crab Spring flowering, winter fruit
Japanese Lilac Spring flowering, tough tree
Hawthorn Native tree, variety of soils, small spaces
Serviceberry Fall color, native tree, flowers, fruit
Viburnum Native tree, small spaces, flowers, fruit
Dogwood( Gray, Pagoda) Native, flowers, fruit
Blue Beech Native, fruit, fall color
Plum Small spaces, flowers, fruit
H) Outside display and storage.
Page 6 of 8
1) Outside display of goods for rent or sale are subject to the requirements identified in
152.097 and as specifically noted below. Open storage yards of other types are expressly
prohibited.
2) Exterior display or storage of articles, goods, materials, equipment and the like
shall be located in an enclosure that is attached to the building and constructed of a low brick or
block wall, matching the principal building, with wrought iron fencing or vinyl-covered chain
link or better. Brick or block columns and decorative headers shall be utilized to provide
architectural relief along expansive walls.
3) Landscaping beds shall be located in front of exterior display areas.
I) Signage.
1) All signs shall have good scale in their design and shall utilize materials and colors
that are compatible with the building and to the surrounding area.
2) Freestanding signs shall not exceed 20 feet in height and shall be a of monument
style design with decorative base and materials that match the building.
3) All wall signage shall consist of individually backlit letters.
4) When buildings are designed or intended to accommodate multiple tenants, a
uniform sign criteria shall be submitted as part of the site plan/building design review approval
process. The criteria shall identify sign size and design requirements that promote visual
continuity.
J) Lighting. Outdoor lighting, where provided, shall serve to enhance the building design
and adjoining landscape. All lighting shall comply with the provisions of§ 152. 080(A) and shall
be of a design, color and size that is harmonious with lighting utilized in adjacent areas.
K) Fencing.
1) Type. All required safety fencing, such as atop retaining walls where required by
code, shall consist of black wrought iron or better. Other types of fencing application shall be in
accordance with the standards identified for that use.
2) Design. Sections of fence over 50 feet in length shall require visual relief in the
form of landscaping, bump- outs, decorative columns or similar features.
L) Retaining walls. Retaining walls shall be constructed of materials that are compatible in
style, scale and color, with those utilized on the building.
Page 7 of 8
M) Pondingfeatures. Stormwater ponds shall be designed as an amenity, creating a high
quality focal point or entrance feature, and shall be incorporated into the overall landscape
design for the site, in accordance with standards established by the City Engineer.
Prior Code, § 9- 28- 4) ( Ord. 589, passed 3- 7- 2005) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 449 ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS.
A) Access management. Development of properties adjoining County Road 42 shall be
subject to the recommendations of the County Road 42 Corridor Study.
B) Pedestrian walkways. The City Council may require the provision of sidewalks, trails or
pathways in proximity to public service areas such as parks, schools, shopping facilities or in
other appropriate locations of a similar nature. All facilities shall conform to city design
standards and ADA guidelines and shall be constructed at the sole expense of the developer.
1) The location of all trails and sidewalks shall conform to the park and trail corridor
master plan, as outlined in the comprehensive plan or as updated by the City Council, and shall
be considered in their relation to existing and planned walkways, to topographical conditions, to
public convenience and safety and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land.
2) Where not specifically illustrated in the comprehensive plan or similar
city-approved trail/sidewalk plan, the arrangement of walkways in the subdivision shall either:
a) Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing walkways in
surrounding areas; or
b) Conform to a specific pedestrian plan for the neighborhood approved or
adopted by the City Council to meet a particular situation.
Prior Code, § 9- 28- 5) ( Ord. 589, passed 3- 7- 2005) Penalty, see § 152. 999
Page 8 of 8
SIGNS
152.460 Purpose and intent
152.461 Definitions
152.462 Exemptions
152.463 Prohibited signs
152.464 Signs by conditional use permit
152.465 Master signage plans
152.466 Freestanding sign regulations
152.467 Monument signs for residential developments
152.468 Temporary signs
152.469 Development project signs
152.470 Permanent signs
152.471 Dynamic displays
152.472 Brightness standards
152.473 Design, construction and maintenance
152.474 Planned Development Districts
152.475 Sign permits
152.476 Non-conforming signs
152.477 Enforcement
152.478 Conditional use permits and variances
152. 460 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The City Council finds and declares that it is necessary to protect and promote the general
welfare, health, safety, and order within the city through the establishment of a comprehensive
and impartial series of standards, regulations and procedures governing the erection, use and/ or
display of devices, signs or symbols serving as visual communicative media to persons situated
within or upon public properties or right-of-way and private properties. The provisions of this
section are intended to encourage creativity, a reasonable degree of freedom of choice, an
opportunity for effective communication, and a sense of concern for the visual amenities on the
part of those designing, displaying or otherwise utilizing needed communicative media of the
types regulated by this section; while at the same time assuring that the public is not endangered,
annoyed or distracted by the unsafe, disorderly, indiscriminate or unnecessary use of such
communicative facilities.
Prior Code, § 9- 23- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 461 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
AWNING. A roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal or glass designed and intended
Page 1 of 24
for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment, and which projects from a wall
or roof of a structure primarily over a window, walls, or the like. Any part of an awning which
also projects over a door shall be counted as an awning.
BALLOON. A flexible, nonferrous inflated bag in various shapes and colors.
BANNERS and PENNANTS. Attention-getting devices that resemble flags and are
nonpermanent paper, cloth or plastic-like consistency.
BENCH SIGN. A sign affixed to a bench.
BUSINESS SIGN. Any sign which directs attention to a business or group of businesses,
either retail or wholesale, a profession or to the commodity service, or entertainment, offered or
sold upon the premises where the sign is located or to which it is attached. Business Sign
includes a sign which is located on an abutting premises, but only if the premises on which the
business is located does not have frontage on or access to a public road other than by a recorded
easement over the abutting parcel on which the sign is located.
CAMPAIGNIPOLITICAL SIGN. A temporary sign promoting the candidacy of a person
running for a governmental office, or promoting an issue to be voted on at a governmental
election.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A sign or portion thereof which has a reader board for the
display of text information in which each alphanumeric character, graphic or symbol is defined
by objects, not consisting of an illumination device and may be changed or re- arranged manually
or mechanically with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged
without altering the face or the surface of the sign.
COMMERCIAL SPEECH. Speech advertising a business, profession, commodity, service
or entertainment.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A non- illuminated sign placed at a construction site identifying
the project or the name of the architect, engineer, contractor, financier or other involved parties,
or announcing the character of the building enterprise or the purpose for which the building is
intended.
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT SIGN. A sign placed at a development site for the purpose of
selling or promoting the project.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign which is erected on private property by the owner of such
property for the purpose of guiding vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Such signs shall bear no
commercial information other than the directional information.
Page 2 of 24
DIRECTIONAL SIGNS FOR PLACES OF WORSHIP, SCHOOLS, OR PUBLICLY
OWNED LAND OR BUILDINGS. A sign which bears the address and/ or name of a place of
worship, school, or publicly owned land or building and a directional arrow pointing to said
location.
DISTRICT. Refers to a specific zoning district as defined in the Zoning Code.
DYNAMIC DISPLAY. Any characteristics of a sign that appear to have movement or that
appear to change, caused by any method other than physically removing and replacing the sign
or its components, whether the apparent movement or change is in the display, the sign structure
itself, or any other component of the sign. This includes a display that incorporates a technology
or method allowing the sign face to change the image without having to physically or
mechanically replace the sign face or its components. This also includes any rotating, revolving,
moving, flashing, blinking, or animated display or portion thereof and any display that
incorporates rotating panels, LED lights manipulated through digital input, " digital ink" or any
other method or technology that allows the sign face to present a series of images or displays.
EMPLOYMENT SIGNS. A temporary sign to announce employment opportunities in
commercial and industrial zoning districts.
ELECTRONIC VARIABLE MESSAGE SIGNS. Signs whose message may be changed at
reasonable intervals by electronic process or remote control and whose movement is the periodic
changing of information against a solid, colorless background, engineered for maximum
legibility and readability, and having a constant light level and glare reduced screens.
FLASHING SIGN. An illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained
constant in intensity and color at all times during which the sign is in use or any sign which by
mechanical means, appears to simulate a flashing sign.
FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign which is placed in the ground and not affixed to any part
of any structure.
ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign which is illuminated by an artificial light source.
LOT FRONTAGE. The least width of a lot.
MARQUEE and/ or CANOPY. A roof-like structure projecting from and attached to a
building.
MONUMENTSIGN. A freestanding sign that is attached to or supported by a monument
structure which bears entirely on the ground, extending horizontally for a minimum of 80%
of the entire length of the sign face. The sign base must be constructed of materials that
shall be the same or similar to the primary building materials of the principal structure.
MULTI-FACED SIGN. Any sign with a sign face orientated to more than two directions.
Page 3 of 24
NAMEPLATE or IDENTIFICATION SIGN. Any sign which states the name or address or
both of a business or occupancy of the lot where the sign is placed, including a directory listing
of names, addresses and businesses of occupants.
NONCOMMERCIAL SPEECH. Dissemination of messages not classified as commercial
speech which include, but are not limited to, messages concerning political, religious, social,
ideological, public service and informational topics.
NON-ACCESSORY SIGN. A sign, billboard, poster panel board, painted bulletin board, or
other communicative device which is used to direct attention to a business or profession, or to
the commodity, service or entertainment not sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is
located, or to which it is attached. Any sign which constitutes a Business Sign as defined in this
Section shall not be considered a Non-Accessory Sign.
NON-CONFORMING SIGN. A sign which lawfully existed prior to the adoption of this
subchapter August 3, 2009 but does not conform to the newly enacted requirements of this
subchapter.
OFF-PREMISE SIGN. A sign relating in its subject matter to, or which directs attention
to, a business or profession, or to the commodity, service or entertainment not sold or offered
upon the premises where such sign is located, or to which it is attached. Any sign which
constitutes a Business Sign as defined in this Section shall not be considered a Non-Accessory
Sign.
OPAQUE. Impervious to the passage of light.
PARAPET. A low protective wall which is located along the edge of a roof on a building.
PERMANENT SIGN. Any sign which is not a temporary sign.
PORTABLE SIGN. A sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent
structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be
transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A- or T- frames; balloons used as
advertising, umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked
and visible from the public right- of-way, unless the vehicles is used in the normal day- to-day
operations of the business.
PROJECTING SIGN. A sign, any part of which extends over public property more than 12
inches.
PYLON SIGN. A sign erected on a post or posts, or freestanding shafts, walls or piers which
are solidly affixed to the ground and not attached to a building. A PYLON SIGN shall be
considered as one sign though it may have two faces. The degree of angle off a parallel line of
the faces of the sign so as to form a V sign shall be no greater than 30 degrees.
REAL ESTATE SIGN. A sign placed upon a property advertising that particular property
Page 4 of 24
for sale, for rent or for lease offering property (land and/ or buildings) for sale, lease or rent.
REPLACEMENT, RECONSTRUCTION OR RESTORATION. Construction that exactly
matches pre- existing conditions.
ROOF SIGN. A sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet of a building or above the
eaves in the case of a hip, gable or mansard roof where the plane of the roof are less than 60
degrees from the horizontal.
SIGN. Any letter, work or symbol, device, poster, picture, statuary, reading matter or
representation in the nature of advertisement, announcement, message or visual communication,
whether painted, posted, printed, affixed or constructed, including all associated brackets, braces,
supports, wires and structures which is displayed for informational or communicative purposes
when the same is displayed or placed out of doors in view of the general public including
displays on an exterior wall or building surface, or inside of a building within three feet of a
transparent window. A sign shall be considered as a structure or a part of a structure for the
purpose of applying yard and height regulations except as hereinafter stipulated.
SIGN AREA. The area that includes the smallest rectangle around each line of copy for
individually mounted letter signs and the entire face of a sign, including the advertisement
surface and any framing, trim or molding but not including the supporting structure for all other
signs. The maximum sign area is the maximum allowable gross surface area in square feet of a
sign or signs. The maximum number of signs cannot be arranged and integrated so as to create a
cumulative gross sign area in excess of the requirements as may be applicable.
SIGN, GROSS AREA. The area within the frame which shall be used to calculate the gross
area except that the width of the frame in excess of 12 inches shall be added thereto. When
letters or graphics are mounted directly to a wall without a frame, the GROSS AREA shall be the
area bounded by straight lines around the periphery of the letters or graphics. Each surface
utilized to display a message or to attract attention shall be measured by a separate sign.
SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure which supports or is capable of supporting any sign as
defined in this subchapter. A SIGN STRUCTURE may be a single pole and may or may not be
an integral part of the building.
SILHOUETTE. The area within the outline drawing of a building but not including screen
walls.
STREET FRONTAGE. The side of a lot abutting one or more streets. An interior lot has
one street frontage and a corner lot, two frontages. For purposes of this subchapter, any reference
to " street" herein shall mean any street or roadway, public or private, but not to include private
driveways.
TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign that is erected or displayed for a period of time not to
exceed 30 days of any 12- month calendar period.
Page 5 of 24
TRAFFIC SIGN. A sign which is erected by a governmental unit for the purpose of
directing or guiding traffic.
VEHICLE SIGN. A sign mounted, painted or otherwise placed on a trailer, truck,
automobile or other vehicle so parked or placed so that the sign thereon is visible from a public
street or right- of-way and is so parked primarily for the purpose of displaying commercial
signage.
WALL. The surface of a building that does not deviate more than 30 degrees from the
vertical plane, including decorative features which constitute its silhouette, but not to include
retaining or screen walls.
WALL SIGN. A sign which is affixed to the exterior wall of a building and which is parallel
to the building wall. A WALL SIGN does not project more than 12 inches from the surface to
which it is attached, nor extend beyond the top of the parapet wall. Banners do not qualify as a
wall sign.
Prior Code, § 9- 23- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 641, passed 4- 7- 2008; Ord. 692, passed
10- 17- 11; Ord. 719, passed 5- 20- 2013)
152. 462 EXEMPTIONS.
The following signs shall not require a sign permit but shall conform to all other applicable
provisions of this code and shall be permitted in all zoning districts in which the use identified is
permitted. Unless otherwise noted, no sign shall be placed on fences, trees or other vegetation,
public street/ traffic signs, utility poles, city/public property or within public road right- of-way.
Signs in violation of this section located on city/public property may be removed by City
personnel at their discretion, without advance notice to the sign owner.
A) Signs not exceeding two square feet in area. Signs not exceeding two square feet in
area and bearing only property numbers, post box numbers, names of occupants of premises or
other identification of premises not having commercial connotations.
B) Nonilluminated signs - home occupations. One nonilluminated sign not exceeding two
square feet in area for permitted home occupations. The sign shall be mounted flat against the
wall of the primary structure.
C) Signs directing and guiding traffic andparking. Signs directing and guiding traffic and
parking on private property, not to exceed six square feet in area and limited to one sign per
driveway entrance or street frontage. Other signs to designate reserved parking spaces or related
traffic or parking regulations limited to two square feet. Parking lots not contiguous to their
business may have one sign per street frontage which includes the business name and is up to 12
square feet in area.
D) Nonilluminated sign for buildings under construction. Nonilluminated sign for
buildings under construction; message limited to identification of architects, engineers,
Page 6 of 24
contractors and other individuals or firms involved with the construction and/ or development,
and the name of building, purpose for which intended and expected completion date. The sign
shall be limited to the construction site and shall be removed when the building is ready for
occupancy.
E) Open house for sale signs. Signs indicating an open house for the sale, lease or
promotion of a property are allowed the day of the open house only.
F) Garage sale signs. Garage sale signs are permitted one day prior to sale event and on
days of event. The signs shall be located on private property and only with the owner' s
permission. Garage sale signs must be removed immediately after the event has ceased.
G) Memorial signs or tablets. Memorial signs or tablets, name of buildings and/ or date of
erection when cut into masonry surface or when constructed on bronze or other noncombustible
material or heavy timber with routed letters which has been treated or has natural resistance to
decay, not to exceed ten square feet in area.
H) Traffic signs. Traffic may be located within the public right- of-way.
I) Signs displaying noncommercial speech. With the consent of the owner of the property,
no more than two signs displaying noncommercial speech not more than 32 square feet in total
combined area may be erected on private property.
J) Business window signs. Signs in the window of a business which are part of a display
of merchandise or display relating to sales on the premises, provided the signs are not to be
displayed for a period exceeding 30 consecutive days. The sign shall not exceed 25% of each
individual window area.
K) Display rack signs. Signs limited to four square feet in area on display racks or on
merchandise for sale, located near the building and not intended to attract attention from the
public right of way. The signs must be weather resistant, securely attached and properly
maintained.
L) Service station signs. Signs at service stations attached to the gas pumps or canopy
supports, limited to four square feet in area, to advertise special services or sales. Signs must be
weatherproof, securely attached and properly maintained.
M) Bench signs. Bench signs but only at designated bus stops and provided the bench is
not within the bus shelter. Each bench sign shall not exceed ten square feet and shall only be
affixed to either or both sides of the back rest of the bench.
N) Temporary on-site directional signs. Temporary on-site directional signs may be
erected for the purpose of selling or leasing the property in accordance with the following
limitations:
Page 7 of 24
1) The signs shall be professionally designed and painted on all sides, including
support posts. Freestanding signs shall be properly anchored into the ground.
2) The signs shall be limited to one per street frontage of the property.
3) The content of the commercial message on these signs shall include an offer of the
property for sale or lease, the company name, the phone number and other information related to
the sale.
4) The signs shall not measure more than 12 square feet in R- 1, R-2, R-3, PRD and
PMD districts and shall not measure more than 40 square feet in all other districts. The 40 square
feet limitation may be increased to 64 square feet, provided a permit is issued and the following
standards are met:
a) The sign shall be a maximum height of 12 feet;
b) The sign shall be set back from the property line no less than ten feet;
c) The sign shall be non-illuminated;
d) The signs shall be wall or freestanding on premises signs; and
e) The sign shall be removed ten days after the closing of the sale or leasing of
the property.
0) Temporary signs for organized showcase events. Temporary signs for organized
showcase events promoting new construction model homes are allowed as off-premise signs
provided that the signs do not exceed five square feet and are removed within 30 days from
beginning date of event.
P) Up to three flags containing non- commercial speech only may be displayed upon a lot.
Each flag may not exceed 100 square feet in size. Flag pole height must comply with height
regulations of the applicable zoning district.
Q) Signs which are located on the interior of a building and are not visible from outside of
the building shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, and shall not require permits or
payment of fees.
R) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, all signs of any size containing
non-commercial speech may be posted from 46 days before the state primary in any general
election year until ten days following the general election and 13 weeks prior to any special
election until ten days following the special election.
S) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, signs containing noncommercial
speech are permitted in all districts and are subject to only the provisions of
Page 8 of 24
152.470. Non-commercial signs are also subject to individual district setback and height
regulations. The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this code may substitute
non-commercial copy in lieu of any other commercial or non-commercial copy. This substitution
of copy may be made without any additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this
provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial
speech, or favoring of any particular non-commercial message over any other non-commercial
message. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary.
Prior Code, § 9- 23- 3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 667, passed 6- 7- 2010; Ord. 692, passed
10- 17- 11) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 463 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
The following signs or advertising structures are prohibited in all zoning districts:
A) Offensive signs. Signs which bear or contain statements, words or pictures of an
obscene, indecent or immoral character, that as is likely to offend public morals or decency;
B) Exterior building surface signs. Painting signs directly on any exterior building
surface;
C) Vehicle signs. Signs placed on vehicles, trailers or other equipment being used in a
manner that advertising is a principal use of the equipment;
D) Dynamic display signs. Dynamic displays except as permitted in §§ 152.471 and
152.472;
E) Banners. Banners except as permitted in § 152. 468( E);
F) Signs near intersections. Signs which are erected at the intersection of any street in a manner as
to substantially obstruct free and clear vision of the traveling public; or at any location where, by reason
of the position, shape, color or animation, it may interfere with, obstruct or be confused with any
authorized traffic sign or highway identification sign; or which makes use of the words: " STOP,"
LOOK," " DANGER" or any other words, phrase, symbol, character or animation in a manner as is
reasonably likely to interfere with, mislead or confuse vehicle operators;
G) Rooftop signs. Rooftop signs;
H) Identification signs. Signs and their structures which identify, advertise or provide direction to
a use, business, industry or service which has ceased existence for 90 days or more. The signs shall be
removed within 30 days after written notice from the Zoning Administrator or his or her designee;
I) Off-premise signs. Off-premise signs, except as specifically permitted in other sections of this
title;
Page 9 of 24
O Air inflated, banners, pennants and whirling devices. Air inflated devices, banners, pennants
and whirling devices or any such sign resembling the same, are prohibited from use within the city;
K) Portable signs. Portable signs unless otherwise expressly permitted within this subchapter;
L) Multifaced signs. Multi-faced signs;
M) Guy wire supported signs. Signs supported by guy wires;
N) Signs on fences, trees, poles and the like. Signs erected, placed or maintained on fences, trees,
mailboxes, utility poles or the supports thereof, and
0) Illuminated signs. Illuminated signs in which the light reflects direct rays of light onto adjacent
property or public streets. Signs which use incandescent lamps on exterior surfaces which exceed 15 watts
during nighttime hours.
Prior Code, § 9- 23- 4) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 641, passed 4- 7- 2008; Ord. 652, passed 1- 26-
2009) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 464 SIGNS BY CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
The following signs shall be allowed only by approval of a conditional use permit by the City
Council after a public hearing is held by the Planning Commission and a recommendation made to the
City Council.
A) Non-accessory signs, as defined by § 152. 461, shall be prohibited and any non- accessory
signs legally in existence on October 22, 2011 shall have the status of a non-conforming use under
Minnesota Statute § 462. 357, subsection 1 e, as that law may be amended from time to time.
B) Off-premise signs for the purpose of providing direction to a public, religious or non-profit
institution, or to any use which, in the determination of the City Council, incurs substantial hardship from
lack of reasonable identification as a result of its location, may be allowed by conditional use permit. The
sign shall not exceed 50 square feet per face and shall conform to the sign setback requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located.
C) Athletic scoreboards shall be allowed as a conditional use in the P- 2 Public Buildings and
Facilities District and shall comply with the following standards:
1) One scoreboard not exceeding 45 feet in height or 1030 square feet in area is allowed per
park or public school athletic field provided that the information on the scoreboard is not visible from any
adjacent public right-of-ways.
2) Video display may be allowed up to 35% of the total scoreboard area and only the score
keeping portion of the scoreboard may utilize an electronic message component.
3) Only game or school related information is permitted on the scoreboard, except that an
organization sponsoring the scoreboard may be displayed on the scoreboard provided the combined
sponsorship area shall not exceed 30% of the total scoreboard area.
4) No signage shall be affixed to the back of the scoreboard.
Page 10 of 24
5) Scoreboard shall only be illuminated when events are occurring at the athletic field.
Prior Code, § 9- 23- 5) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11; Ord. 734, passed 04- 07-
2014) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152.465 MASTER SIGNAGE PLANS.
A master signage plan shall be included in any non-residential development plan, site plan/building
permit review, exterior remodel, non-residential planned development district, exterior remodel or other
official plan for developments with more than one individual business or tenant. No permit shall be issued
for an individual sign requiring a permit in a commercial and/ or industrial zoning district where more than
one business or industry will be located until a master signage plan has been approved by the city.
A) The owner/agent shall submit a master signage plan containing the following information:
1) A scaled site plan showing location of buildings, parking lots, driveways and landscaped
areas and an accurate indication on the site plan of the proposed location of present and future signs of
any type, whether requiring a permit or not;
2) Scaled color drawings clearly showing location of sign on building elevation;
3) Computation of the maximum total sign area, the maximum area for individual signs and
the height of signs; and
4) Specifications for color scheme, lettering or graphic style, lighting, location of each sign on
the building, materials and sign proportions.
B) The maximum numbers of signs affixed to a building by each business within the building shall
be controlled by the master signage plan.
C) Other provisions of the plan may contain other restrictions as the owner of the development or
building may reasonably determine.
D) The plan shall be signed by all owners or their authorized agents in a form as required by the
city.
E) All building signs shall have sign band, materials and/ or colors identical to the main primary
business sign.
F) A master signage plan may be amended by filing a new master signage plan that conforms with
all requirements of this subchapter.
G) If a new or amended master signage plan is filed for a property on which existing signs are
located, it shall include a schedule for bringing into compliance, within two years, all signs not
conforming to the proposed amended plan or requirements of this subchapter in effect on the
date of submission.
H) After approval of a master signage plan, no sign shall be erected, placed, painted or
maintained, except in conformance with approved master signage plan and a plan may be
Page 11 of 24
enforced in the same way as provisions of this subchapter. In case of any conflict between the
provisions of a plan and this code, the code shall govern.
Prior Code, § 9- 23- 6) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 466 FREESTANDING SIGN REGULATIONS.
In addition to other applicable regulations of this subchapter, freestanding signs shall be
regulated as follows.
A) Maximum height measurements. Actual height of freestanding signs shall be measured
from the grade of the roadway from which the sign gains its principal exposure or from the grade
level at the sign location except that in no case shall a freestanding sign exceed 30 feet above
grade at the base of the sign.
B) Setback. Except as otherwise specifically provided for herein, freestanding signs, except
accessory signs, shall be set back at least ten feet from any property line. Freestanding signs shall
be located no closer than five feet from driveway or parking spaces. These requirements pertain
to any portion of the sign whether it is the sign board or the supporting structure.
C) Location. A freestanding sign may be located on an adjacent parcel and shall not be
prohibited under § 152.463( I) provided that:
1) Both parcels are under the same ownership.
2) The parcel on which the sign is located is contiguous to the other parcel upon
which the business being advertised is located. Advertising on the sign is limited to advertising
pertaining to the business located on such other parcel.
3) Only one freestanding sign is allowed for both parcels.
Prior Code, § 9- 23- 7) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 719, passed 5- 20-2013) Penalty, see §
152. 999
152. 467 MONUMENT SIGNS FOR RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS.
A monument sign intended to permanently identify a residential development shall be
permitted under the following conditions.
A) There shall be an entity established to the satisfaction of the city such as a homeowners
association, which shall be clearly responsible for the perpetual maintenance of the monument
sign.
B) The monument sign shall not exceed ten feet in height and shall not exceed 40 square
feet of sign area.
Page 12 of 24
C) The monument sign shall be a minimum of 30 feet from any existing or future
residence.
D) The city, at the discretion of the City Council, may deny a permit for a monument sign
where it is determined that the monument sign may create an undue burden upon the city by
virtue of its size, location, building materials or potential need for maintenance.
Prior Code, § 9- 23- 8) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 468 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
Temporary signs other than construction signs and real estate signs may be permitted on a
lot no more than four times in any calendar year for a time period not exceeding a total of 30
days in any calendar year. Temporary signs are regulated as follows.
A) The signs shall not exceed 32 square feet and the advertisement contained on any
temporary sign shall pertain to the business conducted on the premises on which the sign is
erected.
B) Temporary signs shall maintain a ten- foot setback from all property lines.
C) There shall be no more than one temporary sign per business at any one time.
D) No temporary signs shall be erected in a residential zoned district.
E) Banners shall be professionally designed and constructed and shall be attached to the
principal building. Banners shall not be placed above the roofline of the building or across
windows.
F) If any temporary sign is not removed by the expiration date of the permit, the Zoning
Administrator or his or her designee may remove it and charge the costs of removal to the
individual or enterprise responsible or property owner.
Prior Code, § 9- 23- 9) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 469 DEVELOPMENT PROJECT SIGNS.
Sign permits are required for temporary on and off-premise signs for the purpose of
selling/promoting a development project and for providing direction to the project. Regulations
pertaining to the signs shall be as follows.
A) On-premise signs shall not exceed 48 square feet in area per sign; two signs are
permitted if the development is five acres or larger or if the development has more than one
street frontage.
B) Off-premise signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area per sign; evidence of
Page 13 of 24
permission of the property owner for erecting the sign shall be required; there shall be no more
than two signs per development; where signs for two or more developments are located in close
proximity, they shall be placed so as not to obscure the line of vision to the signs from the
roadway motorist.
C) On and off-premise signs shall be set back ten feet from all property lines. The signs
shall be removed when 90% of the units have obtained occupancy permits.
Prior Code, § 9- 23- 10) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11) Penalty, see §
152.999
152. 470 PERMANENT SIGNS.
The following signs are permitted in each specific district and shall be regulated as to size,
location and character according to the requirements set forth as follows.
Zoning Permitted Maximum Max. Sign Areafor Freestanding Sign Additional
District Signage Sign Type ofSignage( Sq Ft) Setbacks( Feet) Regulations
Area for
Lot Wall Signs Freestanding Maximum Minimum
Sign Height Setback
R- 1, R-2, R-3 1 monument
and PRD sign; NA 32 50 8 10
Non- wall signs per side
residential
land uses
R- 1, R-2, R-3 1 wall sign for Message
and PRD each housing limited to
One- and unit NA 2 NA NA NA name and
two- family address and
dwellings noncommercial
speech
R- 1, R-2, R-3 1 monument
and PRD sign per
Subdivision/ development NA NA 40 6 10 Sign shall be
area or 1 30 feet from
identification monument
any existing
sign per
or proposed
arterial street structure
frontage
1- 1, 1- 2 1 freestanding 1. 5 sq. ft. 20% of the
Individual sign perlineal wall area
businesses wall signs foot of lot where 100 20 10
frontage sign( s)
is/ are
Page 14 of 24
Zoning Permitted Maximum Max. Sign Areafor Freestanding Sign Additional
District Signage Sign Type ofSignage( Sq Ft) Setbacks( Feet) Regulations
Area for
Lot Wall Signs Freestanding Maximum Minimum
Sign Height Setback
located not
to exceed
150 sq. ft.
1- 1, 1- 2 1 freestanding 1. 5 sq. ft. 20% of
Multi-tenant sign per per lineal tenant' s
development; foot of lot individual 200 25 10
each tenant frontage wall area per side Master
allowed wall not to signage plan
signage exceed required
150 sq. ft.
C- 1, C-3, P- 1 1 freestanding 1. 5 sq. ft. 20% of the
Individual sign per lineal wall area Hamilton&
businesses wall signs foot of lot where 100 sq. ft. per 20 10 CR 42
frontage sign(s) side Overlay
is/ are Districts
located not regulations
to exceed govern
150 sq. ft.
C- 1, C-3 1 freestanding 20% of the Hamilton&
Multi-tenant sign per wall area CR 42
development where 200 30 10 Overlay
each store sign(s) per side Districts
allowed wall is/ are regulations
signage located not govern
to exceed Master
150 sq. ft. signage plan
required
P- 2
1 freestanding 1. 5 sq. ft. 20% of the
sign per street per lineal wall area Hamilton&
frontage foot of lot where CR 42
Walls signs frontage sign(s) 100 sq. ft. per Overlay
is/ are side Districts
located not
20 10
regulations
to exceed govern
150 sq. ft.
C-2 1 freestanding 2 sq. ft. per 20% of the 150 25 10
Individual sign lineal foot wall area per side Hamilton&
businesses wall signs of lot where CR 42
frontage sign(s) Overlay
is/ are Districts
located not regulations
to eceed govern
150 sq. ft.
C-2 1 freestanding 2 sq. ft. per 20% of the Hamilton&
sign per lineal foot wall area CR 42
Page 15 of 24
Zoning Permitted Maximum Max. Sign Areafor Freestanding Sign Additional
District Signage Sign Type ofSignage( Sq Ft) Setbacks( Feet) Regulations
Area for
Lot Wall Signs Freestanding Maximum Minimum
Sign Height Setback
Multi-tenant development of lot where 200 30 10 Overlay
each store frontage sign(s) per side Districts
allowed wall is/ are regulations
signage located not govern
to esceed Master
150 sq. ft. signage plan
required
BP 1 monument 1. 5 sq. ft. 10% of 80
Individual sign per lineal wall area per side
businesses wall signs foot of lot which 6 10
frontage fronts a
public
street not
to exceed
200 sq. ft.
BP 1 monument 1. 5 sq. ft. 10% of 80 Master
Multi-tenant sign per lineal wall area per side Signage Plan
wall signs foot of lot which 6 10 required
frontage fronts a
public
street not
to exceed
200 sq. ft.
Prior Code, § 9- 23- 11) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 641, passed 4- 7- 2008; Ord. 692,
passed 10- 17- 11) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 471 DYNAMIC DISPLAYS.
A) Studies show that there is a correlation between dynamic displays on signs and the
distraction of highway drivers. Distraction can lead to traffic accidents. Drivers can be distracted
not only by a changing message, but also by knowing that the sign has a changing message.
Drivers may watch a sign waiting for the next change to occur. Drivers are also distracted by
messages that do not tell the full story in one look. People have a natural desire to see the end of
the story and will continue to look at the sign in order to wait for the end. Additionally, drivers
are more distracted by special effects used to change the message, such as fade- ins and fade- outs.
Finally, drivers are generally more distracted by messages that are too small to be clearly seen or
that contain more than a simple message. Time and temperature signs appear to be an exception
to these concerns because the messages are short, easily absorbed, and become inaccurate
without frequent changes.
B) Despite these public safety concerns, there is merit to allowing new technologies to
Page 16 of 24
easily update messages. Except as prohibited by state or federal law, sign owners should have the
opportunity to use these technologies with certain restrictions. The restrictions are intended to
minimize potential driver distraction and to minimize proliferation in residential districts where
signs can adversely impact residential character.
C) Local spacing requirements could interfere with the equal opportunity to use such
technologies and are not included. Without those requirements, however, there is the potential
for numerous dynamic displays to exist along any roadway. If more than one dynamic display
can be seen from a given location on a road, the minimum display time becomes critical. If the
display time is too short, a driver could be subjected to a view that appears to have constant
movement. This impact would obviously be compounded in a corridor with multiple signs. If
dynamic displays become pervasive and there are no meaningful limitations on each sign's
ability to change frequently, drivers may be subjected to an unsafe degree of distraction and
sensory overload. Therefore, a longer display time is appropriate.
D) A constant message is typically needed on a sign so that the public can use it to identify
and find an intended destination. Changing messages detract from this way-finding purpose and
could adversely affect driving conduct through last-second lane changes, stops, or turns, which
could result in traffic accidents. Accordingly, dynamic displays generally should not be allowed
to occupy the entire copy and graphic area of a sign.
E) In conclusion, the city finds that dynamic displays should be allowed on signs but with
significant controls to minimize their proliferation and their potential threats to public safety.
1) Regulations. Dynamic displays on signs are allowed subject to the following
conditions:
a) Dynamic displays are allowed only on advertising/billboard/non- accessory
signs, monument signs and pylon signs. Dynamic displays may occupy no more than 40% of the
actual copy and graphic area. The remainder of the sign must not have the capability to have
dynamic displays, even if not used. Only one, contiguous dynamic display area is allowed on a
sign face.
b) A dynamic display may not change or move more often than once every 8
minutes, except one for which changes are necessary to correct hour- and-minute, date, or
temperature information. Time, date, or temperature information is considered one dynamic
display and may not be included as a component of any other dynamic display. A display of
time, date, or temperature must remain for at least 8 minutes before changing to a different
display, but the time, date, or temperature information itself may change no more often than once
every three seconds. The face of a sign displaying time, date or temperature may not exceed 50
square feet.
c) The images and messages displayed must be static, and the transition from one
static display to another must be instantaneous without any special effects.
d) The images and messages displayed must be complete in themselves, without
Page 17 of 24
continuation in content to the next image or message or to any other sign.
e) Every line of copy and graphics in a dynamic display must be at least seven
inches in height on a road with a speed limit of 25 to 34 miles per hour, nine inches on a road
with a speed limit of 35 to 44 miles per hour, 12 inches on a road with a speed limit of 45 to 54
miles per hour, and 15 inches on a road with a speed limit of 55 miles per hour or more. If there
is insufficient room for copy and graphics of this size in the area allowed under subsection ( a)
above, then no dynamic display is allowed.
f) Dynamic displays must be designed and equipped to freeze the device in one
position if a malfunction occurs. The displays must also be equipped with a means to
immediately discontinue the display if it malfunctions, and the sign owner must immediately
stop the dynamic display when notified by the city that it is not complying with the standards of
this chapter.
g) Dynamic displays must comply with the brightness standards contained in
152.472.
h) Dynamic displays existing on April 7, 2008 must comply with the operational
standards listed above. An existing dynamic display that does not meet the structural
requirements in subsection ( a) above may continue as a non-conforming development subject to
152.067. An existing dynamic display that cannot meet the minimum size requirement in
subsection ( e) must use the largest size possible for one line of copy to fit in the available space.
2) Incentives.
a) An owner of a non- accessory sign legally in existence on October 22, 2011
may obtain a permit to modify one face of such sign to an enhances dynamic display if the
requirements of this section are met including but not limited to the requirements of subsection
1) of this division. The enhanced dynamic display permit will allow a dynamic display to
occupy 100% of the potential copy and graphic area of the sign face and to change no more
frequently than once every 20 minutes. The designated sign must also meet all other
requirements of this chapter. The applicant must comply with the following requirements:
1. The applicant agrees in writing to permanently remove, within 15 days
after issuance of the permit, at least one other non- accessory sign legally in existence on October
22, 2011 that is owned or leased by the applicant, and that satisfies the criteria of subsections 2
through 4. This removal must include the complete removal of the structure and foundation
supporting the sign. The applicant must agree that the city may remove the sign if the applicant
does not timely do so, and the application must be accompanied by a cash deposit or letter of
credit acceptable to the City Attorney sufficient to pay the city' s costs for that removal. The
applicant must also agree that it is removing the sign voluntarily and that it has no right to
compensation for the removed sign under any law.
2. The city has not previously issued an enhanced dynamic display permit
based on the removal of the particular sign relied upon in this permit application.
Page 18 of 24
3. The removed copy and graphic area is equal to or greater than the area of
the copy and graphic area for which the enhanced dynamic display permit is sought.
4. If the removed sign is one for which a state permit is required by state law,
the applicant must surrender its permit to the state upon removal of the sign. The sign that is the
subject of the enhanced dynamic display permit cannot begin to operate until proof is provided to
the city that the state permit has been surrendered.
5. The applicant must agree in writing that no dynamic displays will ever be
used on one additional non-accessory sign it owns that was legally in existence on
October 22, 2011. This agreement will be binding on the applicant and all future
owners of the sign. If the sign is subsequently removed or destroyed and not
replaced, the holder of the enhanced dynamic display permit is not required to
substitute a different sign for the one that no longer exists.
Ord. 641, passed 4- 7- 2008; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11) § Penalty, see 152. 99
152. 472 BRIGHTNESS STANDARDS.
A) All signs must meet the following brightness standards in addition to those in
152.463:
1) No sign may be brighter than is necessary for clear and adequate visibility.
2) No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance as to impair the vision of a motor
vehicle driver with average eyesight or to otherwise interfere with the driver' s operation of a
motor vehicle.
3) No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance that it interferes with the
effectiveness of an official traffic sign, device or signal.
B) The person owning or controlling the sign must adjust the sign to meet the brightness
standards in accordance with the city' s instructions. The adjustment must be made immediately
upon notice of non-compliance from the city. The person owning or controlling the sign may
appeal the city' s determination through the following appeal procedure:
1) After making the adjustment required by the city, the person owning or controlling
the sign may appeal the city' s determination by delivering a written appeal to the City Clerk
within ten days after the city' s non- compliance notice. The written appeal must include the name
of a person unrelated to the person and business making the appeal, who will serve on the appeal
panel.
2) Within five business days after receiving the appeal, the city must name a person
who is not an official or employee of the city to serve on the appeal panel. Within five business
days after the city names its representative, the city' s representative must contact the sign
owner' s representative, and the two of them must appoint a third member to the panel, who has
no relationship to either party.
Page 19 of 24
3) The appeal panel may develop its own rules of procedure, but it must hold a
hearing within five business days after the third member is appointed. The city and the sign
owner must be given the opportunity to present testimony, and the panel may hold the hearing, or
a portion of it at the sign location. The panel must issue its decision on what level of brightness is
needed to meet the brightness standards within five business days after the hearing commences.
The decision will be binding on both parties.
C) All signs installed after April 7, 2008 that will have illumination by a means other than
natural light must be equipped with a mechanism that automatically adjusts the brightness in
response to ambient conditions. These signs must also be equipped with a means to immediately
turn off the display or
lighting if it malfunctions, and the sign owner or operator must immediately turn off the sign or
lighting when notified by the city that it is not complying with the standards in this section.
Ord. 641, passed 4- 7- 2008) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 473 DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
All signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following
standards.
A) All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of the Building Code and Electrical
Code.
B) Unless otherwise noted, all signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall
be permanently attached.
C) All signs shall contain current information. Outdated signs or signs outdated with
information
shall be removed by the property owner.
D) Painting, repainting, cleaning and normal maintenance and repair of a sign or sign
structure is required to protect the sign and prevent its deterioration and maintain its neat
appearance. The maintenance is allowed without permit unless a structural change is made.
E) All signs shall be maintained in good condition and the areas around them kept free
from debris, high weeds and from anything else that would constitute a nuisance.
F) All signs shall be constructed in such a manner and of such material that they shall be
safe and substantial, provided that nothing in this section shall be interpreted as authorizing the
erection or construction of any sign not now permissible under the zoning or building provisions
of the city code. All signs must be maintained in a safe non- deteriorating manner. Cracked,
broken or bent glass, plastic, wood or metal and burnt- out light bulbs and peeling, faded, or
cracked paint must be repaired, replaced, or removed.
Prior Code, § 9- 23- 15) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
Page 20 of 24
152. 474 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS.
A) City Council approval of a Planned Unit Development District (PDD) may specify that
sign regulations of a particular zoning district shall apply to the new PUD, or the approval may
incorporate separate sign regulations tailored to the needs of the new Planned Unit Development.
B) In the event new sign standards are approved for a phased development, subsequent
sign applications shall be reviewed by Zoning Administrator or his or her designee to determine
compliance with PUD sign regulations.
Prior Code, § 9- 23- 12) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 475 SIGN PERMITS.
A) Permits. Except as provided in § 152.462 of this subchapter, no person, company,
organization or club shall hereinafter install, erect, alter, remodel or move any sign in the
corporate limits of Savage without first obtaining from the city a sign permit as provided in this
code. In addition, freestanding signs are considered to be structures and shall meet requirements
of the Building Code including inspection by Building Inspector. A sign permit may be issued to
the owner or occupant of the premises/property on which a sign is to be installed or displayed, or
to the owner or installer or to a licensed contractor upon completion of application form and
payment of fees.
B) Fees. Permit fees shall be as established by ordinance and shall be in the amounts as the
Council determines in its reasonable discretion to be necessary to finance the administration and
enforcement of this subchapter.
C) Application for issuance ofsign permit.
1) Application for a sign permit shall be made to the city on a prescribed application
form, obtainable from the Planning Department office, containing the following information:
a) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and property owner;
b) Survey or site plan showing location of building structure or location on lot to
which or upon which the sign or sign structure is to be attached or erected;
c) An elevation drawing showing the method of attachment, construction, design
and other information such as stress as may be necessary so that the Zoning Administrator may
determine the compliance of the sign with this subchapter;
d) Height above grade of sign, dimensions and square footage of sign area;
e) Underwriter Laboratories label if an electrical sign;
f) Name of person, firm, corporation or association erecting structure; and
Page 21 of 24
g) Such other information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator.
2) It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator or his or her designee upon filing
of an application for a sign permit, to examine such plans and specifications and other data; and
if it appears that the proposed structure is in compliance with all requirements of this subchapter
and all other laws and regulations of the city, then he or she shall grant the sign permit. In
addition, all illuminated signs shall be subject to the provisions of the State Electrical Code and
shall comply with the underwriter' s standard as defined in the current Underwriter Laboratories
Standard for safety, electric sign.
D) Double fees. Where work for which a permit is required by this subchapter is started or
proceeded with prior to obtaining a permit, the fee as provided by the sign regulations shall be
doubled.
Payment of such double fee shall neither relieve any persons from fully complying with the
requirements of this subchapter in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties
prescribed herein.
E) Permits null and void. If the work authorized under a sign permit has not been
completed within six months after the date of issuance, the permit shall expire automatically and
renewal of the permit shall be required.
F) General application procedures. Section 152.027 ( A) and (F) of this chapter, relating to
general application procedures, applies to applications for sign permits.
Prior Code, § 9- 23- 13) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
Page 22 of 24
152. 476 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
Existing signs that do not meet the requirements of this subchapter at the time of its adoption
shall be considered as nonconforming and shall with § 152. 067 comply with the following
regulations:
A) The use of any nonconforming sign may continue, including through repair,
replacement, restoration, maintenance or improvement, but not including expansion, unless:
1) The use of the nonconforming sign is discontinued for a period of more than one
year; or
2) Any nonconforming sign is destroyed by fire or other peril to the extent of greater
than 50%
of its market value, and no sign permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the sign is
damaged. In this case, the city may impose reasonable conditions upon a sign permit in order to
mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent property.
B) All non-conforming signs are subject to the requirements of this subchapter regarding
nuisances, public health, welfare, and safety.
Prior Code, § 9- 23- 14) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 477 ENFORCEMENT.
The Zoning Administrator or designee is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the
provisions of this subchapter.
A) Notification. The Zoning Administrator or designee shall notify the applicant for any
sign permit of any violation of this subchapter. The applicant shall then correct the violation
within the time specified on written notice.
B) Violations andfines. If the Zoning Administrator or designee shall find that any sign or
signs regulated by this subchapter is or are prohibited as to size, location, content, type, number,
height or method of construction, or if any sign has been constructed or erected without a permit
first being granted for the sign or is in violation of any other provision of this subchapter, he or
she shall give
written notice of the violation to the owner or permittee thereof. If the permittee or owner fails to
remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the provisions set forth in this subchapter within
five calendar days following receipt of this notice:
1) Such sign shall be deemed to be a nuisance and may be abated by the city pursuant
to the authority granted under M.S. § 412.221, Subd. 23 and Chapter 429 and may further
undertake proceedings taken under M.S. Chapter 429, as it may be amended from time to time,
and the cost of abatement, including administration expenses, may be levied as a special
assessment against the property upon which the sign is located; or
Page 23 of 24
2) Any person who violates any of the provisions of this code shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Each day the violation continues shall be considered as a separate offense.
Prior Code, § 9- 23- 16) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 478 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS AND VARIANCES.
The procedures for obtaining approval for signs requiring conditional use permits and for
variances from the provisions of this subchapter shall be as established by §§ 152. 031 and
152. 033 respectively.
Prior Code, § 9- 23- 17) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
Page 24 of 24
PARKING REQUIREMENTS
152.490 Purpose
152.491 Application
152.492 Change of use
152.493 Existing facilities
152.494 Use of parking facilities
152.495 Location
152.496 Calculation of requirements
152.497 Parking area design and maintenance
152.498 Specific off-street parking requirements
152.499 Shared parking
152.500 Off-site parking
152. 501 Parking deferment
152.502 Off-street loading
152. 490 PURPOSE.
Parking and loading regulations are established to alleviate or prevent congestion of the
public right- of-way, to provide for the parking and loading needs of uses and structures, to
enhance the compatibility between parking and loading areas and their surroundings, and to
regulate the number, design, maintenance and location of required off-street parking and loading
spaces, and access driveways and aisles.
Prior Code, § 9- 24- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 491 APPLICATION.
The regulations and requirements set forth herein shall apply to all off-street parking and
loading facilities in all zoning districts of the city, with the exception that properties located
within the Hamilton Overlay District are subject only to the provisions identified in §§ 152. 380
through 152.389.
Prior Code, § 9- 24- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 492 CHANGE OF USE.
No change of use or occupancy of land already dedicated to a parking area, parking spaces
or loading spaces shall be made, nor shall any subdivision of land be made which reduces area
necessary for parking, parking stalls or parking requirements below the minimum proscribed by
this subchapter. Any change of use or occupancy of any building or buildings, including
additions thereto, requiring more parking area shall not be permitted until there is furnished
additional parking spaces as required by this subchapter.
Prior Code, § 9- 24- 3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
Page 1 of 14
152. 493 EXISTING FACILITIES.
Existing parking and loading facilities shall not be reduced below the requirements for a
similar new use or, if less than the requirements for a similar new use, they shall not be reduced
further.
Prior Code, § 9- 24- 4) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 494 USE OF PARKING FACILITIES.
A) Required parking and loading spaces and the driveways providing access to them shall
not be used for open storage, storage of inoperable vehicles, storage of snow or for sale or rental
of goods, except as specifically permitted by this subchapter.
B) No commercial motor vehicle that is 22 feet or more in length or over 10, 000 pounds
gross weight capacity, no semi-trailer, truck tractor or combination thereof, and no commercially
licensed trailer shall be parked or stored in a residential district except when loading, unloading
or rendering a service. Under no circumstances shall parking facilities accessory to residential
structures be used for open storage/parking of commercial vehicles nor for open parking of
automobiles belonging to the employees, owner, tenant or customers of business or
manufacturing establishments, except that tow trucks, utility trucks or similar vehicles may be
parked at a private residence for the purpose of emergency preparedness, but only for the period
of time in which the resident operator is on call. In all cases, no more than one permitted
commercial vehicle shall be parked on a residential lot at any given time.
C) The number of passenger automobiles or permitted commercial vehicles, as set forth by
division (B) above, parked at a residence may not exceed the number that can be garaged and
parked within permitted off-street parking spaces. Those vehicles parked on the driveway that
are not garaged must be currently licensed, operable and in good repair. In cases of permitted
two-family and multi-family dwellings, the same shall apply.
D) Up to three recreational vehicles, as defined in § 152. 012, may be parked in a residential
district provided that:
1) The vehicles are immediately operable, without need of repair, and are currently
licensed and/ or registered to the occupant of the premises upon which they are stored;
2) The vehicles are located in a rear or side yard, or portion of a driveway in the rear
or side yard, and provide a five-foot setback from property lines, except when screened from eye
level view from public right-of-way or adjacent property by a 90% opaque screening fence and
provided that the parking space is kept free of weeds and mowed regularly;
3) During periods of seasonal use, the vehicles may be located completely on an
established driveway within the required setback, provided that:
Page 2 of 14
a) The vehicle is kept entirely on the vehicle owner' s property;
b) The vehicle does not obstruct the public sidewalk;
c) The vehicle does not by any part enter or protrude into the public right- of-way;
and
d) The total number of RVs on driveways is limited to two.
4) Recreational vehicles parked outside of an enclosed building within a residential
district may not exceed 34 feet in length, except as follows:
a) Recreational vehicles greater than 34 feet in length may be parked at a
residential location for a period not to exceed eight hours, provided that all other requirements of
this subchapter, and Chapter 71 of this code, are met.
b) Extended outdoor storage of RVs greater than 34 feet in length may be
permitted by conditional use permit. In these cases the applicant shall demonstrate that the
vehicle is limited from the view of neighboring dwellings through screening or setback from the
neighboring dwelling or a combination thereof.
5) For the purposes of this section, a utility trailer shall be considered a recreational
vehicle provided that it is not used on a regular basis in support of a commercial operation.
Further, snowmobiles, ATVs and other vehicles parked on a trailer shall constitute one
recreational vehicle for enumeration purposes; and
6) A permitted or exempted commercial vehicle, as defined in division (B) above,
shall be counted as a recreational vehicle for the enumeration purposes of this section.
E) No motor vehicle repair work of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with
exposed off-street parking facilities, except for temporary (not exceeding 14 days) minor repairs
of vehicles owned by the occupant or resident of the principal use for which the parking space is
intended. No exterior storage of car parts is allowed at any time.
F) Passenger automobiles and recreational vehicles may be advertised " For Sale" within a
residential area provided the vehicle is owned by the property owner where the vehicle is parked
and the vehicle is currently licensed, operable and parked entirely on a hard surfaced driveway.
At no time shall any commercially licensed vehicle be parked within a residential area advertised
For Sale." The number of vehicles sold from a residential location within a given year shall not
exceed that allowed by the Minnesota Department of Public Safety.
G) Passenger, commercial and recreational vehicles shall not be displayed " For Sale"
within nonresidential districts unless part of an approved sales dealership or for short-term
parking (eight hours or less) if the vehicle is owned by an employee of the business where the
vehicle is parked. Used car/vehicle sales may only be allowed when they are in integral part of a
new car dealership.
Page 3 of 14
Prior Code, § 9- 24- 5) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 577, passed 6- 21- 2004) Penalty, see
152.999
152. 495 LOCATION.
All accessory off-street parking and loading facilities as required by this subchapter shall be
located and restricted as follows.
A) Required off-street parking and loading spaces shall be located on the same lot under
the same ownership as the principal use being served, except under the provisions of §§ 152.499
and 152. 500.
B) The boulevard portion of the public right- of-way shall not be used for parking nor
parking calculation.
C) In the case of single- and two- family residential dwellings, parking shall be prohibited
in any portion of the front, side or rear yard except on designated driveways leading directly into
a garage or one open, hard-surfaced space located on the side of a driveway, away from the
principal use.
D) Off-street parking requirements for multi-family and townhouse residential uses may be
furnished by providing a space so designed within the principal building or detached accessory
structure. Unless alternative provisions are made in compliance with this subchapter, no building
permit shall be issued to convert the parking structure into a dwelling unit or living area or other
activity.
Prior Code, § 9- 24- 6) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 496 CALCULATION OF REQUIREMENTS.
Calculation of the number of parking spaces required shall be in accordance with the
following.
A) The term " floor area" for the purpose of calculating the number of off-street parking
spaces required shall be determined on the basis of the exterior floor dimensions of the building,
structure or use times the number of floors, minus 10%.
B) In churches and other places of public assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy
benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each 22 inches of seating shall be counted as
one seat for the purpose of this subchapter.
C) In cases where parking requirements are based on capacity of persons, capacity shall be
based on the maximum number of persons that may occupy a place, as determined by the State
Building Code. Maximum capacity shall be posted within the establishment. Both indoor and
outdoor seating is included in maximum capacity.
Page 4of14
D) When calculating the number of off-street parking spaces results in a fraction, each
fraction of one- half or more shall require another space.
E) Except in shopping centers or where joint parking requirements have been approved, if
a structure or site contains two or more uses, each use shall be calculated separately in
determining the total off-street parking spaces required.
F) In cases where future potential uses of a building may generate additional parking
demand, the city may require a proof of parking plan for the site, showing how the anticipated
parking demand will be met. The city may permit the additional land area that would be required
for anticipated parking to be placed in reserve as landscaped open space until needed.
Prior Code, § 9- 24- 7) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 497 PARKING AREA DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE.
A) Submission ofparking plan. Any land use application requiring or including the
provision of off-street parking shall include a parking plan. The plan shall be drawn to scale and
fully dimensioned, showing parking facilities to be provided in compliance with this subchapter.
B) Access to parking spaces. Except where accessory to residential uses of up to four units,
required off-street parking areas shall be designed so that circulation between parking bays or
aisles occurs within the designated parking area and does not depend upon a public street or
alley. Access and parking area design that requires backing into a public street is prohibited.
C) Surfacing. All open off-street parking areas, all driveways leading to those parking
areas and all other areas upon which motor vehicles may be located shall be surfaced with
asphalt or concrete.
D) Curbing. Except where accessory to residential uses of up to four units, all driveways
leading to those parking areas, landscaped islands and all other areas upon which motor vehicles
may be located shall have six- inch non- surmountable concrete curbing around the perimeter. In
cases where existing circumstances or area practices make the curbing impractical, the
requirement may be waived or modified subject to submittal of a parking area drainage plan, to
be approved by the City Engineer.
E) Lighting. Lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall comply with the
performance standards identified in § 152. 080. The height of parking lot light poles or standards
shall be no less than 12 feet and no more than the maximum height established for structures in
the zoning district where the lights will be installed.
F) Required setbacks, screening and landscaping. Required setbacks for parking, loading
and driving areas are specified within the individual zoning district chapters. Landscaping and
screening requirements for parking and driving areas are identified in §§ 152. 515 through
152. 523.
Page 5 of 14
G) Driveway access and width standards. All driveways shall be subject to the following.
1) Driveway accesses shall not exceed 32 feet in width at the right-of-way line for
non-residential properties and shall be located so as to cause the least interference with traffic
movement.
2) Residential driveways shall not exceed 24 feet in width at the curb and 27 at the
public street right-of-way line, provided that the driveway between the curb and right-of-way
line shall not exceed in width a straight line connecting these points. Residential driveways
beyond the right-of-way line and on private property shall not exceed 36 feet in width. In
addition to the above, a single 12- foot by 20- foot hard- surfaced area for vehicular turn-around
shall be permitted in the front yard. Circular driveways with two curb cuts serving the same lot
shall conform to all requirements of this subchapter, including but not limited to width, setbacks
and spacing.
3) No access drive to any lot shall be located within 30 feet of any two intersecting
street right-of-way lines.
4) All driveway access points ( public or private) to principal roadways shall comply
with the minimum spacing standards shown below, except when impractical or impossible due to
existing property division, topography or other constraint.
Road Classification Minimum Spacing
STH 101 and STH 13 ( STH 101 to Xenwood Avenue from Lynn Avenue to / z mile (2,640 feet)
east city limits)
STH 13 ( STH 101 to southwest city limits), CSAH42 and CSAH27 1/ 4 mile ( 1, 320
feet)
STH 13 ( Xenwood Avenue to Lynn Avenue) 1/ 8 mile (660 feet)
Other county routes 1/ 8 mile (660 feet)
Collector roadways 1/ 16 mile (330 feet)
5) The maximum driveway slope is 15%.
H) Marking ofparking spaces. All parking areas containing four or more spaces or
containing angled parking shall have the parking spaces and aisles clearly marked on the
pavement, using paint or other approved marking devices approved by the Zoning Administrator.
The markings shall be maintained in a clearly legible condition.
Page 6 of 14
I) Size. The minimum dimensions for required parking spaces are shown in Table 152.497
and Figure 152.497. Minimum dimensions are exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps or
columns. In no case shall any part of the public right-of-way contribute towards required stall
size.
Table 152.497- Minimum Parking Space and Aisle Dimensions
Angle (A) Width (B) Curb Stall Depth 1- Way 2- Way
in Length D) Aisle Aisle
degrees) C Width (E) Width (E
0 9 feet 23 feet 9 feet 12 feet 22 feet
Parallel)
45 9 feet 12 feet 9 19 feet 10 13 feet 22 feet
inches inches
60 9 feet 10 feet 5 21 feet 18 feet 24 feet
inches
90 9 feet 9 feet 18 feet 20 feet 24 feet
A B curb
C JB
D
C
Figure 152. 497 Minimum Parking Space and Aisle Dimensions
J) General maintenance. Parking areas and driveways shall be kept free of dirt, dust and
debris and the pavement shall be maintained in good condition.
K) Accessible parking. Accessible parking spaces for the disabled shall be provided as
required by the State Building Code.
Page 7 of 14
Prior Code, § 9- 24- 8) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 616, passed 11- 6- 2006) Penalty, see
152.999
152. 498 SPECIFIC OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
The following minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided and
maintained by ownership, easement and/ or lease for and during the life of the respective uses
identified in Table 152.498.
Table 152.498- Specific Off-Street Parkin Requirements
Use Minimum Spaces Required
Residential Single- family 2 spaces
Two-family 2 spaces per unit
Multi-family and 2- 1/ 2 spaces per unit; the City Council may require
townhouses additional clustered guest parking for projects with
more than 8 units
Housing for the elderly 1 space per unit
Uses with occupancy
limited to persons age 55
and over)
Residential care facility 2 spaces per unit for uses serving 6 or fewer
Institutional Auditoriums, theatres, 1 space per 3- 1/ 2 seats based upon design capacity
religious institutions, of the facility, plus additional spaces required for
sports arenas adjoined facilities.
Community center, 10 spaces plus 1 space per every 300 square feet
library, museum over 2,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Nursing homes and similar 4 spaces plus 1 for each 4 beds based upon design
establishments capacity
Hospital 1 space per each 3 beds based upon design capacity
School, elementary and 1 space per 7 students based on design capacity
junior high
Page 8 of 14
Table 152.498- Specific Off-Street Parkin Requirements
Use Minimum Spaces Required
School, senior high and 1 space per 3 students based on design capacity,
post high school facilities plus 1 space per classroom
Animal hospital/kennel 5 spaces plus 1 space per 500 sq. ft. over 1, 000 sq.
Commercial ft. of floor area
Industrial Auto convenience facility, 4 spaces plus 2 spaces for each service stall, plus
auto repair other requirements for uses or sale of goods not
directly auto related
Auto sales 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of showroom plus 1 space
for each 3, 000 sq. ft. of outdoor sales lot, plus
additional parking required for ancillary service or
repair.
Auto repair, transportation 8 spaces plus 1 space per 800 sq. ft. of
terminal, boat sales and manufacturing or display floor area over 1, 000 sq.
repair, garden supply or ft.
building material sales
Auto wash Drive-through: 10 spaces
Self-service: 1 space wash bay
None required if accessory to auto convenience
facility
Beauty or barber shop 2 spaces per chair
Bowling alleys 5 spaces per lane plus spaces required for ancillary
uses
Day care facilities In a residential district serving less than 12 persons:
2 spaces per use; all others: 1 space for each 4
persons of licensed capacity
Funeral Homes 1 space per 3 seats based upon design capacity of
assembly area, plus 1 space for every 2 employees
plus 1 space per company vehicle.
Notwithstanding the above a minimum of 10
Page 9 of 14
Table 152.498- Specific Off-Street Parkin Requirements
Use Minimum Spaces Required
parking spaces shall be provided.
Furniture sales 1 space per 400 square feet for first 25, 000 sq. ft. of
floor area, plus 1 space per 600 sq. ft. thereafter
Golf course 4 spaces per hole, plus 50% of the requirements for
any other associated use
Manufacturing 1 space per 350 sq. ft. of floor area, plus 1 space
per company vehicle not stored within the principal
structure
Medical and dental 3 spaces plus 1 for each 250 sq. ft. of floor area
offices, clinics
Motels, hotels and other 1 space per unit, plus 1 space per every 10 units
lodging facilities
Office and professional 3 spaces plus 1 for each 250 sq. ft. of floor area
buildings, banks, public
administration
Restaurants, clubs and 1 space per each 3 seats based upon design capacity
lodges
Restaurants, drive-in or 1 space per 75 sq. ft. of floor area
convenience food
Retail sales 1 space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area
Shopping center 1 space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area
Warehousing Office: 1 space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area
Other: 1 space per 1, 000 sq. ft., plus 1 space per
company vehicle not stored within the principal
structure
Uses not specified or precisely identified Calculated by Zoning Administrator based upon,
but not limited to, characteristics for similar uses
Page 10 of 14
Table 152.498- Specific Off-Street Parkin Requirements
Use Minimum Spaces Required
and professional studies prepared by APA or ITE.
Prior Code, § 9- 24- 9) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001, Ord. 745, passed 11- 17- 2014) Penalty, see
152.999
152. 499 SHARED PARKING.
The city may approve the use of a required off-street parking area for more than one
principal use on the same or an adjacent development site if the following conditions are met.
A) Entertainment uses. Up to 50% of the parking facilities required for a theater, bowling
alley, bar, nightclub or tavern may be supplied by off-street parking facilities provided for
primarily daytime uses, as specified below.
B) Nighttime or Sunday uses. Up to 50% of the off-street parking facilities required for any
use specified below as primarily daytime uses may be supplied by the parking facilities provided
for the following nighttime or Sunday uses: auditoriums incidental to a public or parochial
school, churches, bowling alleys, theaters, bars, nightclubs or taverns ( excluding those with
restaurants) or multi-family apartments.
C) School auditorium and church uses. Up to 80% of the parking facilities required by this
section for a church or an auditorium incidental to a public or parochial school may be supplied
by the parking facilities provided by uses specified below as primarily daytime uses.
D) Daytime uses. For the purpose of this section the following uses are considered as
primarily daytime uses: banks, offices, retail stores, personal service shops, service and repair
shops, manufacturing, wholesale and similar uses.
E) Joint parking. The use for which application is being made for joint parking shall be
located within 400 feet of the use providing the parking facilities.
F) Conflict with operating hours. The applicant shall show that there is no substantial
conflict in the principal operating hours of the buildings or uses for which joint parking is
proposed.
G) Filing required. A legally binding instrument, executed by the parties concerned, for
joint use of off-street parking facilities shall be approved by the City Attorney and filed with the
County Recorder' s office within 60 days after approval of the joint parking use.
Prior Code, § 9- 24- 10) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
Page 11 of 14
152. 500 OFF-SITE PARKING.
Any off-site parking which is used to meet the requirements of this subchapter may, as
applicable, be allowed by conditional use permit for long-term off-site parking, subject to the
provisions of§ 152. 031 or by interim use permit for short- term temporary off-site parking,
subject to the provisions of§ 152. 032. In both cases, the following conditions must be met.
A) Off-site parking shall be developed and maintained in compliance with all requirements
and standards of this subchapter.
B) Reasonable access from off-site parking facilities to the use being served shall be
provided.
C) Except as provided by division (G) below, the site used for meeting the off-street
parking requirements of this subchapter shall be under the same ownership as the principal use
being served or under public ownership.
D) Off-site parking for multiple-family dwellings shall not be located more than 250 feet
from the main public entrance to the principal use being served.
E) Off-site parking for non-residential uses shall not be located more than 500 feet from
any normally used entrance to the principal use served.
F) Any use that depends upon off-site parking to meet the requirements of this chapter
shall maintain ownership and parking utilization of the off-site location until a time as on- site
parking is provided or an alternate off-street parking area, in closer proximity to the principal use
being served, is acquired and developed.
G) Compliance with off-street parking requirements provided through leased off-street
parking may be approved subject to the following additional conditions.
1) The lease shall specify the total number and location of parking spaces under
contract and this number, when combined with any on- site parking provided, must equal or
exceed the total number of spaces required under this subchapter.
2) The lease instrument shall legally bind all parties to the lease and provide for
amendment
or cancellation only upon written approval of the city.
3) The lease agreement shall incorporate any other provisions, as recommended by the
City Attorney, that are deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the intent of this subchapter.
Prior Code, § 9- 24- 11) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
Page 12 of 14
152. 501 PARKING DEFERMENT
The city may allow a reduction in the number of required parking stalls provided that:
A) The proposed use will have a peak parking demand less than the required parking under
152.498. Factors to be considered when reviewing the proposed parking demand shall include,
but not be limited to:
1) Size of building;
2) Type and use;
3) Number of employees;
4) Projected volume and turnover of customer traffic;
5) Projected frequency and volume of delivery or service vehicles;
6) Number of company owned vehicles; and
7) Storage of vehicles on site.
B) In no case shall the amount of parking provided be less than one- half the amount of
parking required under this subchapter;
C) The site has sufficient property under the same ownership to accommodate the
expansion of the parking facilities to meet the minimum requirements of this subchapter should
the parking demand exceed on-site supply. A proof of parking plan in accordance with
152.496( F) shall be required;
D) On-site parking shall only occur in areas designated and constructed for parking in
accordance with this subchapter;
E) The applicant and city enter into a development agreement, to be recorded against the
subject property, which includes a clause requiring the owner to install the additional parking
stalls upon a finding by the City Council that the additional parking stalls are necessary to
accommodate the use; and
F) A change of use will necessitate compliance with the applicable parking standard
identified in this subchapter.
Prior Code, § 9- 24- 12) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 502 OFF-STREET LOADING.
A) Requirements. Off-street loading space shall be provided for any non-residential use
Page 13 of 14
which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar
vehicles, and which will have a gross floor area of 5, 000 square feet or more, according to the
following minimum standards.
1) The off-street loading requirement for buildings with less than 20,000 square feet
GFA may be satisfied by the designation of a loading zone area on the site. This loading zone
area shall be separate from any required off-street parking area, and access to it shall not conflict
with automobile or pedestrian circulation within the site.
2) Buildings with 20, 001 to 50,000 square feet of GFA shall provide one loading
space.
3) Buildings with 50, 001 to 100,000 square feet of GFA shall provide two loading
spaces.
4) Buildings with 100, 001 or more square feet of GFA shall provide one additional
loading space per additional 300,000 square feet GFA.
B) Size and location. The size and location of off-street loading areas shall be subject to the
following standards.
1) Semi-trailer spaces shall be at least 55 feet in length, 12 feet in width and 14 feet in
height plus necessary additional maneuvering space.
2) Access to loading berths or docks shall be no closer than 25 feet from the
intersection of two street right-of-way lines and shall be no closer than 15 feet to a side or rear
lot line. Loading berths and docks shall not face street frontages nor occupy any required yard
bordering a street or residential district, unless fully screened from view.
3) All loading spaces and driveways shall be surfaced in accordance with the
standards identified in § 152.497( C) for off-street parking areas and driveways.
4) All loading spaces shall be provided in a location where it is not necessary to utilize
the public right-of-way for access to the space.
5) Any area allocated as a required loading berth or access drive so as to comply with
the terms of this subchapter shall not be used for the storage of goods, inoperable vehicles nor be
included as a part of the area necessary to meet the off-street parking area.
Prior Code, § 9- 24- 13) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
Page 14 of 14
LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
152. 515 Purpose
152. 516 General requirements
152.517 Landscape and screening plan required
152. 518 Landscape design requirements
152.519 Landscaping requirements; single- and two- family residential uses
152. 520 Landscaping requirements; all other uses
152. 521 Residential buffer yards
152. 522 Screening requirements
152. 523 Selection, installation and maintenance requirements
152. 515 PURPOSE.
Landscaping and screening requirements are established to foster aesthetically pleasing
developments that will protect and preserve the appearance, character, health, safety and welfare
of the community. Specifically, these regulations are intended to increase the compatibility of
adjacent land uses requiring a buffer or screen between uses, to minimize the harmful impact of
noise, dust, debris, motor vehicle headlight glare or other artificial light intrusions, and other
objectionable activities or impacts conducted or created by an adjoining or nearby use.
Prior Code, § 9- 25- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 516 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
In addition to the specific landscape standards established elsewhere in this subchapter, all
development sites shall meet the following requirements.
A) Finished sites. All pervious land areas shall be brought to finished grade and planted in
sod, native grasses or other appropriate ground covers. Undisturbed areas containing existing
viable natural vegetation may be left in their natural state, but shall be kept free of litter, debris
and noxious and unsightly weeds.
B) Sodding/seeding requirements. Sod shall be required between the curb and property
line, and within front and side yards which have been disturbed. Seeding or other acceptable
ground cover may be permitted in front, rear and side yards provided that adequate cover is
provided within one growing season to prevent erosion or disruption.
C) Relationship to tree preservation chapter. The tree planting requirements of this
subchapter shall be in addition to, and shall not count towards, any tree replacement that is
required by the Urban Forest and Shade Tree Management Chapter, Chapter 102 of the city
code.
Prior Code, § 9- 25- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
Page 1 of 9
152. 517 LANDSCAPE AND SCREENING PLAN REQUIRED.
All plans submitted in support of a site plan review, conditional use or other development
proposal shall include a landscape and screening plan demonstrating compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter. All development plans that require approval by the City Council
and have a construction cost of over $500,000 shall require that the plans be prepared by a
licensed landscape architect. The landscape and screening plan shall include the following
information:
A) A planting schedule indicating symbols, quantities, common and botanical names, sizes
of plant material and special planting instructions;
B) Location, type and size of all existing significant trees to be removed or preserved;
C) Planting detail, showing all species to scale at normal mature crown diameter or spread
for local hardiness zone;
D) Typical sections with details of fences, tie walls, berms and other site amenities;
E) Typical sections with details of landscape islands, planter beds and foundation plantings
with identification of materials used;
F) Note indicating how disturbed soil areas will be restored through the use of seeding,
sodding or other techniques;
G) Delineation of both sodded and seeded areas;
H) Where landscape or man-made materials are used to provide screening from adjacent
and neighboring properties, a cross- through section shall be provided showing the perspective of
the site from the neighboring property at the property line elevation; and
I) Existing or proposed conditions that could potentially affect landscaping and screening
of the site.
Prior Code, § 9- 25- 3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 518 LANDSCAPE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
Landscape design shall serve to provide visually interesting open space, to reduce the
potential negative impact of development on adjacent land uses, and to facilitate the preservation
and reestablishment of plants native to the region. The following design criteria shall be
considered as part of the landscape plan submittal to the city:
A) The overall composition and location of landscaped areas should complement the scale
of the development and its surroundings;
Page 2 of 9
B) Plant materials should be selected and arranged to prevent blocking or obscuring of
required site lighting during all stages of plant growth;
C) Plantings at intersections or driveway entrances shall be arranged to allow a
permanently clear, safe sight distance;
D) Trees or shrubs shall not be planted under existing or proposed utility lines when their
ultimate height may interfere with the lowest lines;
E) Trees and shrubs shall not be placed over underground drainage and shall maintain
adequate distance from storm sewers, sanitary sewers and water lines to prevent roots from
entering the facilities;
F) Landscaped areas should be of adequate size to promote proper plant growth and to
protect plantings from pedestrian traffic, vehicle traffic and other types of concentrated activity;
G) Earthen berms and existing topography should, whenever practical, be incorporated into
the landscape treatment of a site;
H) Landscaped areas and plantings should be located in a manner to prevent spread onto
adjacent properties or right- of-way and to allow adequate room for proper maintenance;
I) A variety of tree and shrub species should be utilized to provide visual, four-season
interest. Not more than one- third of the required number of trees or shrubs may be comprised of
any one species and at least one-third of the plantings must be of a coniferous or evergreen
species; and
J) Final slopes greater than a three to one ratio will not be permitted without special
approval or treatment, such as special seed mixtures or reforestation, terracing or retaining walls.
Prior Code, § 9- 25- 4) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 519 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS; SINGLE- AND TWO-FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL USES.
Construction of new single-family and two- family housing units shall require the following.
A) The planting of two trees per dwelling unit, one of which must be a deciduous shade
tree.
B) When two or more healthy, significant trees are present per dwelling unit, no trees are
required to be planted. For the purpose of this section, a significant tree shall be any healthy
deciduous shade tree ( except Russian olive, cottonwood, boxelder, mulberry and elm) that
measures six inches or more in diameter or any healthy coniferous ( evergreen) tree that measures
four inches or more in diameter.
Page 3 of 9
C) Trees shall be planted only on private property, within a front, side or rear yard, and
shall not be planted in utility or drainage easements.
D) A cash escrow specifically for the planting of required trees shall be part of a combined
final turf, grade and tree escrow. The escrow amount shall be established by the City Council and
shall be refunded when all of the following are completed:
1) Required trees are installed;
2) Final grade requirements are completed; and
3) Ground cover requirements are completed.
Prior Code, § 9- 25- 5) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 520 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS; ALL OTHER USES.
With the exception of single-family and two-family residential uses, park/open space uses
and properties within the Hamilton Overlay District and I-2, Flood Plain Limited Industrial
District, all uses of land shall provide landscaping as follows.
A) Foundation plantings. At least 50% of each principal structure shall be sodded or
landscaped with approved ground cover and shrubbery within an area of no less than three feet in
width.
B) Interior landscaping ofparking lots. In all parking areas, including those for the sale
and display of autos, trucks and other types of vehicles, that contain more than 50 parking
spaces, planting islands must be provided to occupy a minimum of 3% of the parking area,
subject to the following:
1) The interior dimensions of any planting area or landscaped islands shall be a
minimum of 150 square feet in area;
2) Each planting island shall contain at least one tree that provides shade or is capable
of providing shade upon maturity. Planting islands that contain a light pole shall provide an
ornamental tree that will not interfere with lighting upon maturity. The remainder of the
landscaped area shall be covered with turf grass, native grasses, ground cover or other perennial
flowering plants, vines, shrubs or trees. If landscape rock or bark is to be utilized, provision
should be made to prevent material from spilling into the parking area;
3) Each landscaped island shall be protected by vertical curbs or similar structures and
shall be designed and grouped into a parking area to create defined aisles and entrances for
on- site traffic circulation; and
Page 4 of 9
4) Landscape aisles or strips between parallel parking rows shall be a minimum of ten
feet in width. When incorporating pedestrian walkways, the strips shall be increased to at least
20 feet in width to accommodate vehicle overhangs, walkways, light posts and other
appurtenances. Landscape aisles and strips shall include medium to large deciduous trees at a
minimum of one tree every 30 linear feet, in addition to other parking lot landscape
requirements.
C) Perimeter landscape requirements.
1) Within the front and corner side yards where a street right- of-way separates a
nonresidential use from property zoned for residential use, a continuous 15- foot landscape area
shall be provided with landscaping at a rate of one deciduous shade or coniferous/ evergreen tree
for every 30 feet of linear street frontage and one deciduous ornamental tree for every three
required deciduous shade or evergreen trees. Screening shall be provided through berming and
shrub plantings across 100% of the street frontage to a minimum height of three feet, as
measured from the grade of the parking lot or adjacent street curb, whichever is the higher
elevation.
2) Within the front and corner side yards where a street right- of-way separates a
nonresidential use from property zoned for another non-residential use or where a street
right-of-way separates a multi-family residential use from property zoned for another residential
use, a continuous 15- foot landscape area shall be provided with landscaping at a rate of one
deciduous shade or coniferous/ evergreen tree for every 50 feet of linear street frontage and one
deciduous ornamental tree for every three required deciduous shade or evergreen trees.
Screening shall be provided through berming and shrub plantings across 100% of all parking and
vehicular areas to a minimum height of three feet, as measured from the grade of the parking lot
or adjacent street curb, whichever is the higher elevation.
3) Within rear and interior side yards, a landscaped berm or berm/fence combination
shall be provided at a minimum height of six feet where a non-residential use abuts a property
zoned for residential use. The area shall require landscaping at a rate of one deciduous shade or
coniferous/ evergreen tree for every 30 feet of linear property line and one deciduous ornamental
tree for every three required deciduous shade or evergreen trees. The screening and landscaping
shall be located within a continuous landscape area at least 20 feet wide. When a fence is to be
utilized, it shall be constructed of masonry, brick or wood, shall provide a solid screening effect,
and is subject to the requirements for fences as identified in § 152. 077. Requirements for
landscape areas, plantings and screening fences/ berms may be modified by the Planning
Commission and City Council, where either an increase or decrease is clearly warranted.
4) Within rear and interior side yards where a non-residential use abuts property zoned
for non-residential use or where a multi-family use abuts another residential use, a continuous
ten-foot landscape area shall be provided with landscaping at a rate of one deciduous shade or
coniferous/ evergreen tree for every 50 feet of linear property and one deciduous ornamental tree
for every three required deciduous shade or evergreen trees. Screening shall be provided through
berming and shrub plantings across 25% of all parking and vehicular areas to a minimum height
of three feet, as measured from the grade of the parking lot or vehicular area.
Page 5 of 9
Prior Code, § 9- 25- 6) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 734, passed 04- 07- 2014) Penalty, see
152.999
152. 521 RESIDENTIAL BUFFER YARDS.
A) General requirements. A residential buffer yard shall be required along the rear of all
double frontage residential lots that abut a designated collector or arterial street. Whenever a
residential subdivision is proposed that includes those lots, a buffer yard plan shall be submitted
for approval by the city in conjunction with preliminary plat review. Installation of required plan
elements shall be completed by the developer, or, if applicable, by the individual property
owners, prior to issuance of a final certificate of occupancy.
B) Design standards. A required residential buffer yard shall be located along the entire
width of applicable lots to a minimum depth of 20 feet, and shall meet the following standards.
1) Plantings within designated buffer yards shall adhere to the following:
a) Plant material centers shall be located at least three feet from the fence line or
property line and shall not conflict with sidewalks, trails or other public improvements;
b) Landscape screen material shall be planted in two or more staggered rows;
c) Deciduous shrubs shall not be planted more than four feet on center and
evergreen shrubs shall not be planted more than three feet on center; and
d) Deciduous trees intended for screening shall not be planted more than 40 feet
apart and evergreen trees not more than 15 feet apart.
2) All walls and fences erected within designated buffer yards shall adhere to the
following:
a) Only fences and walls formally approved as part of the subdivision and site
plan process will be permitted;
b) At least 50% of the street side of a screening fence shall be landscaped with
plant materials; and
c) Exposed fences shall run a maximum length of 50 feet between landscape
areas or clusters.
3) Earth berms within designated buffer yards shall adhere to the following:
a) Except in areas of steep slopes or where other topographic features will not
permit, as determined by the City Engineer, an earth berm at least four feet in height shall be
installed in all designated buffer yards; and
Page 6 of 9
b) Earth berms shall contain no less than four inches of topsoil and shall not
exceed a three to one slope unless approved by the City Engineer.
C) Maintenance. On-going maintenance of the buffer yard, including landscape materials
and fencing, shall be the responsibility of the individual property owners, or, if applicable, the
homeowner' s association. All necessary repairs and replacement shall be completed in
conformance with the approved buffer yard design.
Prior Code, § 9- 25- 7) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 522 SCREENING REQUIREMENTS.
Site plans or landscaping plans for all multi-family residential, commercial, industrial and
mixed-use developments shall include details regarding enclosure and screening methods, as
required hereunder. For purposes of this section, the phrase screened from public view means not
visible, at any distance, from adjoining properties or any street right- of-way.
A) Refuse and recycling receptacles and enclosures. All waste and recycling receptacles
shall be stored within the principal structure or within an accessory enclosure area, subject to the
following.
1) The enclosure shall be located in the side or rear yard and comply with setback
requirements for accessory structures.
2) The exterior wall treatment of the enclosure shall be of similar color and materials
as the principal structure. Exterior walls shall be at least six feet in height and provide a
minimum opacity of 90%.
3) The enclosure must be accessible to waste and recycling collections vehicles.
4) Landscaping shall be provided surrounding enclosures to screen the structure from
view of the public right- of-way or adjacent residential properties.
B) Mechanical and other equipment. Exterior ground- mounted or building- mounted
equipment including, but not limited to, mechanical equipment, utility meter banks and coolers
shall be screened from public view with landscaping or with an architectural treatment
compatible with the building' s architecture.
C) Rooftop equipment. All rooftop equipment shall be screened from public view with an
architectural treatment that is compatible with the building' s architecture and integral to the
overall appearance of the building. The methods of screening rooftop equipment include, but are
not limited to, encasement or partition screens. Equipment screens shall be required at a height
that is as high or higher than the equipment being screened. The Planning Commission may grant
exceptions to the screening requirements in cases where one of the following criteria are shown
to exist:
Page 7 of 9
1) A building is located at a high elevation in relation to surrounding properties and it
is clearly demonstrated that rooftop equipment will not be visible;
2) A building is located within the middle of an industrial park and rooftop equipment
will not be visible from arterial roadways or residential properties, nor will it have a negative
impact upon any sensitive areas or scenic view or vistas; or
3) A building is sited in a manner that the location and setback of rooftop equipment
from the building edge, in relation to the elevation and visibility of surrounding properties, is so
that the equipment will not be visible from any distance.
D) Outdoor storage. In addition to the standards identified in § 152. 078, outdoor storage
areas shall be screened from view of public right-of-way and surrounding residential or public
use areas, as follows.
1) Required screening shall provide 90% opacity through solid fences or walls,
berming, landscaping or any combination thereof.
2) Screening fences or walls, when utilized, shall be constructed of attractive,
permanent finished materials, compatible with those used in the construction of the principal
structure
3) Planting screens shall consist of healthy, fully hardy plant materials, at least six feet
in height and shall be designed to provide a minimum year-round opaqueness of 90% at the time
of maturity.
Prior Code, § 9- 25- 8) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 523 SELECTION, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
A) In general. All landscaping materials and screening methods depicted on development
plans approved by the city shall be considered as required elements of the project. All plant
materials must meet the standards set by the American Association of Nurserymen and be of a
variety that is indigenous to the hardiness zone in which Savage is located, except that the
following trees are expressly prohibited from being planted:
1) Box elder: Acer negundo;
2) Silver maple: Acer saccharinum;
3) Northern catalpa: Catalpa speciosa;
4) Mulberry. Morus alba;
5) Cottonwood: Populus deltoids ( seedless varieties are acceptable); and
Page 8 of 9
6) Willow: Salax species.
B) Minimum plant size. All required plant materials shall meet the minimum size standards
identified below. For the purposes of determining tree trunk size, the diameter shall be measured
six inches above ground level.
Plant Type Minimum Size
Deciduous shade tree 2-/ z inch diameter
Deciduous ornamental tree
1-/ z inch diameter
Coniferous/ evergreen tree
6 feet in height
Shrubs
5 gallons
C) Installation requirements. Required landscaping shall be considered a site improvement
subject to the performance agreement and guarantee established in § 152. 034( L).
D) Maintenance and care. The developer, its successor and/ or subsequent owners shall be
responsible for the continued maintenance of landscape materials on a continuing basis for the
life of the development. Plant material that exhibits evidence of insect pests, disease or damage
shall be appropriately treated and dead plants promptly removed and replaced within the next
planting season
E) Inspection. All landscaping shall be subject to periodic inspection by the Zoning
Administrator. Landscaping that is not installed, maintained or replaced as needed to comply
with the approved landscape plan shall be considered in violation of the terms of the site plan or
building permit. The landowner shall receive notice of the violation in accordance with code
enforcement requirements as specified in § 152. 035.
Prior Code, § 9- 25- 9) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
Page 9 of 9
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
152. 535 Purpose
152. 536 Findings
152.537 Scope and effect
152. 538 Stormwater requirements
152.539 Stormwater Management Plan requirements for large sites
152. 540 Plan review procedure
152. 541 Approval standards
152. 542 Commercial, industrial, multi-family building permits and residential
subdivisions
152. 543 Residential building permits
152.544 Fees
152. 545 Security
152.546 Inspection and corrective work
152. 547 Interim strategy of Minnesota River (repealed)
152. 548 Stormwater and urban runoff pollution control
152. 549 Stormwater management structure protection
152.550 Lawn fertilizer restrictions
152. 551 Other Controls
152.552 Severability
152. 535 PURPOSE.
This Stormwater Management subchapter is established to promote, preserve and enhance
natural resources within the city and protect them from adverse effects occasioned by poorly
sited development or incompatible activities by regulating land disturbing or development
activities that would have an adverse and potentially irreversible impact on water quality and
unique and fragile environmentally sensitive land; by minimizing conflicts and encouraging
compatibility between land disturbing and development activities and water quality and
environmentally sensitive lands; and by requiring detailed review standards and procedures for
land disturbing or development activities proposed for those areas, thereby achieving a balance
between urban growth and development and protection of water quality and natural areas. The
provisions of this subchapter are adopted pursuant to M.S. § 462.351 to 462.365, as may be
amended from time to time.
Prior Code, § 9- 26- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 747, passed 04- 20- 2015)
152. 536 FINDINGS.
The city hereby finds that uncontrolled and inadequately planned use of wetlands, woodlands,
natural habitat areas, areas subject to soil erosion and areas containing restrictive soils adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare by impacting water quality and contributing
to other environmental problems, creating nuisances, impairing other beneficial uses of
environmental resources and hindering the ability of the city to provide adequate water, sewage,
Page 1 of 20
flood control and other community services. In addition, extraordinary public expenditures may
be required for the protection of persons and property in those areas and in areas that may be
affected by unplanned land usage
Prior Code, § 9- 26- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 747, passed 04- 20- 2015)
152. 537 SCOPE AND EFFECT.
Every applicant for a building permit, subdivision approval, grading plan approval or an
excavation/filling permit, shall comply with the requirements of this subchapter. No building
permit, subdivision approval, grading plan approval or excavation/filling permit, to allow land
disturbing activities shall be issued or allowed until approval of the stormwater management
plan or a waiver of the approval requirement has been obtained in strict conformance with the
provisions of this subchapter. Any party responsible for land disturbances greater than 1 acre is
required to comply with all relevant NPDES Permit requirements.
In addition, every person within the City shall comply with the requirements of Sections
152.548 through 152. 550.
A) Exemptions. The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to:
1) Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved by the
city on or before the effective date of the initial adoption of this subchapter;
2) A lot for which a building permit has been approved on or before the effective date
of the initial adoption of this subchapter;
3) Installation of fence, sign, telephone and electric poles and other kinds of posts or
poles;
4) Emergency work to protect life, limb or property;
5) Any development that will result in less than 5, 000 square feet of new impervious
surface. However, the Site Construction Plan and the Erosion Minimization and Sediment
Control Plan identified in 152. 539 ( E) 5 and 6 are required; or
6) Any development that will result in more than 5, 000 square feet of new impervious
surface but less than 1 acre of total project site drainage area. However, the Site Construction
Plan, the Erosion Minimization and Sediment Control Plan identified in 152. 539( C) and ( E) 5
and 6 and the Stormwater Abstraction Plan identified in 152. 539 ( G) are required.
A) Waiver. The City Council, upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, may
waive any requirement of this subchapter upon making a finding that compliance with the
requirement will involve an unnecessary hardship and the waiver of the requirement will not
adversely affect the established standards and requirements set forth in this subchapter. The City
Council may require as a condition of the waiver, the dedication or construction or agreement to
dedicate or construct property or erosion and sediment control measures as may be necessary, to
adequately meet the standards and requirements.
Page 2 of 20
B) Clearing and Grubbing. Once a stormwater management plan is approved, and erosion
minimization and sediment control practices are installed and approved by the City Engineer,
earth- disturbance may begin consistent with approved plans. Clearing and grubbing may occur
prior to installation of erosion minimization and sediment control practices
Prior Code, § 9- 26- 3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11; Ord. 747, passed
04- 20-2015) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 538 STORMWATER REQUIREMENTS.
The following regulations apply to all persons:
A) Definitions.
1) BMP. Best Management Practices.
2) EROSION. The removal of solid particles from the surface, and the
transportation of the eroded materials by natural processes, primarily wind and/ or water.
3) SEDIMENT. A common term for the particles that have been eroded and
transported.
4) Sedimentation is the deposition of sediment some distance from the original
point of erosion.
5) EROSION MINIMIZATIONAND SEDIMENT CONTROL " EMSC': The
multi-phase process of minimizing the erosive effects of wind and water and controlling the
sediment after erosion has occurred.
6) NPDES PERMIT. The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
Construction Stormwater Permit issued on August 1, 2013.
7) SPEICAL AND IMPARIED WATER. Defined in Part B of Appendix A of the
NPDES Construction Stormwater Permit issued on August 1, 2013.
8) STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN_ The stormwater management plan,
or the applicable portion thereof, required by 152. 539.
9) LARGE SITES. Land disturbances of 1 acre or more or requiring NPDES
Permit coverage.
10) SMALL SITES. Land disturbances of less than 1 acre and not requiring NPDES
Permit coverage.
B) Stormwater requirements.
Page 3 of 20
1) No sediment can leave the site.
2) BMPs shall be based on steepness and length of slopes, drainage area feeding the
slopes, proximity to property boundaries and sensitivity of downstream areas.
3) Redundant sediment devices may be required in unique situations as identified by
the City Engineer.
4) BMPs shall be established as near the area of disturbance as feasible. At a
minimum sediment control BMPs shall be established and maintained completely on the
property of the developer, applicant or permittee.
5) BMPs shall be installed upgradient of any buffer zones.
6) A floating silt curtain placed in the water is not an adequate sediment control
BMP unless it is protecting work within the water or shoreline.
7) Storm drain inlets shall be protected from sediment intrusion with City-approved
BMPs.
8) Discharges from BMPs shall be directed to pervious or vegetated areas to increase
sediment removal and maximize infiltration, unless infeasible due to lack of such areas. Velocity
dissipation shall be provided, if determined by the City Engineer, to minimize erosion.
9) Frozen or snow-covered ground does not negate the requirement for erosion
minimization or sediment control BMPs.
10) Where vehicle traffic leaves any part of the site or onto paved roads within the
site, a vehicle tracking BMP shall be installed. Vehicle tracking BMPs shall consist of a rock pad
or equivalent system consistent with City requirements.
11) For large sites, where 10 or more acres of disturbed area drains to a common
location, temporary sedimentation basins shall be designed and installed consistent with
requirements of Part IILC. of the NPDES Permit.
12) For large sites, a 50- foot natural( existing) buffer shall be maintained from any
down-gradient surface water body if the water body is within 50 feet of the project' s disturbance.
If this buffer is not feasible, redundant sediment controls can be used instead. This buffer is not
required adjacent to road ditches, judicial ditches, county ditches, stormwater conveyance
channels, storm drain inlets or sedimentation basins.
13) All newly constructed ponds and infiltration areas shall have silt fence or other
City-approved sediment control installed at the normal water elevations immediately upon
excavation of the feature to final grade.
Page 4 of 20
C) Dewatering activities.
1) No discharge of sediment laden, or otherwise contaminated water is allowed.
2) Off-site discharge shall not cause erosion or nuisance conditions.
3) If filters with backwash water are being used, the backwash water shall be hauled
away for disposal, returned to the beginning of the treatment process, or incorporated into the
site in a manner that does not cause erosion.
D) Final stabilization. Final stabilization at the site is not complete untilall of the
following requirements have been met:
1) All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and all soils are
stabilized by a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of at least 70 percent of its
expected final growth density over the entire pervious surface area, or other equivalent means
necessary to prevent soil failure under erosive conditions.
2) The permanent stormwater management system is constructed, meets all
requirements in the approved stormwater management plan and is operating as designed.
3) Temporary or permanent sedimentation basins that are to be used as permanent
water quality management basins have been cleaned of any accumulated sediment.
4) All sediment has been removed from conveyance systems and ditches are
stabilized with permanent cover.
5) All temporary synthetic and structural erosion minimization and sediment
control BMPs ( such as silt fence, biorolls, etc.) have been removed from the site.
6) The City of Savage " Homeowner Fact Sheet" has been provided to the
homeowner to inform them of the need for, and benefits of, permanent cover.
E) Inspections and Maintenance for Large Sites
1) Inspections shall be completed once every 7 days and within 24 hours after a
rainfall event greater than 0. 5 inches over 24 hours. Inspections shall be performed and
documented by an individual trained consistent with the requirements of NPDES Permit Part
IILF. Inspections shall be documented on a form that is provided by the City of Savage.
Inspections and documentation required by the City of Savage does not replace or supersede
NPDES requirements.
2) Adjustment of inspection frequency may be appropriate due to closure of a
portion of the site or suspension of activity for winter or other conditions. An adjustment in
inspection frequency shall be requested in writing, and is not effective until approved in writing
by the City Engineer.
Page 5 of 20
3) Inspections shall continue until final stabilization is complete on all disturbed
areas. Once City-required inspections have ceased, NPDES Permittees shall continue inspections
according to the NPDES Permit requirements.
4) All BMPs, structures or features that are found to be in need of maintenance shall
be maintained or replaced by the next business day or as soon as practical thereafter. Sediment
tracked onto offsite pavement shall be removed by the end of the same work day discovered.
5) All infiltration areas shall be inspected to ensure that, if excavated to final grade,
the practice is protected from sediment accumulation. Equipment cannot drive through the
practice and compact the soil.
Prior Code, § 9- 26- 4) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 609, passed 5- 1- 2006; Ord. 636,
passed 10- 15- 2007; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11, Ord. 747, passed 04- 20- 2015) Penalty, see
152.999
152. 539 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS FOR LARGE
SITES.
Stormwater Management Plan. A written stormwater management plan shall be filed with
the Engineering Division prior to issuance of a subdivision approval, grading plan approval or
excavation/ filling permit. A stormwater management plan shall comply with all requirements
of 152.538. A stormwater management plan shall include the following:
A) Construction Activity Description: The description shall be a combination of narrative,
plan sheets, and ( if appropriate) standard detail sheets that address the foreseeable conditions at
each stage in the construction or post construction activities. The stormwater management plan
shall identify the potential for discharge of sediment and/ or other potential pollutants from the
site.
B) Existing site map. A map of existing conditions showing the site and immediately
adjacent areas. The map shall include two sets of clearly legible black lined copies of drawings.
Drawings shall be prepared to a scale appropriate to the site of the project and suitable for the
review to be performed. The plans shall be submitted at a minimum scale of one inch equals 100
feet and shall contain the following information:
1) The name and address of the applicant, the section, township and range, north
point, date and scale of drawing and number of sheets;
2) Location of the tract by an insert map at a scale sufficient to clearly identify the
location of the property and giving information such as the name and numbers of adjoining
roads, railroads, utilities, subdivisions, towns and districts or other landmarks;
3) Existing topography with a contour interval appropriate to the topography of the
land but in no case having a contour interval greater than two feet;
Page 6 of 20
4) A delineation of all streams, rivers, public waters and wetlands located on and
within 1 mile of the project boundaries that will receive stormwater from the construction site,
including any classification given to the water body or wetland by the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources, the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and/ or the United States Army
Corps of Engineers;
5) Location and dimensions of existing stormwater management systems and
natural drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the site, delineating in which direction
stormwater is conveyed from the site, identifying the receiving stream, river, public water or
wetland, and setting forth those areas of the unaltered site where stormwater collects;
6) A description of the soils of the site, including a map indicating soil types of
areas to be disturbed as well as a soil report containing information on the suitability of the soils
for the type of activity and describing any remedial steps to be taken by the developer to render
the soils suitable;
7) Vegetative cover and clearly delineating any vegetation proposed for removal;
and
8) One-hundred-year flood plains, flood fringes and floodways.
C) Site construction plan. A site construction plan including:
1) Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing activities and any
phasing of those activities; and
2) Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt stockpiles;
D) Evidence ofcoverage under the NPDES Permit.
E) Erosion Minimization and Sediment Control(" EMSC') Plan. The EMSC Plan should
include multiple plan sheets, as needed, to be clear and thorough. The following requirements
apply only to large NPDES sites except as specifically noted below. The EMSC Plan shall
comply with all requirements set forth in Section 152. 538.
1) The EMSC Plan shall include a site construction plan showing the locations of
all planned erosion minimization and sediment control BMPs. The BMPs shall meet the
requirements of this subchapter. The EMSC Plan shall include details and specifications of each
BMP. Standard City of Savage Plates/ Details for EMSC are available and should be referenced
where applicable. The Plan shall include the most recent version of the City of Savage
Construction Site Pollution Prevention Notes.
2) As part of the EMSC Plan, the preparer shall identify a person knowledgeable
and experienced in the application of erosion minimization and sediment control BMPs who
will oversee the implementation of the Plan, and the installation, inspection and maintenance of
the BMPs before and during construction. The person responsible for overseeing the
Page 7 of 20
implementation of the EMSC Plan shall be trained by local, state, federal agencies, professional
organizations, or other entities with expertise in erosion prevention, sediment control,
permanent stormwater management and the Minnesota NPDES/ SDS Construction Stormwater
Permit. An update refresher training shall be attended every three ( 3) years. Evidence of this
training shall be included in the EMSC Plan.
3) A chain of responsibility with all operators on the site, or if not known, the title
or position of the responsible party, to ensure that the EMSC Plan will be implemented and stay
in effect until the construction project is complete, the entire site has undergone Final
Stabilization, and a Notice of Termination has been submitted to the MPGA. Once the identity
of the responsible party is known, the EMSC Plan shall be amended to include this information.
4) Identification of who will have the responsibility for long- term operation and
maintenance of the Permanent Stormwater Management System.
5) For all sites, the EMSC Plan shall address each of the following components of
erosion minimization:
a) Areas to be graded or disturbed.
b) BMPs to minimize erosion. BMPs shall be based on steepness and length of
slopes, drainage area feeding the slopes, proximity to property boundaries and sensitivity of
downstream areas.
c) Phasing or timing of grading and BMP installation and removal.
d) Delineation of areas not to be disturbed.
e) The routing of concentrated stormwater around unstable and construction
areas to reduce erosion, to the extent feasible.
f) Energy dissipation devices to be installed in locations where concentrated
stormwater cannot be routed around unstable areas.
6) For all sites, the EMSC Plan shall address each of the following components of
sediment control:
a) Sediment control BMPs to be installed prior to any earth- disturbing activity
and any clearing and/ or grubbing to be performed prior to BMP installation.
b) Phasing or timing of BMP installation and removal.
7) Quantities: Estimated preliminary quantities tabulation anticipated at the start of
the project for the life of the project shall be included for all erosion minimization and sediment
control BMPs ( e. g., linear feet of silt fence or ft2 of erosion control blanket, etc.).
Page 8 of 20
8) Impervious surface: The number of acres of impervious surface for both pre- and
post- construction shall be specified.
9) Final stabilization: Methods to be used for Final Stabilization of all exposed soil
areas shall be described.
10) BMP design factors: The EMSC Plan shall account for the following factors in
designing the temporary erosion minimization and sediment control BMPs:
a) The expected amount, frequency, intensity, and duration of precipitation.
b) The nature of stormwater runoff and run-on at the site, including factors such
as expected flow from impervious surfaces, slopes, and site drainage features.
c) If any stormwater flow will be channelized at the site, the BMPs shall be
designed to control both peak flowrates and total stormwater volume to minimize erosion at
outlets and to minimize downstream channel and streambank erosion.
d) The range of soil particle sizes expected to be present on the site.
11) Soil Management: Methods used to minimize soil compaction and preserve
topsoil shall be described. Minimizing soil compaction is not required where the function of a
specific area of the site dictates that it be compacted.
12) Chemical treatments: Any specific chemicals and the chemical treatment
systems that may be used for enhancing the sedimentation process on the site. If such chemicals
are used, methods for compliance with the following shall be described.
a) Conventional erosion minimization and sediment controls prior to chemical
addition to ensure effective treatment. Chemicals may only be applied where treated stormwater
is directed to a sediment control system which allows for filtration or settlement of the flow
prior to discharge.
b) Chemicals shall be selected that are appropriately suited to the types of soils
likely to be exposed during construction, and to the expected turbidity, pH, and flow rate of
stormwater flowing into the chemical treatment system or area.
c) Chemicals shall be used in accordance with accepted engineering practices,
and with dosing specifications and sediment removal design specifications provided by the
manufacturer or provider/supplier of the applicable chemicals.
13) Documentation of infeasibility: If it is determined that compliance with any
requirement of this subchapter is infeasible on the project site; the EMSC Plan shall document
that determination and the substitute BMPs in the EMSC Plan.
Page 9 of 20
F) Stormwater calculations. Calculations demonstrating the following shall be provided,
according to the method approved by the Engineering Division:
1) The amount of existing runoff from the site before development;
2) The amount of proposed runoff from the site ( from the 2- year, 10- year and 100-
year storm events) after development;
3) The stormwater volume and design needed, with inflow/outflow hydrographs to
provide the flood control, rate control and water quality specified in the City of Savage Water
Resource Management Plan, dated June 20, 2011, or any subsequently adopted version of this
Plan; and
4) The amount of stormwater volume requiring abstraction.
G) Stormwater abstraction plan. A plan to limit the loss of pervious area, to maximize the
volume of water that is infiltrated into the groundwater table and/ or transpired into the
atmosphere by vegetation and, to the extent possible, to infiltrate runoff from impervious areas.
The plan shall address the abstraction requirements specified in the City of Savage Water
Resource Management Plan, dated June 20, 2011, or any subsequently adopted version of this
Plan.
H) Plan offinal site conditions. A plan of final site conditions on the same scale as the
existing site map showing the proposed site changes including:
1) Finished grading shown at contours at the same interval as provided above or as
required to clearly indicate the relationship of proposed changes to existing topography and
remaining features;
2) A landscape plan, drawn to an appropriate scale, including dimensions and
distances and the location, type, size and description of all proposed landscape materials which
will be added to the site as part of the development;
3) A drainage plan of the pre- developed and post- developed site, delineating in
which direction stormwater will be conveyed into, on and away from the site;
4) The proposed size, alignment and intended use of any structures to be erected on
the site;
5) A clear delineation and tabulation of all areas which shall be paved or surfaced,
including a description of the surfacing material to be used; and
6) Any other information pertinent to the particular project which, in the opinion of
the applicant, is necessary for the review of the project.
Prior Code, § 9- 26- 5) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11; Ord. 747, passed
04- 20-2015) Penalty, see § 152. 999
Page 10 of 20
152. 540 PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURE.
A) Process. Stormwater management plans meeting the requirements of this subchapter
shall be submitted to the Engineering Division for review and approval. The City Engineer or
his/ her designee shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the stormwater management
plan. All items in Section 152.538 and 152.539 shall be addressed if applicable, or
acknowledged if not applicable.
B) Implementation. The City-approved stormwater management plan shall be fully
implemented. If portions of the Plan are not to be implemented prior to initial earth- disturbance,
this delay shall be a part of the City-approved Plan.
C) Plan Revision. The City-approved plan may be revised at any time by written City
approval. This revision shall be documented in writing. No deviations from the City-approved
plan are allowed unless approved in writing.
D) Duration. Approval of a plan submitted under the provisions of this subchapter shall
expire one year after the date of approval unless construction has commenced in accordance
with the plan. However, if prior to the expiration of the approval, the applicant makes a written
request to the Engineering Division for an extension of time to commence construction setting
forth the reasons for the requested extension, the City Engineer or his/ her designee may grant
one extension of not greater than one single year. Receipt of any request for an extension shall
be acknowledged by the City Engineer or his/ her designee within 15 days. The City Engineer or
his/ her designee shall make a decision on the extension within 30 days of receipt.
E) Conditions. A stormwater management plan may be approved subject to compliance
with conditions reasonable and necessary to ensure that the requirements contained in this
subchapter are met. The conditions may, among other matters, limit the size, kind or character
of the proposed development, require the construction of structures, drainage facilities, storage
basins and other facilities, require replacement of vegetation, establish required monitoring
procedures, stage the work over time, require alteration of the site design to ensure buffering
and require the conveyance to the City or other public entity of certain lands or interests therein.
Prior Code, § 9- 26- 6) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 636, passed 10- 15- 2007; Ord. 692,
passed 10- 17- 11; Ord. 720, passed 5- 20- 2013; Ord. 747, passed 04- 20- 2015) Penalty, see
152.999
152. 541 APPROVAL STANDARDS.
A) Compliance with standards. No stormwater management plan which fails to meet the
standards contained in this section shall be approved by the City.
B) Stormwater management criteria for permanentfacilities.
Page 11 of 20
1) An applicant shall install or construct, on or for the proposed land disturbing or
development activity, all stormwater management facilities necessary to manage increased
runoff so that the two-year, ten- year and 100- year storm peak discharge rates existing before the
proposed development shall not be increased and accelerated channel erosion will not occur as
a result of the proposed land disturbing or development activity. An applicant may also make an
in-kind or monetary contribution to the City for development and maintenance of community
stormwater management facilities designed to serve multiple land disturbing and development
activities.
2) The applicant shall give consideration to reducing the need for stormwater
management facilities by incorporating the use of natural topography and land cover such as
wetlands, ponds, natural swales and depressions as they exist before development to the degree
that they can accommodate the additional flow of water without compromising the integrity or
quality of the wetland or pond.
3) The following stormwater management practices shall be investigated in
developing a stormwater management plan in the following descending order of preference:
a) Natural infiltration of precipitation on- site;
b) Flow attenuation by use of open vegetated swales and natural depressions;
c) Stormwater retention facilities; and
d) Stormwater detention facilities.
4) A combination of successive practices may be used to achieve the applicable
minimum control requirements. Justification shall be provided by the applicant for the method
selected.
C) Design standards. Stormwater detention and infiltration facilities constructed in the
city shall be designed according to standards established by the City, and shall, at a minimum,
meet the standards specified in the City of Savage Water Resource Management Plan, dated
June 20, 2011, or any subsequently adopted version of this Plan.
D) Steep slopes. No land disturbing or development activities shall be allowed on slopes
of 33- 1/ 3% or steeper.
E) Drain leaders. All newly constructed and reconstructed buildings will route drain
leaders to pervious areas wherein the runoff can be allowed to infiltrate. The flow rate of water
exiting the leaders shall be controlled so no erosion occurs in the pervious areas.
F) Inspection and maintenance. All stormwater management facilities shall be designed
to minimize the need of maintenance, to provide access for maintenance purposes and to be
structurally sound. All stormwater management facilities shall have a plan of operation and
maintenance that assures continued effective removal of pollutants carried in stormwater
Page 12 of 20
runoff The City Engineer or designated representative, may inspect all stormwater
management facilities as he/she determines necessary. It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to obtain any necessary easements or other property interests to allow access to the
stormwater management facilities for inspection and maintenance purposes.
G) Models/methodologies/computations. Hydrologic models and design methodologies
used for the determination of runoff and analysis of stormwater management structures shall
be approved by the City Engineer. Plans, specification and computations for stormwater
management facilities submitted for review shall be sealed and signed by a professional
engineer registered in the state of Minnesota. All computations shall appear on the plans
submitted for review, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
H) Watershed management plans/groundwater management plans. Stormwater
management plans shall be consistent with adopted watershed management plans and
groundwater management plans prepared in accordance with Minnesota Board of Water and
Soil Resources in accordance with state law.
I) Easement. If the stormwater management plan involves direction of some or all
runoff off of the site, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain from adjacent
property owners any necessary easements or other property interests concerning flowage of
water.
Prior Code, § 9- 26- 7) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 747, passed 04- 20- 2015)
152. 542 COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, MULTI-FAMILY BUILDING PERMITS
AND RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
In addition to the requirements of Section 152. 538 through 152.541, all commercial,
industrial, multi-family building permits and residential subdivision applications shall be
accompanied by the following:
A) Site and grading plan. Site plan and grading plan submittals shall contain all of the
following:
1) Existing and proposed topography of the site taken at two- foot intervals to define
the topography over the entire site;
2) Contour lines that extend a minimum of 100 feet off site or sufficient to show on
and off-site drainage;
3) Site property lines shown in true location with respect to the plan' s topographic
information;
4) Location and graphic representation of all existing and proposed natural and
manmade drainage facilities;
Page 13 of 20
5) Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices to be constructed
with or as a part of the proposed work, together with a map showing the drainage area and the
estimated runoff of the area being drained;
6) Name(s), address( es) and telephone number(s) of the person( s) responsible for
the preparation and implementation of the site plan and grading plan;
7) Location and graphic representation of proposed excavations and fills, on-site
storage of soil and other earth material and on- site disposal;
8) Location of final surface run- off measures;
9) Area of land disturbance in acres;
10) Quantity of soils or earth material in cubic yards to be excavated, filled, stored or
otherwise utilized on- site;
11) Quantity of soils to be removed from site in cubic yards by type; outline of haul
routes to be used; schedule of haul routes; number and frequency of trips on proposed haul
routes;
12) Proposed sequence of excavation, filling, other land disturbing and filling
activities and soil or earth material storage and disposal; and
13) Location of any building or structures on the property where the work is to be
performed and the location of any building or structure on land of adjacent owners that is within
50 feet of the property or that may be affected by the proposed grading operations.
Prior Code, § 9- 26- 8) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11; Ord. 747,
passed 04- 20-2015) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 543 RESIDENTIAL BUILDING PERMITS.
In addition to the requirements of Section 152. 538 and 152.541, construction of a residential
home shall be subject to the following conditions.
A) Erosion minimization and sediment control plan.
1) The permittee or owner shall submit an EMSC Plan and a site survey that address
all of the applicable requirements as specified in §152. 538 and § 152. 539 of this subchapter.
2) The city will review the Plan to ensure that adequate erosion minimization and
sediment control measures are proposed. Any modifications recommended by the city shall be
included in the approved erosion minimization and sediment control plan for the construction
site.
Page 14 of 20
3) A City-approved Erosion Minimization and Sediment Control Plan shall be
implemented, inspected and maintained consistent with §152. 538 and § 152. 539 of this
subchapter.
Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11; Ord. 747, passed 04- 20-2015) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 544 FEES.
A) Fees. All applications for stormwater management plan approval and other permits
or approvals required by this subchapter shall be accompanied by a processing and approval fee
as set by the City Council annually and set forth in the City fee schedule.
B) Inspection fee. The initial permit or approval fee shall include initial inspection. The
permittee or applicant shall have to pay an additional re-inspection fee for any additional
inspections required, including but not limited to those due to incomplete work and/ or
corrective action. This re- inspection fee will be deducted from any security held by the City and
will be set annually by City Council and be set forth in the City fee schedule.
Ord. 747, passed 04- 20- 2015) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 545 SECURITY.
A) Financial Security. Prior to approval of any stormwater management plan or any
other approval or permit required by this subchapter, the applicant shall post with the City a
letter of credit or cash escrow in the amount set annually by the City Council and set forth in the
City fee schedule.
B) Agreement. In addition to the financial security, prior to approval of any stormwater
management plan or any other approval or permit required by this subchapter, the City Engineer
or City Building Official may require, in his/ her sole discretion, that the applicant enter into an
agreement with the City whereby the applicant agrees to construct the required physical
improvement, to dedicate property or easements to the City and/ or to comply with the required
conditions. The agreement shall secure completion and compliance within a specific time,
which time may be extended in accordance with § 152. 540. The adequacy, conditions and
acceptability of any agreement shall be determined by the City Engineer or his/ her designee.
C) Use ofFinancial Security. The city may act against the security if any of the
conditions listed below exist. The city shall use funds from the security to finance remedial
work undertaken by the city or a private contractor, under contract to the city and to reimburse
the city for all cost incurred in the process of remedial work including, but not limited to, staff
time and attorney' s fees.
1) The permittee or owner fails to conform to the grading plan and/ or stormwater
management plan as approved by the city.
2) The techniques utilized under the stormwater management plan fail within one
year of installation.
Page 15 of 20
3) The city has determined that additional action is necessary to prevent excessive
erosion from occurring on the site or sediment from being transported off the site.
4) The permittee or owner fails to comply with any other requirement of this
subchapter.
D) Release ofSecurity. The financial security shall be released after the following are
complete: ( i) an as- built survey is provided to the City; (ii) the approved turf and trees have
been established and approved by the City; (iii) the requirements of the City approved
stormwater management plan or the applicable portions thereof have been completed to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer; and ( iv) the potential for erosion and sediment discharge has
been eliminated. In addition, all temporary erosion minimization and sediment control measures
such as silt fence, bio-rolls and straw bales shall be removed from the site prior to release of the
security or as directed by the city. No partial releases of the deposit will be given by the city.
Prior Code, § 9- 26- 10) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11; Ord. 747,
passed 04- 20- 2015)
152. 546 INSPECTION AND CORRECTIVE WORK.
A) City inspection. The city may make periodic inspections to ensure compliance with
the requirements of this subchapter.
B) Notification. The city shall notify the permit holder and/ or owner of the property of
the failure of the stormwater management plan or the non- compliance with any other provision
of this subchapter. If a permit is active, the initial contact will be by phone or fax to the parties
listed on the application and/ or stormwater management plan. If there is no active permit the
initial contact shall be in writing delivered either personally or by US Mail. The notification
shall state the non- compliance or failure, the required remedial or corrective action, and the
time period in which the remedial or corrective action shall be taken.
C) Sedimentation off-site. If sedimentation breaches the perimeter of a site, the permittee
or owner shall immediately develop a cleanup and restoration plan; obtain the right-of-entry
from the adjoining property owner; and within 48 hours of obtaining the adjoining property
owner' s permission implement the cleanup and restoration plan. Under no circumstances,
unless written approval is received from the city, may more than seven calendar days pass
without the permittee or owner taking corrective action.
D) Sedimentation ofstreets, wetlands or public water bodies. If sedimentation enters, or
entrance appears imminent onto streets, wetlands or other public water bodies, the permittee or
owner shall arrange immediate cleanup and repair. Permittee or owner shall provide all traffic
control and flagging required to protect the traveling public during the cleanup operations.
E) Failure to do corrective work. When a permittee or owner fails to conform to any
provision of this subchapter within the time stipulated, the city may take the following actions:
Page 16 of 20
1) Withhold the scheduling of inspections and/ or the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy or issue a stop work order;
2) Direct the correction of the deficiency by city forces or separate contract. The
issuance of a permit constitutes a right- of-entry for the city or its contractor to enter upon the
construction site for the purpose of correcting deficiencies in stormwater management.
3) All costs incurred by the city in correcting deficiencies, including staff time,
engineering fees, attorney fees, and administration, shall be reimbursed by the permittee or
owner. If payment is not made within 30 days after costs are incurred by the city, payment will
be made from the financial security.
4) If there is an insufficient amount of financial security to cover the costs incurred
by the city, the city may assess the remaining amount against the property as a public nuisance
pursuant to M.S. § 429. 101.
Prior Code, § 9- 26- 11) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11; Ord. 747,
passed 04- 20-2015) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 547 INTERIM STRATEGY OF MINNESOTA RIVER.
REPEALED)
Prior Code, § 9- 26- 12) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 636, passed 10- 15- 2007; Ord. 692,
passed 10- 17- 2011; Ord. 747, passed 04- 20- 2015) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 548 STORMWATER AND URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION CONTROL.
The following regulations apply to all persons:
A) Illegal disposal, discharges and connections.
1) No person shall intentionally dispose of leaves, dirt or other landscape debris,
construction debris, solid waste, chemical waste or any non- stormwater waste into a street,
road, alley, catch basin, culvert, curb, gutter, inlet, ditch, natural watercourse, flood control
channel, canal storm drain, stormwater pond stormwater pond buffer or any other stormwater
management facility.
2) No person shall cause any illicit discharge to enter the municipal stormwater
system unless the discharge:
a) Consists of non-stormwater that is authorized by an NPDES point source
permit. obtained from the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency; or
b) Is associated with firefighting activities;
Page 17 of 20
3) No person shall use any illicit connection to intentionally convey non- stormwater
to the stormwater system;
4) No person shall leave, deposit, discharge, dump or otherwise expose any
chemical or septic waste in an area where discharge to streets or stormwater system may occur;
and
5) No person shall permit runoff of water from washing down of paved areas in
commercial and industrial property to discharge to streets or the stormwater system unless such
discharge is necessary for the health and safety purposes and not in violation of other provisions
of this code.
B) Maintenance ofstormwater facilities. All private stormwater facilities shall be
maintained in proper condition consistent with the performance standards for which they were
originally designed. All settled materials from ponds, sumps, grit chambers and other devices,
including settled solids, shall be removed and properly disposed of on a five-year interval. Oneto
five-year waivers from this requirement may be granted by the City Engineer when the
owner presents evidence that the facility has additional capacity to remove settled solids in
accordance with the original design capacity. No private stormwater facilities may be approved
unless a maintenance plan is provided that defines who will conduct the maintenance, the type
of maintenance and intervals.
C) Site dewatering. Water pumped, drained or otherwise discharged from a site may not
be discharged in a manner that causes nuisance conditions, including erosion or flooding of the
site or adjacent property or receiving channels or a wetland. Any sediment- containing water
shall be treated to remove sediment prior to discharge from the site.
D) Construction products, materials and wastes shall be stored, handled and disposed to
minimize exposure to stormwater.
E) Pesticides, herbicides, insecticides, fertilizers treatment chemicals and landscape
materials shall be stored under cover.
F) Hazardous materials and toxic waste (including oil, diesel fuel, gasoline, hydraulic
fluids, paint solvents, petroleum-based products, wood preservatives, additives, curing
compounds, and acids) shall be properly stored in sealed containers to prevent spills, leaks or
other discharge. Restricted access storage areas shall be provided to prevent vandalism. Storage
and disposal of hazardous waste or hazardous materials shall be in compliance with Minn. R.
ch. 7045 including secondary containment as applicable.
G) Management of solid wastes shall be consistent with State requirements.
H) Portable toilets shall be positioned so that they are secure and will not be tipped or
knocked over. Sanitary waste shall be disposed of consistent with State requirements.
Page 18 of 20
I) Fueling and Maintenance of Equipment or Vehicles; Spill Prevention and Response:
All reasonable steps shall be taken to prevent the discharge of spilled or leaked chemicals,
including fuel, from any area where chemicals or fuel will be loaded or unloaded including the
use of drip pans or absorbents unless infeasible. Fueling shall be conducted in a contained area
unless infeasible. Adequate supplies shall be available at all times to clean up discharged
materials and an appropriate disposal method shall be available for recovered spilled materials.
Spills shall be reported and cleaned up immediately as required by Minn. Stat. § 115. 061, using
dry clean up measures where possible.
O Vehicle and equipment washing: If the exterior of vehicles or equipment is washed,
washing shall be limited to a defined area of a site. Runoff from the washing area shall be
contained in a sediment basin or other similarly effective controls and waste from the washing
activity shall be properly disposed of. Soaps, detergents, and solvents shall be properly used
and stored. No engine degreasing is allowed.
K) Concrete and other washouts waste shall be managed with effective containment for
all liquid and solid wastes generated by washout operations ( concrete, stucco, paint, form
release oils, curing compounds and other construction materials) related to construction
activity. The liquid and solid washout wastes shall not contact the ground, and the containment
shall be designed so that it does not result in runoff from the washout operations or areas.
Liquid and solid wastes shall be disposed of properly and in compliance with MPCA rules. At
all construction sites, a sign shall be installed adjacent to each washout facility that requires site
personnel to utilize the proper facilities for disposal of concrete and other washout wastes.
Prior Code, § 9- 26- 14) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11; Ord. 747,
passed 04- 20- 2015)
152. 549 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE PROTECTION.
No activity is allowed in or on stormwater management structures or features that may
reduce the intended effectiveness of the structure or feature. Protected structures and features
include, but are not limited to: stormwater ponds, pond buffers ( including buffer vegetation),
pond inlet and outlet features, flow control and conveyance structures, rain gardens,
infiltration basins and other stormwater management structures and features.
Prior Code, § 9- 26- 15) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11; Ord. 747,
passed 04- 20- 2015)
152. 550 LAWN FERTILIZER RESTRICTIONS.
The following regulations apply to all persons:
A) Timing of application. No fertilizer application shall be made when the ground is
frozen or during the period of November 15 through April 1 of the each year.
Page 19 of 20
B) Impervious surfaces. Fertilizer shall not be applied, spilled or otherwise deposited on
impervious surfaces. Any fertilizer applied, spilled or deposited, either intentionally or
accidentally, on impervious surface shall be immediately and completely removed.
C) Buffer zones. No fertilizer shall be applied within established wetland buffer or within
20 feet of the edge of any wetland, pond, river, creek or lake.
D) Fertilizer content and application rate. No fertilizer shall be applied within the city
which contains any amount of phosphorus or other compounds containing phosphorus, such as
phosphate except for the following:
1) Newly established turf areas for the turf' s first growing season; and
2) In turf areas which soil test confirm area below phosphorus levels established by
the University of Minnesota Extension Service. The lawn fertilizer application shall not
contain an amount of phosphorus exceeding the amount of phosphorus and the appropriate
application rate recommended in the soil test evaluation.
E) Notice requirement. Retail businesses selling fertilizer shall post a notice in a
conspicuous location near the fertilizer notifying customers of the limitation on the use of
fertilizer containing phosphorous contained in this section.
F) Violations. For the first 12 months following the effective date of this section, no
penalty shall attach to its violation. Thereafter, a person violating any provision of this section
shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties
imposed by Minnesota Statutes for petty misdemeanor offenses.
Ord. 747, passed 04- 20- 2015)
152. 551 OTHER CONTROLS.
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this subchapter and the provisions of
any erosion and sediment control or shoreland protection chapter adopted by the City Council,
the more restrictive standard governs.
Ord. 747, passed 04- 20- 2015)
152. 552 SEVERABILITY.
The provisions of this subchapter are severable. If the provisions of this subchapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect
other provisions or applications of this subchapter which can give effect without the invalid
provision or application.
Ord. 747, passed 04- 20- 2015)
Page 20 of 20
LAND EXCA" TIONAND FILLING
152.560 Purpose
152. 561 Exceptions
152.562 General conformance
152. 563 Minor excavation/ filling permit
152.564 Major excavation/ filling permit
152. 565 Permit requirements
152.566 Excavation/filling operations
152. 567 Filling in Floodway District
152. 568 Inspection
152. 569 Suspension or revocation
152.570 Fees
152. 571 Financial security
152.572 Amended permit
152. 573 Erosion and sediment control
152.574 Final reports
152. 575 Notification of completion
152. 560 PURPOSE.
It is unlawful for any person to do any grading, excavation or filling without first having
obtained a permit from the city. Changes or deviation from previously approved plans require
that an amended permit be applied for and approved before the work is performed.
Prior Code, § 9- 27- 1) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 561 EXCEPTIONS.
The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to, nor shall permits under this subchapter
be required for, the following:
A) Excavations or filling of less than 15 cubic yards of material;
B) Construction of buildings for which a permit has been applied for and issued, provided
the contemplated excavation or filling operation was sufficiently described at the time of
building permit application;
C) Excavations or filling operations that have been approved with a development project
on platted property which have commenced within two years after an approved plat has been
filed with the county;
D) Excavations or filling operations by state, county or city authorities in connection with
the construction or maintenance of roads, highways, parks or utilities or on slope or utility
easements provided the activity is conducted within public right- of-way or easements;
Page 1 of 10
E) Curb cuts, utility hook-ups or street openings for which a permit is required from the
city; and
F) Any development for which a conditional use permit has been approved and granted
and a final grading plan approved as a part thereof
Prior Code, § 9- 27- 2) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 562 GENERAL CONFORMANCE.
Whenever the city determines that any existing excavation or embankment or fill on private
property has become a hazard to life and limb, or endangers property, or adversely affects the
drainage, safety, use or stability of a property, public way or drainage channel, the owner of the
property upon which the excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of the
property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the city, shall within the period specified therein
repair or eliminate the excavation or embankment so as to eliminate the hazard, and be in
conformance with the requirements of this subchapter. The city may inspect any property for
compliance.
Prior Code, § 9- 27- 3) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 563 MINOR EXCAVATION/FILLING PERMIT.
A) Excavation or filling of any material in excess of 15 cubic yards, but less than 2,000
cubic yards, or to a depth of one foot or more, but less than three feet over an area of 130 square
feet or more shall require a minor excavation/ filling permit from the City Engineer.
B) Application for minor excavating and filling permits shall be made in writing on forms
supplied by the city and shall be submitted to the City Engineer for processing. Applications
shall be filed jointly by the landowner and the earth moving contractor. The following
information and exhibits shall be submitted with the completed application form:
1) Legal description of property; and
2) Two copies of the plat map or half-section map of the property proposed to be
excavated or filled indicating the area where the activity is to occur together with an estimate of
the amount of material to be moved.
Prior Code, § 9- 27- 4) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 564 MAJOR EXCAVATION/FILLING PERMIT.
A) Excavation or filling of any material in the amount equal to 2,000 cubic yards or more,
or to a depth of three feet or more, shall require a major excavation/ filling permit from the City
Engineer.
Page 2 of 10
B) Application for major excavating and filling permits shall be made in writing on forms
supplied by the city and shall be submitted to the City Engineer for processing. Applications
shall be filed jointly by the landowner and the earth moving contractor. The following
information and exhibits shall be submitted with the completed application form:
1) Legal description of the property;
2) A map showing existing conditions both on the property and 300 feet beyond the
boundaries of the property. This information shall include but not be limited to land ownership,
structures, utilities, platting and easements, street and railroad right of ways, vegetation,
waterways and topography shown by a two-foot contour minimum. This information shall be no
more than two months old at the time of application;
3) A plan to show materials removed from, or deposited upon, the property. The plan
shall include final topography at two- foot contours or less, steps to be taken to conserve topsoil
and to minimize erosion, areas where topsoil is to be stockpiled and the proposed phasing and
timing of restoration;
4) Identification of proposed truck hauling routes and method of controlling dust
on- site and along haul routes;
5) Hours and period of operation;
6) Copies of any agreements contemplated or entered into between the owner of the
property and any other person charged with performance of the earth work; and
7) In the case of commercial sand and gravel mining operations, a concept plan
showing the ultimate development of the property including future streets, lots, topography and
proposed land use.
Prior Code, § 9- 27- 5) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 565 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
A) All operations.
1) At the end of excavation or filling operations, the disturbed area shall be restored
with topsoil or other approved cover material and shall be reseeded to establish approved
vegetation.
2) Finished grades shall not adversely affect adjacent properties.
3) Drainage facilities shall be provided to effectively divert or convey stormwater
runoff
Page 3 of 10
4) It shall be unlawful for any person to dig and leave open, unfenced, unbarricaded or
uncovered, any pit, quarry, hole or excavation, including basements, wells, septic tanks or
cesspools.
5) Sufficient erosion minimization and sediment controls shall be installed and
maintained to prevent soil movement off-site until vegetation is established in compliance with
the Stormwater Management subchapter of the Code.
B) Major operations.
1) Provisions shall be made for effectively controlling dispersal of material by wind or
by hauling to and from the site, and for general maintenance of the site.
2) Spillage of material on and damage to public streets used as haul roads shall be
cleaned up and repaired to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
3) Hours of operation shall be limited to between the hours of 7: 00 a.m. to 7: 00 p. m.,
Monday through Friday, and 8: 00 a.m. to 6: 00 p.m. on Saturdays. Operations on Sunday shall be
prohibited. The City Council shall have authority to modify, on an individual basis, the
operational hours. Applicants must make a specific request and must provide documentation to
support the request. The modifications shall be made only after a public hearing has been held.
4) All operations shall be conducted no closer than 100 feet to an adjacent property,
unless under common lease or ownership, and no closer than 100 feet to any right- of-way line.
5) All operations shall be conducted no closer than 300 feet to an existing dwelling,
school, hospital or similar residential or public use.
6) The operator shall post a cash escrow or letter of credit as designated by the city.
The city shall be in possession of the cash escrow or letter of credit prior to issuance of a permit.
The cash escrow or letter of credit shall remain in effect for a period of not less than one year and
shall expire on August 1 following the expiration of the permit. The amount of the cash escrow
or letter of credit shall be set by ordinance.
Prior Code, § 9- 27- 6) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11; Ord. 747, passed
04- 20-2015) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 566 EXCAVATION/FILLING OPERATIONS.
A) Cuts. Unless otherwise recommended in a soils engineering and/ or engineering geology
report submitted by a professional deemed qualified by the city, cuts shall conform to the
provisions of this subchapter. In the absence of the report, these provisions may be waived by the
city for minor cuts not intended to support structures.
B) Slope. The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use and
shall be no steeper than two units horizontal to one unit vertical, for a short term interim period,
unless the owner furnishes a soils engineering or an engineering geology report, or both, stating
Page 4of10
that the site has been investigated and giving an opinion that a cut at a steeper slope will be
stable and not create a hazard to public or private property. Unless specifically approved,
permanent slopes shall be no steeper than three horizontal units to one vertical unit.
C) Filling. Unless otherwise recommended in a soils engineering and/ or engineering
geology report submitted by a professional deemed qualified by the city, filling shall conform to
the provisions of this subchapter. In the absence of the report, these provisions may be waived by
the city for minor filling not intended to support structures.
1) Clearing area to be filled. All timbers, logs, trees, brush and rubbish shall be
removed from the site. All clearing must conform with the tree preservation regulations.
2) Preparation ofground. The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by
removing vegetation, non-complying fill, topsoil and other unsuitable material, scarifying to
provide a bond with the new fill and, where slopes are steeper than five to one and the height is
greater than five feet, by benching into sound bedrock or other competent material as determined
by the soils engineer. The bench under the toe of a fill on a slope steeper than five to one shall be
at least ten feet wide. The area beyond the toe of fill shall be sloped for sheet overflow or a
paved drain shall be provided. When fill is to be placed over a cut, the bench under the toe of fill
shall be at least ten feet wide but the cut shall be made before placing the fill and accepted by the
soils engineer or engineering geologist, or both, as a suitable foundation for fill.
3) Fill material. Organic material shall not be permitted in building pad or roadway
areas. Except as permitted by the city, no rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum
dimension greater than 12 inches shall be buried or placed in fills.
4) Fill material exceptions. The city may permit placement of larger rock when the
soils engineer properly devises a method of placement, continuously inspects its placement and
approves the fill stability. The following conditions shall also apply:
a) Prior to issuance of the permit, potential rock disposal areas shall be delineated
on the plan;
b) Rock sizes greater than 12 inches in maximum dimension shall be ten feet or
more below grade, measured vertically; and
c) Rocks shall be placed so as to assure filling of all voids with fines.
D) Compaction. All fillings shall be compacted to a minimum 90% of maximum density as
determined by the specified density method. In-place density shall be determined in accordance
with ASTM D698- 70.
E) Slope. The slope of fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use, or
three horizontal units to one vertical unit, whichever in less.
F) Grading and terracing. Grading and terracing shall be provided and the area above fill
Page 5 of 10
slopes and the surfaces of terraces shall be graded and paved as required by this subchapter.
G) Setbacks. Cut and fill slopes shall be set back from site boundaries in accordance with
this subchapter. Setback dimensions shall be horizontal distances measured perpendicular to the
site boundary. Setback dimensions shall be shown on the grading plan.
H) Top ofcut slope. The top of cut slopes shall be made not nearer to a site boundary line
than one- fifth of the vertical height of cut with a minimum of two feet and a maximum required
setback of ten feet. The setback may need to be increased for any required interceptor drains.
I) Toe offill slope. The toe of fill slopes shall be made not nearer to the site boundary line
than one- half the height of the slope with a minimum of two feet and a maximum required
setback of 20 feet. Where a fill slope is to be located near the site boundary and the adjacent
off-site property is developed, special precautions shall be incorporated in the work as the city
deems necessary to protect adjoining property from damage as a result of grading. These
precautions may include but are not limited to:
1) Additional setbacks;
2) Provision for retaining or slough walls;
3) Mechanical or chemical treatment of the fill slope surface to minimize erosion; and
4) Provisions for the control of surface waters.
J) Modification ofslope location. The city may approve alternate setbacks based upon an
investigation and recommendation by a qualified engineer or engineering geologist stating that
the intent of this subchapter has been satisfied.
K) Drainage and terracing. Unless otherwise indicated on the approved plan, drainage
facilities and terracing shall conform to the provisions of this subchapter for cut or fill slopes.
1) Terraces. Terraces at least six feet in width shall be established at not more than
30- foot vertical intervals on all cut or fill slopes to control surface drainage and debris except
that where only one terrace is required, it shall be at the mid-point of the vertical height. For cut
or fill slopes greater than 60 feet and up to 120 feet in vertical height, one terrace at
approximately mid-height shall be 12 feet in width. Terrace widths and spacing for cut and fill
slopes greater than 120 feet in height shall be designed by a geotechnical engineer and reviewed
by the city. Suitable access shall be provided to permit proper cleaning and maintenance. Swales
or ditches on terraces shall have a minimum gradient of 5% and must be paved with reinforced
concrete not less than three inches in thickness or an approved equal paving. They shall have a
minimum depth at the deepest point of one foot and a minimum paved width of five feet. A
single run of swale or ditch shall not collect runoff from a tributary area exceeding 13, 500 square
feet ( projected) without discharging into a down drain.
2) Subsurface drainage. Cut and fill slopes shall be provided with subsurface drainage
Page 6 of 10
as necessary for stability.
3) Disposal. All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry waters to the nearest
practicable drainage way approved by the city for the deposit of the waters. Erosion of ground in
the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of non- erosive down-drains or other
devices. Building pads shall have a drainage gradient of 2% toward approved drainage facilities,
unless waived by the city.
4) Exceptions. The gradient from the building pad may be 1% where the following
conditions exist throughout the site:
a) No proposed fills are greater than ten feet in maximum depth;
b) No proposed finish cut or fill slope faces have a vertical height in excess of ten
feet; and
c) No existing slope faces, which have a slope face steeper than ten horizontally
to one vertically, have a vertical height in excess of ten feet.
5) Interceptor drains. Paved interceptor drains shall be installed along the top of all
cut slopes where the tributary drainage area above slopes towards the cut and has a drainage path
greater than 40 feet measured horizontally. Interceptor drains shall be paved with a minimum of
three inches of concrete or granite and reinforced. They shall have a minimum depth of 12 inches
and a minimum paved width of 30 inches measured horizontally across the drain. The slope of
drain shall be approved by the city.
Prior Code, § 9- 27- 7) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 567 FILLING IN FLOODWAY DISTRICT.
Any material proposed to be deposited in the Floodway District other than filling small
localized depressions for the purpose of landscaping, or the deposition of topsoil for the purpose
of landscaping, shall require a conditional use permit according to procedures outlined in
152.031, and shall be subject to the standards for Floodway District uses contained in §§
152. 355 through 152.366. Issuance of a land excavation or filling permit in any floodway district
shall be made subject to all provisions of this chapter and other requirements as the City
Engineer or City Council may specify to protect the public interest.
Prior Code, § 9- 27- 8) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 568 INSPECTION.
All grading operations for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the
city. When required by the city, special inspection of grading operations and special testing shall
be performed. The special inspector shall be a qualified person who shall demonstrate
competence, to the satisfaction of the city, for inspection of the particular type of grading or
Page 7 of 10
operation requiring special inspection. The duties and responsibilities of the special inspector
shall be as follows.
A) The special inspector shall observe the work assigned for conformance with the
approved design drawings and specifications.
B) All discrepancies shall be brought to the immediate attention of the contractor for
correction. If corrections are not undertaken by the contractor in a timely manner, discrepancies
shall be brought to immediate attention of the proper design authority and to the city.
C) The special inspector shall submit a final signed report stating whether the work
requiring special inspection was, to the best of the inspector' s knowledge, in conformance with
the reviewed plans and specifications. The report shall be furnished to the city and other
designated persons.
D) Inspections may be made on a periodic basis to satisfy the requirements of continuous
inspection, provided the periodic inspection is performed as outlined in the project plans and
specifications and approved by the city.
Prior Code, § 9- 27- 9) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152.999
152. 569 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
The city may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this
subchapter whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information
supplied, or is found to be in violation of any regulation or provision of the city code.
Prior Code, § 9- 27- 10) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 570 FEES.
Fees shall be established for grading and excavation permits and for plan review. When a
plan or other data are required to be submitted, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of
submitting plans and specifications for review. Fees shall be charged in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by the Council.
Prior Code, § 9- 27- 11) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 571 FINANCIAL SECURITY.
The city may require a cash escrow or letter or creedit in the form and amounts as may be
deemed necessary to assure that the work, if not completed in accordance with the reviewed
plans and specifications, will be corrected to eliminate hazardous conditions. If requested by the
applicant, the amount of the financial security may be reduced by the city based upon the extent
to which the grading and restoration have been completed and shall consider the continued need
for erosion control.
Page 8 of 10
Prior Code, § 9- 27- 12) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 747, passed 04- 20-2015) Penalty, see
152.999
152. 572 AMENDED PERMIT.
Any changes desired to be made to the grading plan by the applicant following the issuance
of a permit shall be submitted to the city for review. No changes may be implemented by the
applicant unless approved by the city. Any desired change to the plans shall be supported by
information showing the change desired, the reasons for the change, the effect the change would
have upon buildings, structures, drainage facilities and patterns. The request shall be
accompanied by soils engineering and geology reports as necessary. If the changes requested by
the applicant are acceptable, the city may issue an amendment to the permit.
Prior Code, § 9- 27- 13) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001) Penalty, see § 152. 999
152. 573 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL.
All areas disturbed by grading activities shall be prepared and maintained to control against
erosion and to contain sediment. Where necessary, silt fence, filter logs, rock checks , riprap or
other devices or methods shall be employed to control erosion, contain sediment and provide for
site safety. Grading operations, construction sites and other sediment sources shall provide for
erosion and sediment control devices.
A) Notification ofnon- compliance. If the designer, soils engineer, engineering geologist or
testing agency finds that the work is not being completed in conformance with this section or the
reviewed grading plans, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the person
in charge of grading work and to the city. Recommendations for corrective measures, if
necessary, shall be submitted.
B) Areas ofresponsibility. The soils engineer' s area of responsibility shall include, but
need not be limited to, the professional inspection and approval concerning the preparation of
ground to receive fills, testing for required compaction, stability of all finish slope and the design
of buttress fills, where required, incorporating data supplied by the engineering geologist.
Prior Code, § 9- 27- 14) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11) Penalty, see
152.999
152. 574 FINAL REPORTS.
Upon completion of the rough grading work and at the final completion of the work the city
may require the following reports and drawings and supplements thereto.
A) An as- graded grading plan prepared by the designer including original ground surface
elevations, as- graded ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns, and location, and
elevations of all surface and subsurface drainage facilities. The designer shall state that to the
Page 9 of 10
best of his or her knowledge the work was done in accordance with the final approved grading
plan.
B) A soils- grading report prepared by the soils engineer, including locations and elevations
of field density tests. Summaries of field and laboratory tests and other substantiating data and
comments on any changes made during grading and their effect on the recommendations made in
the soils engineering investigation report. The soil engineer shall render a finding as to the
adequacy of the site for the intended use.
C) A geologic grading report prepared by the engineering geologist, including a final
description of the geology of the site and any new information disclosed during the grading and
the effect of same on recommendations incorporated in the approved grading plan. The geologic
engineer shall render a finding as to the adequacy of the site for the intended use as affected by
geologic factors.
Prior Code, § 9- 27- 15) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001)
152. 575 NOTIFICATION OF COMPLETION.
The city shall be notified when the grading operation is ready for final inspection, but not
before all work, including installation of drainage facilities and their protective devices, and
erosion and sediment control measures, have been completed and vegetation has been
established in accordance with the final approved grading plan and the required reports have
been submitted.
Prior Code, § 9- 27- 16) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 692, passed 10- 17- 11)
Page 10 of 10
FEES
152.590 FEES.
Effectiveuponpassageandpublication, thefollowingfeesareprescribedforthereview,
investigationandadministrationofanapplicationforanamendmenttoanofficialcontrol
establishedpursuanttoM.S. §§4 62.351through462.364oranapplicationforapermitorother
approvalrequiredunderanofficialcontrolestablishedpursuanttothosesections.
CITYOFSAVAGE
2019FEESCHEDULE
12/17/2018
COSTSANDFEESASSOCIATEDWITHLANDPLANNINGANDUSE
SERVICE FEE DESCRIPTION
AdministrativeLotSubdivision $ 300.00
Chargesforstafftimein $ 67.00/hour CityPlanner
excessofdevelopment
applicationfeesandtoreview $ 67.00/hour Engineer
siteanddevelopment
constructionforcompliance $ 67.00/hour ParksandNaturalResource
withapprovedplans. Superintendent
52.00/hour EngineeringTechnician
46.00/hour PublicWorks – GeneralStaff
25.00/hour PublicWorks –
Intern/Seasonal
ComprehensivePlan $ 1,150.00
Amendment*
ConceptPlan $ 0.00 Oneperproperty
200.00 Eachadditional
Conditional/SpecialUse $ 450.00 Residential
Permit*
650.00 Allothers
FinalPlat* $ 500.00
InterimUse* $ 450.00 Residential
650.00 Allothers
PlannedUnitDevelopment $ 1,150.00
includesrezone)*
PreliminaryPlat* $ 900.00
PUDAmendment* $ 550.00
Rezone* $ 750.00
SidewalkCaféPermit $ 125.00
SitePlanReview* $ 750.00
SitePlanRevision* $ 250.00
Variance* $ 450.00
ZoningCertificationLetter $ 45.00
ZoningOrdinanceText $ 650.00
Amendment
ReviewEscrowDepositAgreementmayberequired.
Page1of22
COSTSANDFEESASSOCIATEDWITHLANDDEVELOPMENT
SERVICE FEE DESCRIPTION
ParkFee 3,842.00perdwellingunit Single-familyresidential
3,842.00perdwellingunit Multi-familyresidential
8,937.00pernet Commercial/Industrial
developablearea
Parkfeesshallapplytoallnewresidential, commercialandindustrialconstruction, andshallbe
paideitheratthetimeofplattingorattimetheinitialbuildingpermitisissued, whicheveroccurs
first. Noparkdedicationfeeshallapplywhenparklanddedicationrequirementshavepreviously
beenfulfilled. Inthecaseofalotsplit, theparkdedicationfeeshallbeappliedtothenewlotand
paidattimeofadministrativeapproval.
StormDrainageFee
Stormsewerfeesaretobepaidattimeofplattingforallzoningdistricts (basedondevelopable
property) orattheissuanceoftheinitialbuildingpermit, andarebasedontheadjustedgross
acreageasfollows:
BasedontheEngineeringNewsRecordConstructionCostIndex
Singlefamilydevelopments – 28.8centspersquarefoot
Multiplefamilydevelopments – 34.3centspersquarefoot
CommercialandIndustrialDevelopments (baseduponpercentageofthesitewhichisimpervious
paved, building, sidewalk, etc.), asfollows:
Morethan55% imperviousarea – 41.4centspersquarefoot
Lessthan55% butmorethan30% ofthesiteisimpervious – 34.3centspersquarefoot.
Lessthan30% impervious – 28.3centspersquarefoot.
Iffutureexpansioncausestheratio/feetochange, thedevelopershallberesponsibleforpayment
ofthedifferencebetweentheinitialandrevisedfee. Forexample, ifasite50% impervious
expandsto60% impervious, thedevelopershallberequiredtopay6.9centspersquarefoot
uponissuanceofbuildingpermit.
Alldevelopmentsareresponsibleforon-sitestormwaterpondingtolimitstormwaterrunofffrom
thesitetopre-developmentrates. Thisresponsibilityincludestheprovisionoflandforponding
alongwiththegradingandrestorationassociatedwithponddevelopment.
Alldevelopmentsunabletoprovideadequateon-sitepondingshallberequiredtopayan
additionalfee, atthetimeofplatting, asfollows:
Singlefamilydevelopment, 13.9centspersq. ft.
Multi-familydevelopment, 23.8centspersq. ft.
Commercialandindustrialdevelopments, 47.6centspersquarefoot.
Forthepurposeofsinglefamilyresidencesonlargeunplattedparcels, thecalculationshallbelimitedtoone
l) acreofdevelopableproperty. Thebalanceofthedevelopablepropertyshallbesubjecttothe
assessmentatthetimeofsubsequentplattingorissuanceofadditionalbuildingpermits. Thisexception
shallbelimitedonlytothecalculationofstormwater (andcollectorstreet) fees. Itdoesnotapplytospecial
assessmentsleviedthroughMinnesotaStatuteChapter429forpublicimprovementsthatdirectlyand
exclusivelyserveindividualparcels.
Adjustedgrossacreageisthegrossacreage/property, minusanywetland, steepslopes, right-of-way
includingCityStreets), parklandsorothersimilarexclusionthatisregularlyrecognizedinSavageand
consistentwiththeSpecialAssessmentPolicydefinition.
Initialbuildingpermitshallbethefirstbuildingpermitissuedonaparcelorapermitissuedbecausethe
previousprincipalstructurehasbeenrazedordestroyed.
Page2of22
COSTSANDFEESASSOCIATEDWITHLANDDEVELOPMENT (cont’d)
SERVICE FEE DESCRIPTION
TrunkFacilities
Dueattimeofplattingforallnewdevelopmentsthathaveneverbeenassessedfortrunkwater,
trunksewerorelevatedstoragetank:
Trunksewer $ 6,306.14peradjustedgrossacre*
Trunkwater 4,576.41peradjustedgrossacre*
Tank, source, supply 2,070.54peradjustedgrossacre*
Environmentalstudies 448.64peradjustedgrossacre*
Total 1 3$,401.74peradjustedgrossacre*
AdjustedgrossacreshallbeinterpretedasallpropertyexcludingonlyStateHighwaysand
CountyRoadRight-of-Way, wetlandsandsteepslopesasdefinedbyCityPolicy.
LateralSanitarySewerand Costofimprovement100% developerresponsibility
WaterMain
LocalStreetImprovement Costofimprovementforresidentialstandardstreetwithcurband
gutter - 100% developerresponsibility
SidewalksandPedestrian Walkwaysalongcitystreetsoroneasements (internalto
Walkways development) - 100% developerresponsibility
SidewalksandPedestrian Walkwaysalongcollectororarterialstreets - perCitysidewalk
Walkways policy
StreetandTrafficSigns $ 415.00 Innewdevelopments, costtobe
paidbydevelopersfor
permanentstreetsigns.
StreetandTrafficSigns $ 200.00 Innewdevelopments, costtobe
paidbydevelopersfor
temporarystreetsigns.
EngineeringPlanReviewandAdministrationforPublicandPrivateImprovements
Improvementsdesigned, constructedandfinancedbyowner/developer- thefollowingshallapply:
AdministrativeFee: 2% ofnetconstructioncost
ConstructionObservation: 4% ofnetconstructioncosts
Improvementsdesigned, bid, constructedandfinancedbyCitythroughStatutoryAuthority (Minn.
Statutes429): Abudgetwillbeestablishedforeachprojecttoincludecostsfor:
a. FeasibilityReportPreparation
b. PlanandSpecificationPreparation
c. GeneralEngineeringReview
d. ConstructionAdministration
e. ConstructionObservation
f. ConstructionSurveying
g. SoilBoringsandMaterialTesting
h. Bonding/FiscalAdmin.
i. Administration, Legal, Publishing
j. ProjectAssessment
k. InterimInterest
Page3of22
COSTSANDFEESASSOCIATEDWITHINDIVIDUALLOTSORBUILDINGS
SERVICE FEE DESCRIPTION
BuildingPermitValuationincludingAlterationsandAdditions – SeeMinimumValuationsbelow
forLowerLevelFinishesandDecks
LowerLevelFinishOneRoomMinimumValuation $3,000
LowerLevelFinishTwoRoomsMinimumValuation $4,000
LowerLevelFinishThreeRoomsMinimumValuation $5,000
LowerLevelFinishFourRoomsMinimumValuation $6,000
Decks144SForSmallerMinimumValuation $4,000
Decks145SForGreaterMinimumValuation $5,000
1.00to $500.00 $ 29.50
501.00to $2,000.00 $ 28.00 1s t$5000. 0plus $3.70foreach
additional $100.00orfraction
thereof, toandincluding
2000.00.
2,001.00to $25,000.00 $ 83.50 1s t$2,000.00,p lus $16.55for
eachadditional $1,000.00or
fractionthereof, toandincluding
25,000.00.
25,001.00to $50,000.00 $ 464.15 1s t$25,000.00,p lus $12.00for
eachadditional $1,000.00or
fractionthereof, toandincluding
50,000.00.
50,001.00to $100,000.00 $ 764.15 1s t$50,000.00,p lus $8.45for
eachadditional $1,000.00or
fractionthereof, toandincluding
100,000.00.
100,001.00to $500,000.00 $ 1,186.65 1s t$1000, 00.00,p lus $6.75for
eachadditional $1,000.00or
fractionthereof, toandincluding
500,000.00.
500,001.00to $1,000,000.00 $ 3,886.65 1s t$5000, 00.00,p lus $5.50for
eachadditional $1,000.00or
fractionthereof, toandincluding
1,000,000.00.
1,000,001.00andup $ 6,636.65 1s t$1,0000, 00.00,p lus $4.50for
eachadditional $1,000.00or
fractionthereof.
Aninvestigationfee, inadditiontothepermitfee, shallbecollectedwheneveranyworkforwhich
apermitisrequiredbythiscodehasbeencommencedwithoutfirstobtainingsaidpermit. The
investigationfeeshallbeequaltotheamountofthepermitfeerequired. Thepaymentofsuch
investigationfeeshallnotexemptanypersonfromcompliancewithallotherprovisionsofthis
codenorfromanypenaltyprescribedbylaw.
FeerefundsmaybeauthorizedbytheBuildingOfficialofanyfeepaidhereunder, whichwas
erroneouslypaidorcollected. TheBuildingOfficialmayauthorizerefundingthepermitfeepaid,
minusa $25.00administrativefeewhennoworkhasbeendoneunderapermitissued. The
BuildingOfficialshallnotauthorizerefundingofanyfeepaidexceptonwrittenapplicationfiledby
theoriginalpermitteenotlaterthan180daysafterthedateoffeepayment.
Page4of22
COSTSANDFEESASSOCIATEDWITHINDIVIDUALLOTSORBUILDINGS (cont’d)
SERVICE FEE DESCRIPTION
ExteriorReplacements
ResidentialRe-roofPermit $ 101.55
Re-siding $ 101.55
Window/DoorReplacement $ 101.55
Pools
Pool, aboveground $ 148.78
Pool, belowground $ 371.24
OtherInspectionsandFees:
Are-inspectionfeemaybeassessedforeachre-inspectionwhensuchportionofworkforwhich
inspectioniscalledisnotcompleteorwhencorrectionscalledforarenotmade. Re-inspection
feesmaybeassessedwhentheinspectionrecordcardisnotreadilyavailable, approvedplans
arenotreadilyavailable, failuretoprovideaccessonthedateforwhichinspectionisrequested,
orfordeviatingfromplansrequiringtheapprovalofthebuildingofficial.
a. Inspectionoutsideofnormalbusinesshours (minimumcharge--twohours) - $63.25per
hour*
b. Re-inspectionfeesassessedunderprovisionsofSection150.001 (C) oftheSavageCity
Code - $63.25perhour*.
c. Inspectionsforwhichnofeeisspecificallyindicated (minimumcharge, one-halfhour) -
63.25perhour*.
d. Additionalplanreviewrequiredbychanges, additionsorrevisionstoapprovedplans
minimumcharge, one-halfhour) - $63.25perhour*.
e. Useofoutsideconsultantsforplancheckingandinspection, orboth - Actualcost**
f. Re-inspectionfeeforEngineeringstaff - $52.00perhour
Orthetotalhourlycosttothejurisdiction, whicheverisgreatest. Thiscostshallinclude
supervision, overhead, equipment, hourlywagesandfringebenefitsoftheemployeesinvolved.
Actualcostincludesadministrativeandoverheadcosts.
PlanReviewFee
a. Residential/CommercialorIndustrialConstruction - 65percentofbuildingpermitfeeor
25% ofbuildingpermitfeeforsimilarbuildingsasrequiredbyStateBuildingCode.
b. EngineeringLotCertificateofSurveyReview - $52.00
c. PlanningSurveyReview - $40.00
d. Engineering/PlanningSurveyReviewFeefordecks, additionsandsimilarprojects -
10.00
AdditionorAlteration SurchargeComputation
l,000,000orless Valuationx . 0005 (50centsper $l000)
l,000,000to $2,000,000 $ 500 + . 0004x (value - $l,000,000)
2,000,00lto $3,000,000 $ 900 + . 0003x (value - $2,000,000)
3,000,00lto $4,000,000 $ l,200 + . 0002x (value - $3,000,000)
4,000,00lto $5,000,000 $ l,400 + .000lx (value - $4,000,000)
Greaterthan $5,000,000 $ l,500 + . 00005x (value - $5,000,000)
ReserveCapacityCharge (SAC) FeeDeterminedbytheMetropolitanCouncil
a. SingleFamilyHome $ 2,485.00
b. Duplex, Townhouse $ 2,485.00perdwellingunit
c. Apartments $ 2,485.00timesnumberofunitstimes80percent
d. Commercial/Industrial ComputedbyMCES
Page5of22
COSTSANDFEESASSOCIATEDWITHINDIVIDUALLOTSORBUILDINGS (cont’d)
StateofMinnesotaBuildingPermitSurcharge (basedonvaluationofstructure)
ResidentialPlumbingPermit
Plumbingsystem $ 130.00
Bathroomfinish $ 50.00
Lawnsprinkler $ 50.00
Waterheater $ 50.00
Watersoftener $ 50.00
Minimumfee $ 50.00
RPZ (NewInstallationOnly) $ 50.00
Commercial/industrialplumbingfeesshallbeaffixedattherateof2.0percentofthecontract
priceplusastatesurcharge. Theminimumfeeforacommercialplumbingpermitis $130.00.
ResidentialMechanicalPermit
H.V.A.C. system $ 130.00
Factoryfireplace $ 60.00
Furnacereplacement $ 60.00
Airconditioner $ 50.00
Garageheater $ 50.00
Airexchanger $ 50.00
Miscellaneous $ 50.00
Commercial/industrialpermitfeesforheating, airconditioningandventilationshallbeaffixedat
therateof2.0percentofthecontractpriceplusastatesurcharge. Theminimumfeefora
commercialmechanicalpermitshallbe $130.00.
Assessments
Ifrequiredbydeveloper’sagreement, assessmentsmustbepaidattimeofmortgageclosing. No
occupancyshallbealloweduntilsuchpaymenthasbeenmade.
Water-SewerConnectionFees
Forsinglefamilyresidentialdwellings: $ 3,071.04 Waterconnectionpermit
2,302.43 Sewerconnectionpermit
5,373.47 Plusmeter, PRVcostsandInspectionfee
Forcommercial/industrial/multi-family: $ 5,373.47multipliedbynumberofapplicableSAC
units** plusmeter, PRVcostsandInspectionfee.
Forcommercialoutdoorseatingatan
eatingestablishment: $ 1,343.36multipliedbynumberofapplicableSACunits** plusmeter,
PRVcostsandinspectionfee. Indoorseatingischargedat $5,373.47rate
Commercial/Industrial/MultiFamilyReclamationsystemCredit: Establishmentsinstallingwater
reclamationsystemsinconjunctionwiththeoriginalbuildingpermitshallreceiveawater-sewer
connectionfeecreditinanamountequaltothemanufacturer'sreclamationsystemefficiencyon
thatportionoftheestablishmentwhichutilizesreclaimedwater. Thereclamationratioshallbe
appliedtothenumberofMCESSACunitsassignedtothebuildingpermit.
Water & SewerInstallationInspectionFee: $130.00
Water & SewerModifications: 2% ofprojectvaluewitha $130.00minimumfee.
Page6of22
COSTSANDFEESASSOCIATEDWITHINDIVIDUALLOTSORBUILDINGS (cont’d)
2019MeterPricing
SHORTIPERL $ 169.00
LONGIPERL $ 197.00
1" IPERL $ 316.00
1 ½ O"M NIR2METER $ 715.00
2" OMNIR2METER $ 1,014.00
1 ½ O"M NIC2METER $ 1,667.00
2" OMNIC2METER $ 1,963.00
3" OMNIC2METER $ 2,483.00
4" OMNIC2METER $ 4,297.00
1 ½ O"M NIT2METER $ 1,183.00
2" OMNIT2METER $ 1,378.00
2" OMNIT2 - 10"LAYLENGTH $ 1,144.00
3" OMNIT2METER $ 1,729.00
4" OMNIT2METER $ 4,097.00
SENSUSSINGLEPORTMXU $ 169.00
SENSUSTOUCHCOUPLERMXU $ 182.00
METERCONNECTIONINLINE/SET $ 24.00
1" METERCONNECTION INLINE/SET $ 24.00
1 ½ F"L ANGEKIT $ 39.00
2" FLANGEKIT $ 39.00
3" FLANGEKIT $ 78.00
4" FLANGEKIT $ 104.00
Brass=MarketRate + 30%
COPPERHORN/WITHCONNECTORS $ 91.00
1" COPPERHORN/WITHCONNECTORS $ 152.00
COPPERHORN/NOCONNECTORS $ 67.00
METERWIRE (1000' INABOX) $ 299.00
1” PRV – Wilkens $ 198.00
1 ½P” RV $ 572.00
2” PRV $ 683.00
DRIVEWAYCASTING $ 110.00
5' HYDRAFINDERFLAG $ 26.00
METERRENTALFEE $ 5.00perdayincluding
weekendsandholidays, plus
damagedeposit. (replacement
costbasedonmaterialcost.)
CustomPartsPricedatMarketRatePlus30%
DemolitionPermit $ 100.00plus $5,000.00 DwellingUnits, commercial/
deposit Industrialbuildings
50.00plus $2,000.00deposit Accessorystructures
BuilderDeposit: Foralloneandtwofamilydwellings, anescrowintheamountof $2150.00per
unitshallberequiredtoensurecompliancewiththecity'serosioncontrolandfinalgradepolicies.
Multi-familydwellings (threeormoreattachedunits) shallprovideadepositof $350perunit. For
thepurposeoferosioncontrolenforcement, anon-refundabledepositof $150foraoneandtwo
familyhome, andadepositof $50.00perunitformulti-family (3ormoreattached) shallbe
required. ThisescrowfeewillbeforfeitedtotheCityofSavageifcompliancewiththe
ResidentialBuildersDepositformisnotcompletedwithin2yearsfromtheTemporaryCertificate
ofOccupancyexpirationdate.
Page7of22
FEESFORPERMITS/MISCELLANEOUSSERVICES
SERVICE FEE DESCRIPTION
AdministrativeFee $ 25.00 Staffmayauthorizetherefunding
ofanyfeepaid, lessan
administrativefee, whenwritten
applicationisfiledbytheoriginal
permitteenotlaterthan180days
afterthedateoffeepayment
whennoactivityhastakenplace.
AdministrativeAssessmentFee$ 100.00 + annualinterest FeechargedforCurrentServices
ratesetbyFinance asdefinedinCityCode97.01that
Director areassessedifnopaymentis
receivedfromthebenefited
propertyowner. Alsoincludes
falsealarms.
Antenna (leaseofparkortower $ 1,000.00plus $2,000 Neworamendedlease
space) escrow processingfee
300.00plus $2,000 Modificationprocessingfee
escrow ( includingnew, changing, or
removingcellfacilities)
AssessableServicesperCity CostofContractual
CodeSection97.01 Servicesx1.5.
AssessmentSearch $ 25.00
CDorUSBDrives $ 20.00
CollectionFeeforDelinquent $ 10.00addedtoany Citywillinvoiceamountsduefor
Charges (chargesthatarenot outstandingunpaidcharge threeconsecutivemonths. If
assessable) eachmonththeinvoice paymentisnotreceivedwithin90
remainsunpaidbeyond90 daysoforiginalinvoice, a $10
dayspastdue. collectionfeewillbeaddedto
amountdueeachmonththe
invoiceremainsunpaid.
ComprehensivePlan $ 25.00 CD
CreditCardServiceFee 3% oftotalsale Appliedtoallfeeswhenpaidwith
acreditcardexceptutilitybilling
andWebTractransactions
CurrencyExchangePermit, $ 25.00
annualrenewal
DogLicense $ 15.00
Nofeeforservicedogs. $ 10.00 Ifspayedorneutered
Dog, dangerous $ 500.00 Registration
100.00 Annualrenewal
ElectionEquipment $ 100perprecinctper Chargebacktotheschool
electioninwhichschool districts
boardisontheballotor
specialelections
conductedbytheCity.
ElectionJudges $ 12perhour ElectionJudge
14perhour HeadElectionJudge
EmployeeTime –e xcessive $. 001st hour;e ach Seeinformationingeneralfiles
searchorprojectrequestedby succeedinghour – two ( Fees – 2010Fee Schedule)
thepublic timesemployeerateof M.S. 13.03
pay
Page8of22
FEESFORPERMITS/MISCELLANEOUSSERVICES (cont’d)
SERVICE FEE DESCRIPTION
Excavation/Filling/Mining $ 500.00, initial Major
Letterofcreditorbondamount
tobedeterminedbytheCity $ 150.00, annualrenewal Major
Council)
50.00 Minor
FalseAlarms (police) $ 25.00/waivedforBest Firstfalsealarm
Withinacalendaryear Practice (BP)
50.00/$250. 0BP Secondfalsealarm
100.00/$100.00BP Thirdfalsealarm
200.00/$200.00BP Fourthandfifthfalsealarms
300.00/$300.00BP Sixthandseventhfalsealarms
400.00/$400.00BP Eighthandninthfalsealarms
500.00/$500.00BP Tenthandoverfalsealarms
10%p enaltyofunpaidfee PerCityCode99.08(A)f ailureto
paythefeewithin30daysnotice
willcausethealarmusertobe
considereddelinquentandsubject
100AdministrativeFeeif toapenaltyofafull10% ofthe
assessed fee.
FilingFee (elections) $ 5.00
GradingPermitforsubdivisions $ 1,000.00 Morethan5acres
Letterofcreditanderosion
deposittobedeterminedper $ 100.00peracre Lessthan5acres
Citypolicy.)
IndustrialDevelopment $ 5,000.00 Bondapplication
Revenue
ImpoundFees (dog/cat) $ 15.00/day Board
25.00 Fine/nodoglicense
45.00 Pickupfee
LicenseAgreementApplication $ 250.00 Buildings, structuresor
Fee encroachmentsinright-of-way
CityCode101.50 – 101.56
Maps $ 10.00 Aerial11x17
20.00 Aerial22x34
10.00 Coloredwall22x34
5.00 Colored11x17
5.00 Gradingmap
5.00 Platmap
20.00 Topographicalmap
Maps, Images, Data – Digital $ 25.00 GISdatabase
10/squaremile GISparcelbasemap
20/Squaremile Aerialphoto
10/10acre Planimetric, parcel & 2’contourif
available
25.00 Minimumfee
10.00 CDorDVDburning
Page9of22
FEESFORPERMITS/MISCELLANEOUSSERVICES (cont’d)
SERVICE SERVICE SERVICE
MassageEnterpriseLicense $ 100.00 Initial
50.00 Annualrenewal
200.00non-refundable Investigationfee
MassageTherapistLicense $ 25.00 Initialandrenewal
MassageTherapist $ 100.00non-refundable Investigationfee
InvestigationFee
MeetingRoomRequest – $ 25.00Mon. – Thurs. Per4hourblock
Marion/MariettaHall
50.00Fri., Sat., Sun & Per4hourblock
Holidays
MillandOverlay, Assessment $ 1,522.00 Single-familyresidence
MillandOverlay - FullDepth, $ 3,703.00 Single-familyresidence
Assessment
Pawnshop $ 750.00non-refundable Investigationfee
2,000.00 Annuallicensefee
1.50 Billabletransaction
PeddlerandSolicitors $ 100non-refundable PerApplicant
5 ReplacementPermitID
Photocopies $. 25percopyfor10 - 100 TheCitymayrequirethe
pages. requestingpersontopaythe
Actualcostforgreater actualcostofsearchingforand
than100pages. retrievinggovernmentdata,
includingthecostofemployee
10.00percopyforplan time, andformaking, certifying,
sheetslargerthan11x17 compiling, andelectronically
transmittingthecopiesofthedata
orthedata, butmaynotcharge
forseparatingpublicfromnot
publicdata. However, if100or
fewerpagesofblackandwhite,
letterorlegalsizepapercopies
arerequested, actualcostsshall
notbeused, andinstead, theCity
maychargenomorethan25
centsforeachpagecopied (Minn.
Stat. 13.03, Subd. 3. C.).
PreciousMetalDealer $ 750.00 Investigationfee
2,000.00 Annuallicensefee
1.50 Billabletransaction
PrivateActivityRevenueBond $ 2,500.00 Non-refundableapplicationfee
Applications perthepolicy.
10,000or1/8of1% of InitialIssuancefee.
theprincipalamount
Anescrowwillbeestablished
basedonestimateofCitycosts
incurredforeachproject.
Page10of22
FEESFORPERMITS/MISCELLANEOUSSERVICES (cont’d)
SERVICE FEE DESCRIPTION
RefuseHauling $ 100.00,a nnually 1st truck
25.00, annually Eachadditiontruck
Registration, Contractor 35.00peryear TreeContractor
ReturnedChecks/ACH $ 37.00
Right-of-Way
A. Registrationfee $ 50.00perregistration
B. ExcavationPermit $ 200.00eachpermitperutilitycompany
C. ObstructionPermit $ 75.00eachpermitperutilitycompany
D. DelayPenalty $ 25.00plus $25perweekorportionthereof.
E. PermitExtension Sameasdelaypenalty
F. DegradationFee Feebasedonallcoststorepairthestreettotheappropriate
streetrestorationdetailplatesifthepermitteeelectsnotto
repairthestreet.
G. UnauthorizedWorkPermit Uptodoublethepermitfee
H. CurbCutPermit $ 52.00
I. S m allWirelessFacilities $ 1500/UnitforCo-locationonCityFacilityplus $200/unitfor
Right-of-WayPermit
J. RestorationDeposit Depositbasedonlocationandextentofrestoration.
SeasonalSalesPermit $ 250.00
SecondhandDealer $ 750.00non-refundable Investigationfee
2,000.00annually Varietyofmerchandisetypes
500.00annually Onlyonemerchandisetype
1.50 Perbillabletransaction
SexuallyOrientatedBusiness $ 500.00 Investigationfee
5,000.00 Initialfee
5,000.00 Annualrenewal
Sign – freestanding $ 175.00
Sign – temporary $ 35.00
SignPermit – facechange $ 75.00
SignPermit – wall $ 125.00
SnowRemoval (sidewalks) Actualcostofremoval;
minimum $100.00perlot;
add $100.00ifassessed
SpecialEventPermitfora $ 250.00/over4hoursin Title9, Chapter92
Parade, RaceorPublic duration Possiblecontractualpoliceand
Assembly (excludingBlock citystaffovertimedepositand
Parties) $ 100.00/under4hoursin equipmentfeesmayapply.
duration
FeeswaivedforNationalNight
Out.
SpecialEventPermitfora $ 35.00plus $50.00
BlockParty refundablebarricade
deposit
Page11of22
FEESFORPERMITS/MISCELLANEOUSSERVICES (cont’d)
SERVICE FEE DESCRIPTION
StopPayments/Reissue $ 37.00
SubdivisionOrdinance $ 20.00
TaxIncrementFinancingApplication
AnescrowwillbeestablishedbasedonestimateofCitycostsincurredforeachproject.
TaxicabLicense $ 200non-refundable InvestigationFee
25.00pervehicleper
year
TobaccoLicense $ 200non-refundable InvestigationFee
250.00peryear Withuseofageverification
technology
500.00 Withoutageverification
technology
TreeDamage – penalty $100.00perdiameterinch
Chargedwhenabuilderhascauseddamagetotrees, orhasclearedtreesunauthorizedfor
removal. Whenlotshavebeenillegallyclearedoftreespriortobuildingpermit, amountofthe
penaltyshallbedeterminedbycomparingtreeinventoryofsimilarlots.
TreePreservationPermit $ 200.00
UncashedCheckFee $ 50 Processingfee
VacationofEasementorPublic $ 300.00
Roadway
WetlandConservationActAdministrationandReview
WetlandSize (Acres)
0to <3 3to5 5
WetlandDelineationReviewandApproval $ 250 $ 500 $ 750
WetlandReplacementPlanReviewand $ 500 $ 750 $ 1,200
Approval
WetlandReplacementMonitoring $ 5,000
Security-CashorLetterofCredit) 5years
Hourlyrateforstafftimeinexcessoffees $ 67perhour
collected
Wetlandmarkerswithpost $ 60.00each
Page12of22
LIQUORLICENSINGFEES
Investigation – AdministrativeFees
1. Atthetimeofeachapplicationforalicense, exceptatemporarylicense, theapplicant
shallmakeanon-refundablepaymentof $500.00withtheCityfortheinvestigationfee. If
the (police) investigationisconductedsolelywithintheState, thefeeshallbe $500.00.
ForinvestigationsconductedoutsidetheState, theCitymayrecovertheactual
investigationcostsnottoexceed $10,000.00. Anyfeedueinexcessofthe $500.00
depositmustbepaidpriortothelicensehearingandbeforetheCityCouncilconsiders
theapplication.
2. Theapplicantshallalsoberesponsibleforthepaymentofalladministrativecostsrelating
tolicenseissuance. Thisshallinclude, butisnotlimitedto, timespentbytheCity
Administratorandclericalpersonnel, copychargesandmailingcosts.
3. Foreachnewapplicationinvestigationandadministrativecostsshallbeaddedtogether,
andthetotalsubtractedfromtheinitialdeposit; saidbalanceshallbereturnedtothe
applicant.
4. Atanytimeanadditionalinvestigationisrequiredbecauseofachangeintheownership
ofanylicenseeorcontrolofacorporationlicenseorbecauseofatransferfromplaceto
place, thelicenseeshallpayanadditionalinvestigation-administrativefeeequaltothe
costoftheinvestigationandlicensere-issuance. Thedepositonthefeeshallbe
500.00.
5. Atanytimethatanadditionalinvestigationisrequiredbecauseofanenlargement,
substantialalterationwhich, intheCity’ opinion, changesthecharacterofthe
establishment, orextensionofthepremisespreviouslylicensed, thelicenseeshallpayan
additionalinvestigative-administrativefeeequaltotheamountofthecostofthe
investigationandlicensere-issuance. Thedepositinthefeeshallbe $500.00.
6. Ifrequested, theCityshallfurnishtheapplicantverificationofallcostsinexcessof
2,500.00.
Page13of22
LIQUORLICENSEAPPLICATIONFEES
Initial Renewal
1. Off-sale $ 100.00 1 0$0.00
maltliquor (3.2beer)
2. On-sale $ 106.25per $ 425.00
maltliquor (3.2beer) Quarter
3. TemporaryExpansionofPremises $ 250.00
4. Temporaryon-sale (per $ 50.00
eventuptothreedays)
5. Wine $ 212.50per $850.00
Quarter
6. Set-uplicense $ 125.00per $ 500.00
Quarter
7. LiquorLicense Pro-rated $ 5,250.00
Monthly
8. SundayLiquor $ 200.00 2 0$0.00
9. BrewPubs – on-saleintoxicating Pro-rated $ 5,250.00
Monthly
10. BrewPubs – on-sale3.2maltliquor $ 106.25per $ 425.00
Quarter
11. BrewPubs – off-sale $ 250.00 $ 250.00
12. SmallBrewerTaproomon-sale $ 600.00 $ 600.00
13. SmallBrewerTaproomoff-sale $ 250.00 $ 250.00
14. Microdistilleries – on-sale $ 600.00 $ 600.00
15. Microdistilleries – off-sale $ 250.00 $ 250.00
16. ClubLiquorLicense (annual)
a. $ 300ifmembershipis200orless;
b. $ 500ifmembershipisbetween201and500;
c. $ 650ifmembershipisbetween50land1000;
d. $ 800ifmembershipisoverl000.
17. On-SaleStrongBeer – NoChargeforapplicantwithbothanon-sale3.2beerand
winelicense.
18. RefundPolicy: Ifthelicensedestablishmentissold, apro-ratedportionofthelicensefee
shallberefundedtotheinitialowner/licensee, providedsuchamounthasbeenpaidtotheCityof
Savagebythenewowner/licensee.
FIREDEPARTMENTFEES
SERVICE FEE DESCRIPTION
DayCare/FosterCare $ 50.00
InspectionFee
EmployeeTime –e xcessive $. 001st hour;e ach Seeinformationingeneralfiles
searchorprojectrequested succeedinghour – twotimes ( Fees – 2010Fee Schedule)
bythepublic employeerateofpay M.S. 13.03
Page14of22
FIREDEPARTMENTFEES (cont’d)
SERVICE FEE DESCRIPTION
FalseFireAlarm $ 400.00 Perfalsealarminexcessoftwo
withinaperiodof12consecutive
months.
FireworksPermit $ 100.00 Forsalewithinanexistingretail
establishment.
100.00 Tolightapyrotechnicfireworks
display.
350.00 Forsalewithinanestablishment
inwhichonlyfireworksaresold.
350.00 FireworkTentSalesPermit
FireReport SeePhotocopiesunder
Permits/Misc. Services
FireSuppressionSystem/Fire Sameasbuildingpermit (based
AlarmSystem onvaluation): buildingpermit
fee, planreviewfee, surcharge.
Purpose:
TheSavageFireDepartmentrespondstoincidentsinvolvingfire, specialrescue (includingbut
notlimitedtotrench, confinedspace,e tc.e tc…),e xtricationfromvehiclesandoperating
equipment, railroadvehicles, hazardousmaterialsandotherspecialresponsesinthecommunity.
Thefirefightersalsoassistinspecialeventssuchas: eventplanning, firewatch, medicalor
specializedservicestand-bycoverageandresponse. Callsforserviceandspecialevents
occasionallyresultinnon-budgetedexpendituresfortheFireDepartmentandresultinanegative
consequenceforourresidents. Consistentwiththepolicydirectivesetforthherein, itwouldbe
appropriatefortheFireDepartmenttorecoveralloraportionofthecostsrelatedtoaresponse.
Policy:
1) TheSFDmaybillforservicesforthefollowingtypesofcalls:
a. Specializedservicessuchashazardousmaterials, confinedspacerescues,
trenchrescues, railroadincidentsoranyotherunforeseenincidentthatwould
haveabudgetaryimpactbyanon-taxpayingentity.
b. Crashesinourservicearea
i. Crasheswhichinvolveresidentsorbusinessownersofourfirecoverage
areawillnotbebilledbecausetheypaytaxeswhichfundthisfire
department.
c. CarFiresinourservicearea
i. Carfireswhichinvolveresidentsorbusinessownersofourfire
departmentareawillnotbebilledbecausetheypaytaxeswhichfundthis
firedepartment.
d. FireAlarms
i. Billingwilloccuraccordingtotheexistingordinanceadoptedinthecity.
Twofreealarmsper12monthcontinuousperiodandeachfalsealarm
thereaftermaybebilledatacostof $400.00peralarm). Falsealarmsare
tobedefinedbytheFireChief.
e. SpecialEvents
i. Stand-bycoverageforeventswillbebilledattheappropriaterates
f. InspectionFees
Inspectionfeeswillbebilledasnotedintheapprovedcityfeeschedule.
Page15of22
FIREDEPARTMENTFEES (cont’d)
SERVICE FEE DESCRIPTION
Item Feeperhour
1) Apparatus Onehourincrements
a. Aerial $ 300.00 / eachhour
b. Engines/Pumper $ 300.00 / eachhour
c. Rescue / Command $ 150.00 / eachhour
d. Tanker $ 175.00 / eachhour
e. LightRescue $ 100.00 / eachhour
f. DutyOfficervehicle $ 100.00 / eachhour
g. InspectorVehicle $ 100.00 / eachhour
h. ChiefVehicle $ 100.00 / eachhour
i. Utilityvehicle $ 100.00 / eachhour
j. Boat – Large $ 150.00 / eachhour
k. Boat – Small $ 100.00 / eachhour
l. HazmatTrailer $ 75.00 / eachhour
m. IceRescue $ 75.00 / eachhour
n. ATV – Mule $ 55.00 / eachhour
Apparatus/EquipmentCostsincludebutarenotlimitedto:
Apparatus
Equipment
Fuel
Radios/Phones
Referencematerial
Insurance
Vehicledepreciation
2) AdministrativeFees
a. Fireincidentreport FeeschargesasallowedbyMNstat13.03
b. Firecasualtyreport FeeschargesasallowedbyMNstat13.03
c. Photographicservices Actualcostperprint
d. Copies FeeschargesasallowedbyMNstat13.03
3) Trainingservices
a. Fortrainingofindustrial / education / assemblyfacilitiesandsimilarpersonnel,
actualcostsofinstructionalmaterialsandpreparationtime. Nottoexceed $30.00
perhour.
b. FireExtinguisherTraining
30.00percontacthourplusactualcostsofinstructionalmaterialsandpreparationtime.
c. CPRTraining (perstudent)
75HeartsaverCPR & First-Aid
45HeartsaverCPROnly
35HeartsaverFirst-AidOnly
45HeartsaverBlendedLearningSkillsCheckoff
4) Miscellaneousfeesandservices.
a. Firewatchpersonnel (standbyfirefighters) Costoftimeandmaterials
b. Specializedequipmentormaterials Costofmaterials
c. SpecializedEquipment Costofequipmentperentity
i. DumpTrucksandoperators
ii. Backhoesandoperators
iii. Loadersandoperators
iv. Policevehiclesandstaff
Page16of22
PARKANDRECREATIONFEES (*TAXABLEITEM- Subjectto7.375% MNStateSalesTax)
SERVICE FEE DESCRIPTION
BocceCourtRental* 15.00 Percourt/perday
DiamondDry & ChalkBags* 10.00 Perbag
ConcessionStandRental* $ 150.00 Perday/Non-refundable
Due2weekspriorto
reservation
FieldLights* $ 20.00 Perfieldperhour
PublicWorksStaff $ 25.00 Perhourforintern/seasonal
59.00 Perhourforfull-time
RefundCharge – Recreation $ 5.00 Perperson/peractivity
SoccerandFootballField $ 0.10/LF Stripinglayoutcharge
StripingandPreparation
Costs $ 0.05/LF Restripingcharge
SoccerFieldRentalCharge* $ 100.00for2hours AdultProgramming
25/hour Non-ResidentYouthGroups
SoftballFieldRentalCharge* $ 50.00perday; plusset-up AdultProgramming
chargeof $25.00perfieldper
day
250. 0perfieldperday Youth &S ORR (Southofthe
RiverRecreators)
WarmingHouseReservation* $ 15.00 Perhour
User/participationfeeindividuallyassignedperprogram.
PICNICSHELTERS (PARKANDRECREATIONFEES)
Damage/CleaningFee Feewillvarybasedonthe Costtorepairdamages/clean
amountofdamage/cleaning willbeinvoicedtotherenter.
andneeded.
PicnicShelterReservations $ 50Mon. – Thurs. Resident
upto50People (excludes
HiddenValleyMain,M cCann $ 75Fri. –S un. &H ol Resident
andSummitPoint)*
75Mon. – Thurs. Non-Resident
100Fri. –S un &H ol Non-Resident
PicnicShelterReservations – $ 60Mon. – Thurs. Resident
Premier (50+ people) (Hidden
ValleyMain,M cCannand $ 100Fri. –S un. &H ol Resident
SummitPointOnly)*
85Mon. – Thurs. Non-Resident
150Fri. –S un &H ol Non-Resident
PicnicShelterReservations- NoCharge – Mon. – Thurs. ISD191, 719, 720; Scouts
all t*axedifapplicable $ 50Fri. –S un. &H ol
ELCFEES (PARKANDRECREATIONFEES)
EnvironmentalLearning Feewillvarybasedonthe Costtorepairdamages/clean
Center (ELC) amountofdamage/cleaning willbeinvoicedtotherenter.
Damage/CleaningDeposit – needed.
AspenRoomandOutside
Patio
EnvironmentalLearning $ 100.00 Non-refundable. Willbeapplied
Center (ELC) Reservation towardbalancedue.
Fee – AspenRoomand
OutsidePatio*
Page17of22
ELCFEES (cont’d) P(ARKANDRECREATIONFEES)
EnvironmentalLearning Feesarehourlyand
Center (ELC) Room reservationsrequireatwohour
Reservation – spaceincludes minimum
AspenRoomandOutside
Patio* Mon. thruThurs.:
65.00/hror $900.00/day Resident
105/hror $1,300.00/day Non-resident
Fri., Sat., Sun & Holidays:
85.00/hror $900.00/day Resident
125.00/hror $1,300.00/day Non-resident
Youthorganizations, non-profit
civicgroups, & churches:
ResidentNon-Profits
35.00/hr Mon.t hruThurs
55.00/hr Fri.,S at.,S un &H olidays
Non-residentNon-Profits
65.00/hr Mon.t hruThurs.
85.00/hr Fri.,S at.,S un. &H olidays
EnvironmentalLearning NoChargeforthe Schoolslocatedwithinthe
Center – Education (EE) EnvironmentalEducation boundariesof191, 719, 720,
Classrooms* ( EE) Classrooms JeffersFoundationand
approvedEnvironmental
EducationOrganizations
15.00/hour Resident
25.00/hour Non-Resident
WeekdayRate - Incentive $ 450 - 7amto5pm
packageforrentalofthe $ 250 – 4hourblock
Aspenroomduringweekday $ 75/hr (min2hrs/1hrforadd
businesshours onhours)
ELCWEDDINGPACKAGE (PARKANDRECREATIONFEES)
Aspen & Patio $ 900/$1300 Resident/Non-Resident
Classroom #1 $ 240/$400
Classroom #2 $ 240/$400
Additional2hrs $ 180/$250
Packageincludes: Aspen Less20%/30% Discount
room, patio, bothclassrooms,
additional2hoursthenight PkgTotal = $1,200/$1,600
beforesetupor
groom/rehearsaldinnerOR2
hoursthefollowingmorning
forcleanup. Allsubjectto
availability.*
AdditionalItems: Wedding
Reservationfolder, reserved
forprivatepartya-frame
signs, preferredcatererlist,
preferredvendoradvertising
caterersandvendorspayto
advertise)
Page18of22
ELCPREFERREDVENDORPROGRAM (PARKANDRECREATIONFEES)
Weddingfoldermaterialsonly $ 50/year
Allreservationfolders $ 100/year
SPORTSCENTERFEES (PARKANDRECREATIONFEES)
SavageSportsCenter $ 125 - $150/hour PrimeTime:
FieldRental* Fields1,2 &3 Mon –F ri 5p.m.t o10p.m.
Sat 10a.m. to10p.m.
Sun 10a.m. to8p.m.
SavageSportsCenter $ 50 - $125/hour Non-PrimeTime:
FieldRental* Fields1,2 &3 Mon –F ribefore5p.m.
Sat 7a.m. to10a.m.
Sun 7a.m. to10a.m.
8p.m. to10p.m.
SavageSportsCenter $ 100 - 1/3dome November/Decemberreduced
FieldRental* $ 300 – fulldome rate
SavageSportsCenter
OpenPlay $ 5 (children5andunder GeneralAdmission
free)$45/10punches OpenPlayPunchCard
TotTurf $ 3 (ages5andunder) GeneralAdmission
25/10punches TotTurfPunchCard
SavageSportsCenter OpenFreeTime/Walking M-W-F: 6:30 – 9:30a.m.
T-Th: 12:00 – 3:00p.m.
SavageSportsCenter* $ 33perhour/$21per30min. BattingCages
POLICEDEPARTMENTFEES
SERVICE FEE DESCRIPTION
AffidavitofTrespassForm $ 30one-timeadministrative ForBusinesses & Multi-tenant
fee housing.
CDs/DVD’s/FlashDrive $ 25.00 Peritem.
ExtraDutyEmploymentFee Twotimesemployeebase
rateofpay.
Forfeiture-Impound $ 150 Firstsixmonths
100 Months7 –1 2
100 Annualcostafterinitialyearwith
a $550cap
Forfeiture-ImpoundProperty $ 25.00 Perrequest.
Release
Incident/CaseReports SeePhotocopiesunder
Permits/Misc. Services.
StateAccidentReports SeePhotocopiesunder
Permits/Misc. Services.
StatisticalReport SeePhotocopiesunder
Permits/Misc. Services.
Page19of22
UTILITYBILLINGFEES
A. WaterRates
Basechargepermonth $ 8.65
Chargeper1,000gallons/monthwith
thehighestrateappliedforallwater
consumedeachmonth
0to11,999gallonspermonth $3.48
12,000to15,999gallonspermonth $ 3.79
Over16,000gallonspermonth $ 4.18
Bulkwater $ 11.33per1,000gallons
Bulkwaterkey $ 10/each
B. SewerRates
Basechargepermonth $ 4.72
Chargeper1,000gals./mo. $ 1.50
MCEScostsper1,000gals./mo. $2.71RatedeterminedbyMetCouncil
C. IrrigationSystemRates
ResidentialSystem Normalwaterrates
Commercial-Industrial Impactfee (fornewirrigationsystemswhichare
separatelymetered) basedonmetersize:
1" $ 1,260.00
1.5" $ 1,890.00
2" $ 2,520.00
2.5" $ 3,150.00
4" $ 5,040.00
6" $ 7,560.00
Feeforwatermeterandreadingdevice:
Actualcostplus30percent
Annualmaintenancefee: $100.00
Basewaterchargepermonth: $8.65
Chargeper1000gals./month $4.18
D. MiscellaneousCharges
Accountset-upfee $ 25.00
Accounttransferfee $ 20.00
BackflowPreventionDevicesTest $ 10.00annually
CreditCardConvenienceFee $ 2.95 (on-linepaymentsonly)
Estimationfee $ 40.00
Non-responsivemeterrepair/readrequest $ 25.00permonth
Thirdpartyutilitybilling $ 25.00perreport
servicehistoryrequests
Utilitybilling/customerlists $ 20.00perlist
Sewerchargesforresidentialsewercustomerswillbebaseduponthewaterconsumptioneach
billingperiod, exceptfortheusagechargeforthesummermonthswhichwillbeequaltothelower
oftheactualwateruse, or150percentoftheaverageofwaterconsumedduringthemonthsof
NovemberthroughFebruary.
Sewerchargesforallotherpropertyclasseswillbeaccordingtomonthlymeteredusage.
Page20of22
UTILITYBILLINGFEES (cont’d)
Anyresidential, commercialorindustrialuserlocatedinanareaservedbywaterandsewer
servicewhoiseithernotconnectedornotutilizingthewaterandsewerfacilities, andonlyby
specialpermissionfromthecity, shallbebilledforminimumwaterandsewerrateslistedabove
asafacilityupkeepmaintenancecharge.
Allseweronlyaccountsshallbebilledbasedontheequivalentusageamountof9000gallons
permonth.
Alldelinquentaccountsshallbeassessedapenaltyof $5.00oroneandonehalfpercent (1.5%)
oftheunpaidbalance, whicheverisgreater, andsaidpenaltyshallbeaddedtothesubsequent
utilitybill. Anadministrativefeeof $100.00, plusanannualinterestratesetbyFinanceDirector
shallbeaddedtoalldelinquentaccountscertifiedasaspecialassessment. Feesmaybewaived
atthediscretionoftheCityAdministrator.
E. CleanWaterDischargeintoSanitarySewerSystem $ 500.00permonth
F. StormWaterDrainageUtility - MonthlyFeeStructure
Classification/LandUse:
1) SingleFamilyResidential $ 6.42 /perunit
2) Townhome/Duplex $ 5.14 /perunit
3) MultiFamily, Churches, Govt. $ 44.04 /netacre
Bldgs., EducationInstitutions
4) Commercial/Industrial
a) Greaterthan65% impervious $ 66.73 /netacre
b) 35% to65% impervious $ 43.39 /netacre
c) Lessthan35% impervious $ 23.34/netacre
5) MinnesotaRiverDistrict $ 23.34/netacre
6) OpenSpace/VacantLand/Agriculture $ 14.84/netacre
Alldelinquentaccountsshallbeassessedamonthlypenaltyof $5.00, oroneandonehalf
percent (1.5%p) ermonthontheunpaidbalance, whicheverisgreater.
G. StreetLightUtilityFee $ 2.99permonth, allcity
properties
H. WateringViolations (doesnotapplyforresidentswithprivatewells)
1st Violation ReminderCardSent
2nd Violation $ 25addedtowaterbill
3rd Violation $ 50addedtowaterbill
4th Violation $ 75addedtowaterbill
MISCELLANEOUSUTILITYCHARGES
1. Waterturn-on: $75.00 Watershutoff: $75.00
2. Afeeof $75.00, plusa $1.00statesurcharge, shallbechargedforapermittorepairor
alteranexistingconnectiontothemunicipalwaterandsewersystem.
3. Ifthepropertyownerrequestsreplacementofthewatermeter, thechargeshallbeactual
costofthemeterplus30percent (nofeeshallbechargedforlabor). Thefeeforaccessoriesand
otherpartsshallalsobeactualcostplus30percent.
4. Reimbursablecostforrepairofdamagewatermetersandequipmenttoincludecurb
stop, accesspipe, extensionrod, drivewaycasting, oraccesscapduetoabuse, neglector
freezingshallbebilledatactualcost (toincludeoperatortime) plus30percent.
Page21of22
MISCELLANEOUSUTILITYCHARGES – (cont’d)
5. WaterAccessories (seepage8)
6. FireFlowTest $ 175.00 + costofwaterused
Contractor/Agency/Resident/Other
7. Flushhydrantmainonrequest $ 175.00 + costofwaterused
Commercial/Industrial/Institutional/Residential
8. SanitarySewerUseandService $ 65hourlyrate
CityCodeTitle5PublicWorks, $ 100/hourtruckcharge
53.06and53.07, Fats, OilandGrease $ 100MCESTripCharge (roundtrip)
AfterHoursandHolidayratesapply
9. WaterTowerAccess
DuringNormalBusinessHours $ 80.00eachvisittoopenandclose
AfterHours:
Monday – Thursday:
Minimumoftwohours $ 130.00
Eachadditionalhour $ 65.00
Friday – SundayandHolidays:
Minimumoffourhours $ 260.00
Eachadditionalhour $ 65.00
10. Afterhourscalloutsspecifictoaresidentialorcommercialaddress:
Monday – Thursday:
Minimumoftwohours $ 130.00
Eachadditionalhour $ 65.00
Friday – SundayandHolidays:
Minimumoffourhours $ 260.00
Eachadditionalhour $ 65.00
Ord. 606, passed3-20-2006; Ord. 618, passed1-2-2007; Ord. 639, passed1-7-2008; Ord. 642,
passed7-7-2008; Ord. 650, passed12-15-2008; Ord. 661, passed12-21-2009; Ord. 671, passed
07-06-10; Ord. 677, passed12-20-10; Ord. 693, passed12-19-11; Ord. 711, passed12-17-12;
Ord. 727, passed12-16-13; Ord. 746, passed12-15-2014; Ord. 764, passed12-21-2015; Ord.
779, passed12-19-2016; Ord. 792, passed12-18-2017; Ord. 801, passed12-17-2018) Penalty,
see § 152.999
152.999 PENALTY.
152.999 Penalty
Anypersonwhoviolatesanyoftheprovisionsofthischaptershall, uponconvictionthereof,
befinednotmorethanthemaximumpenaltyforamisdemeanorprescribedunderstatelaw.
Eachdaythataviolationispermittedtoexistshallconstituteaseparateoffense.
PriorCode, § 9-26-13) (Ord. 535, passed9-4-2001; Ord. 719, passed5-20-2013)
Page22of22
152.999 PENALTY.
152. 999 Penalty
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not more than the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor prescribed under state law.
Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Prior Code, § 9- 26- 13) ( Ord. 535, passed 9- 4- 2001; Ord. 719, passed 5- 20- 2013)
Page 1 of 1