City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 100. General Provisions
Section 101. City Code 100-1
SHOREVIEW CITY CODE
100 General Provisions
101 City Code
101.010 City Code.
(A) How Cited. This code of ordinances shall be known as The Shoreview
City Code and may be so cited.
(B) Additions. New ordinances proposing amendments or additions to the
code shall be assigned appropriate code numbers and shall be incorporated
into the code as of their effective date. Reference or citation to the code
shall be deemed to include such amendments and additions. When an
ordinance is integrated into the code, there may be omitted from the
ordinance, the title, the enacting clause, the clause indicating date of
adoption, and validating signatures and dates. In integrating ordinances
into the code, the City Manager, in cooperation with the City Attorney,
may correct obvious grammatical, punctuation, and spelling errors; change
reference numbers to conform with sections, articles, and chapters;
substitute figures for written words and vice versa; and perform like
actions to insure a uniform code of ordinances without, however, altering
the meaning of the ordinances enacted.
(C) Title Headings; Cross References. Chapter, section, subdivision, and other
titles shall not be considered part of the subject matter of this code but are
intended for convenience only and not necessarily as comprehensive titles.
(D) Copies. Copies of this code shall be kept in the office of the City Manager
for public inspection or sale for a reasonable charge, as determined by the
City Council.
101.020 Definitions. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following
words have the meaning given them in this section.
(A) City. "City" means City of Shoreview.
(B) State. "State" means State of Minnesota.
(C) City Manager. "City Manager" means the City Manager.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 100. General Provisions
Section 101. City Code 100-2
(D) Person. "Person" means any natural individual, firm, partnership,
association, or corporation. As applied to partnerships or associations, the
term includes the partners or members; as applied to corporations the term
includes the officers, agents, or employees.
(E) Code. "Code" means the Shoreview City Code.
101.030 Statutory Rules Adopted. The definitions and rules of construction,
presumptions, and miscellaneous provisions pertaining to construction
contained in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 645 are adopted by reference and
made a part of this code. As so adopted, references in Minnesota Statutes
Chapter 645 to laws and statutes mean provisions of this code and references
to the legislature mean the City Council.
101.035 Conflicting Regulations. In the event there are conflicts between various
provisions of the Shoreview City Code, the most restrictive provision shall
apply.
101.040 Penalties. Except as otherwise provided herein, any violation of a provision
of this code shall be a misdemeanor. Each violation and every day which a
violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
101.050 Separability. If any ordinance or part thereof in the Shoreview City Code or
hereafter enacted is held invalid or suspended, such invalidity or suspension
shall not apply to any other part of the ordinance or any other ordinance unless
it is specifically provided otherwise.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 201. Purpose and Intent 201- 1
200 Development Regulations
201 Purpose and Intent
201.010 Purpose and Intent. The City's Development Regulations are adopted to protect
and promote the public health, safety and welfare of its residents and are intended
to implement the policies of the City’s Comprehensive Guide Plan and are
intended to help achieve the following objectives:
(A) To maintain the high quality of life within the community by promoting
investment and re-investment in the community.
(B) To provide opportunities for reuse, reinvestment and redevelopment that
increases the City’s employment and service base.
(C) To preserve and protect the City’s natural resources through standards that
promote sustainable land use and development.
(D) To stabilize and improve existing land uses, commercial and business centers,
neighborhoods, and property values by minimizing conflicts, harmonious
influences and harmful intrusion.
(E) To ensure that public and private lands ultimately are used for the purposes,
which are most appropriate and most beneficial for the City as a whole.
(F) To balance the demand for support services with the ability of the City to
efficiently utilize and/or expand the existing utilities, streets, etc.
(G) To establish development patterns which encourage suitable density
transitions from the less intense areas to those of higher intensity and prevent
undue concentrations of population.
(H) To protect all districts from excessive noise, illumination, unsightliness,
odors, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat, glare and other objectionable
influences.
(I) To provide a mechanism to safeguard a property owner's desire for and
investment in, alternative energy sources, be they active or passive.
(J) To stage development and redevelopment in a manner that coincides with the
availability of public services.
(K) To provide housing choice by permitting a variety of housing types, costs and
ownership options.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 201. Purpose and Intent 201- 2
(L) To provide for adequate light, pure air, safety, from fire and other danger.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-1
202 Definitions
202.010 Unless specifically defined below, in Section 205.091 pertaining to Flood Plain
Management, or in Section 208.020 pertaining to Signs, words or phrases used in
the City of Shoreview Code of Ordinances shall be interpreted so as to give them
the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give subject code
its most reasonable application.
Accessory Apartment. A clearly secondary dwelling unit created within an
owner-occupied, single-family dwelling and meeting the permit requirements
of this ordinance.
Accessory Building. An attached or detached subordinate building, or a portion
of the main building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building
or to the use of the premises, with the exception of enclosed porches.
Examples include, but are not limited to, garages, storage sheds and gazebos.
Accessory Structure. A subordinate structure, or a portion of the main structure,
the use of which is incidental to that of the main structure or to the use of the
premises. Examples include, but are not limited to – deck, fencing, and
landscape features such as a pergola.
Accessory Building, Attached. An accessory structure that has a contiguous
foundation, roof, floor or wall system connected to the main building.
Accessory Building, Detached. An accessory structure that is separated from the
principal structure by at least 6 feet with no connecting structures except for
at-grade sidewalks or pathways.
Accessory Building, Water-Oriented. A small, above-ground building or
structure which because of its relationship to the use and enjoyment of a
public water, is permitted to be located closer to the water than the required
structure setback. Examples of such structures include boathouses, storage
sheds, patios, screen porches/gazebos, and detached decks. Stairways, fences,
retaining walls, docks and dock sections, and boatlifts are not included in this
definition.
Accessory Use. A use, on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily
incidental and subordinate to, the principal use.
Agriculture. The cultivation of the soil and all activities incident thereto, except
that said term shall not include the raising and feeding of hogs, sheep, goats,
cattle, poultry and fur bearing animals.
All Terrain Vehicle. A motorized floatation-tired vehicle of not less than three
low-pressure tires, but no more than six tires, that is limited in engine
Rev. Date
4/4/16
Ord. #942
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-2
displacement of not less than 800 cubic centimeters and a total dry weight less
than 600 pounds.
Alley. A minor way providing secondary vehicular access to the side or rear of
two or more properties abutting on a street.
Amusement Center. Any location, establishment owning, operating, maintaining
or keeping 6 or more electrical and mechanical devices.
Ancillary Uses. Uses that are subordinate to the principal and accessory uses on
the property including but not limited to recreational structures, fire pits,
laundry-drying equipment and play equipment.
Animal, Domestic. Animals kept within the home as pets, such as fish, dogs, cats,
household birds, and similar animals.
Animal, Non-Domestic. Animals which are kept outside the home for purposes
of food or pleasure such as cattle, hogs, horses, bees, sheep, goats, llamas,
chickens (Gallus gallus domesticus), birds, such as emus and pigeons, and
similar animals.
Animal, Wild. Any animal, reptile or amphibian which is of a species not usually
domesticated; or of a species which, due to size, wild nature or other
characteristics, may be dangerous to humans; or would ordinarily be confined
in a zoo or found in the wild. The term includes but is not limited to:
(a) Animals and birds, the keeping of which is licensed by the state or federal
government, such as wolves, pheasants, and raptors such as eagles,
falcons, hawks, and owls.
(b) Weasels, wild ferrets, badgers, deer and bison.
(c) Crossbreeds of wild animals and domesticated animals such as the cross
between dogs and coyotes and dogs and wolves.
(d) All members of the Felidae family including, but not limited to, lions,
tigers, cougars, leopards, ocelots, cheetahs, and servals, but not including
domestic cats or cats recognized as a domestic breed, registered as a
domestic breed, and shown as a domestic breed by a national or
international multibreed cat registry association.
(e) Any member of the Canidae family, such as wolves, foxes, coyotes,
dingoes, and jackals, except domesticated dogs.
(f) Any poisonous animal such as a rattlesnake, coral snake, water moccasin,
puff adder, cobra, Gila monster or golden frog.
Rev. Date
5/3/10
Ord. 868
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-3
(g) Any snake or reptile which by its size, vicious nature or other
characteristic may be dangerous to human beings.
(h) Any skunk, or raccoon whether captured in the wild, domestically raised,
descented or not descented, vaccinated against rabies or not vaccinated
against rabies.
(i) Bears.
(j) All nonhuman primates, including, but not limited to, lemurs, monkeys,
chimpanzees, gorillas, orangutans, marmosets, lorises, and tamarins.
(k) Any other animal, bird, or reptile which is commonly considered wild.
Antenna. Any device or equipment designed for transmitting or receiving light,
sound or electronic signals, which is located on the exterior of, or outside of, a
building or structure and which is or could be attached to a tower.
Approved. As applied to material, device or method of construction, shall mean
approved by the City Manager or his/her designee under the provisions of this
Ordinance, or approved by other authority designated by law to give approval
in the matter in question.
Arterial, Minor. Streets as designated in the Comprehensive Guide Plan that are
intended to connect cities with adjacent communities and the regional
highway system.
Arterial, Principal. Streets as designated in the Comprehensive Guide Plan that
have regional or nationwide significance because they connect metropolitan
centers with one another and connect major business concentrations to
another.
Authorizing Body. The City Council, Planning Commission, Board of
Adjustments and Appeals, or City Manager or authorized to grant a permit
based on the provisions of this ordinance.
Auto Rental and Service Facility. Buildings and premises used to rent passenger
vehicles including automobiles, light trucks and vans. Said premises may be
used to store, clean, refuel and perform incidental servicing of vehicles
associated with the automobile rental facility. No servicing of vehicles is
offered to the general public.
Automobile Body Repair and Painting. Motor vehicle rebuilding or
reconditioning including body, frame or fender straightening and repair,
painting and vehicle steam cleaning.
Rev. Date
2/19/13
Ord. #905
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-4
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-5
Automobile Service Stations. A place where gasoline, kerosene or any other
motor fuel, lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for
sale to the public and deliveries are made directly into motor vehicles.
Services may include greasing and oiling, the sale of automobile accessories
on the premises, and replacement of parts and motor services, including
general repair, and the rebuilding or reconditioning of engines.
Awning. A temporary hood or cover which projects from the wall of a building,
and which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of the
supporting building.
Basement. Any floor level below the first story in a building, except that a floor
level in a building having only one floor level shall be classified as a basement
unless such floor level qualified as a first story as defined herein.
Bed, of lake or stream. The land at or below the Ordinary High Water Level on
water bodies defined as "protected" by the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources.
Billboard. (See Sign, Off-Premises Advertising).
Block. An area of land within a development that is entirely bounded by streets,
or by streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision, or a
combination of the above with a river, lake or rail line.
Bluff. (See Slope, Bluff)
Bluff Impact Zone. A bluff and the adjoining land located within 20 feet of the
top of the bluff.
Boat. Any contrivance used or designed for navigation on water.
Boathouse. A structure with a foundation designed for and capable of housing a
boat.
Boat Lift. A structure used to lift a boat out of the water and which may have a
canopy.
Board of Adjustments and Appeals. The Planning Commission serves as the
Board of Adjustments and Appeals.
Buildable Area. The area of a lot contained within the front, side and rear
setbacks.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-6
Building. Any structure for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals,
chattels or property of any kind, and when separated by party walls without
openings, each portion of such building so separated shall be deemed a
separate building.
Building Code. The building code of the City, including the fire code.
Building Facade. That portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending
from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the
building elevation.
Building Setback Line. A line located parallel to and a specified distance from a
lot line, top of bluff, or OHW level which represents the closest distance that a
building/structure is permitted to be located from the lot line, top of bluff or
OHW level.
Business. Any establishment, occupation, employment or enterprise wherein
merchandise is manufactured, exhibited or sold, or which occupies time,
attention, labor and materials or where services are offered for compensation.
Butt Lot. Any lot, the side of which coincides with the back lot of two or more
corner lots.
Camouflaged. Using shape, color, and texture to cause an object to appear to
become part of something else. Camouflage does not mean invisible but
rather appearing as part of another structure, such as a building, wall, or roof.
Includes wireless telecommunication facilities disguised to appear as another
structure such as a building, clock tower, chimney, church steeple, flag pole,
light pole, sign, tree, or utility pole.
Canopy. A roof-like structure projecting over any entrance of a store, building or
place of entry.
Cellar. That portion of a building having more than half of the clear floor-toceiling
height below the average grade of the adjacent ground.
Church. A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where
persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which building, together
with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a
religious body organized to sustain public worship.
CityManager or his/her designee. The Manager of the City as appointed by the
City Council or his/her designee.
Clear Cutting. The removal of an entire stand of trees.
Rev. Date:
4/18/05
Ord. #774
Rev. Date
8/4/08
Ord. #832
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-7
Club or Lodge. A non-profit association of persons who are bona fide members
paying annual dues, with a use of premises being restricted to members and
their guests. It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on such premises,
providing adequate dining space and kitchen facilities are available. Serving
of alcoholic beverages to members and their guests shall be allowed providing
such serving is secondary and incidental to the operation of the dining room
for the purpose of serving food and meals and providing further that serving
of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the applicable Federal, State and
Municipal laws.
Collector Street. A street so designated on the Comprehensive Plan and designed
to collect traffic from individual properties and minor arterials.
Combustible Material. Materials made of or surfaced with wood, compressed
paper, plant fibers, or other materials that are capable of being ignited and
burned placed in dangerous proximity to or in contact with heat-producing
appliances, vent connectors, gas vents, chimneys, steam and hot water pipes,
and warm air ducts.
Commercial Antenna or Tower. An antenna or other device and/or an associated
tower designed for use for commercial purposes or to provide a
telecommunications service with the intent to make a profit.
Commercial Recreation. Non-public and quasi-public establishments engaged in
providing amusement or entertainment for a fee or admission charge,
including but not limited to the following facilities and activities: dance halls;
dance area in a restaurant; bowling alleys; billiards and pool establishments;
commercial sports facilities such as arenas, rinks, race tracks, public golf
courses and driving ranges; amusement centers, amusement parks,
membership sports and recreation clubs, public outdoor swimming pools,
riding academies, carnival operations, expositions, taverns and bars, indoor
theaters and indoor firearms ranges.
Commercial Use. The use of land or buildings for the sale, lease, rental or trade
of products, goods, and/or services.
Commercial Usage Vehicle. Vehicles and equipment designed or modified for
use in any construction, demolition, or maintenance activity.
Tractors.
All trailers or towed equipment exceeding a gross vehicle weight of 1,500
pounds but not including recreational vehicles or trailers used to transport
boats, snowmobiles or ATV’s.
Snow removal vehicles and equipment and tree trimming vehicles and
equipment.
Earth moving vehicles and equipment.
Rev. Date
4/16/14
Ord. 920
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-8
Trucks, vans and pickups with a manufacturer’s nominal rated carrying
capacity of more than ¾ ton and gross vehicle weight exceeding 9000
pounds.
Community Based Residential Facility. A public or private facility, licensed by
the State of Minnesota which for gain or otherwise, regularly provides one or
more persons, who are handicapped by reason of mental retardation, mental
illness, chemical dependency or physical handicap, with a 24 hour per day
substitute for care, food, lodging, training, education, supervision, habilitation,
rehabilitation and treatment they need, but which for any reason cannot be
furnished in the person's own home. This may include a separate dwelling
unit, located within the principal building, for the care provider and the
employment of persons providing care and supervision for the residents of the
home.
Comprehensive Plan. The Shoreview Comprehensive Plan adopted by the City
Council and subsequent amendments thereto.
Concealed. Fully hidden from view. Refers to a wireless telecommunication
facility that is not evident and is hidden or integrated into a structure such as a
building, wall, or roof.
Conditional Use. A specific type of structure or land use listed in the
Development Code that because of special requirements or characteristics
may be allowed but only after an in-depth review procedure and with
appropriate conditions and restrictions so as to be compatible with other land
uses in the area and uphold the integrity of the Comprehensive Plan.
Construction/Heavy Equipment Sales and Rental. Retail establishments selling or
renting construction, farm, or other heavy equipment. Examples include
cranes, earth moving equipment, tractors, combines, heavy trucks, etc.
Controlled Access/Beach Lot. A separate riparian property owned and
maintained jointly by non-riparian property owners in the vicinity and used by
said non-riparian owners for lake-related recreation activities.
Court. An open unoccupied space bounded on two or more sides by the exterior
walls of a building or buildings on the same lot.
Coverage. That portion of a lot which has been covered with an impervious
surface or structure.
Cul-de-sac. A local street with only one outlet which is permanently terminated
by a vehicular turn around.
Rev. Date
2/19/13
Ord. #905
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-9
Curb Level. The level of the established curb in front of the building measured at
the center of such front. Where no curb level has been established, the City
Engineer shall establish such curb level or its equivalent for the purpose of
this ordinance.
Day Care Facility, Licensed. A public or private establishment enrolling children
from more than one other family where tuition, fees, or other forms of
compensation for the care of the children is charged, and which is licensed or
approved by the State of Minnesota to operate as such.
Deck. A horizontal, unenclosed platform, without a roof which may be attached
or unattached to a structure, including any attached railings, seats, trellises, or
other features not more than 36 inches above the platform, and whose
platform, if attached to a dwelling, is larger than permitted for a landing, not
including steps and ramps.
Density Per Gross Acre. The quotient of the total number of dwelling units
divided by the total area of the site.
Density, Residential. A density established within individual residential land use
categories in the official Land Use Plan element of the Shoreview
Comprehensive Plan.
Developer. Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation who owns
or controls land which is to be developed.
Development. The construction, installation or alteration of any structure; the
extraction, clearing or other alteration of terrestrial or aquatic vegetation, land
or the course current or cross section of any water body or water course; or the
division of land into two or more parcels.
District. Referring to a zoning district, as defined by ordinance, it is a section of
the City for which the regulations governing the height, area, use of buildings
and premises are the same.
Department of Natural Resources (DNR). The state agency which guides and
controls the natural resources for Minnesota.
Double Frontage Lot. A lot which front and rear lot lines abut substantially
parallel rights-of-way.
Drive Up Facility. An establishment which by design, physical facilities, service,
or by packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive
services or obtain goods while remaining in their motor vehicles.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-10
Dwelling Structure. A building with one or more dwelling units thereof occupied
or intended to be occupied for residential purposes, but not including rooms in
motels, hotels, nursing homes, boarding houses, trailers, tents, cabins, or
trailer coaches.
Dwelling, One or Single Family. A dwelling structure containing one dwelling
unit.
Dwelling, Multiple Family. A dwelling structure containing two or more
dwelling units that are attached side-by-side and/or are stacked ceiling to
floor. The terms "duplex", "double dwelling", "tri-plex", and "quad" are
commonly used to refer to multiple family dwelling structures with two, three,
and four dwelling units.
Dwelling Unit. Residential accommodation located within a dwelling structure
which includes permanently installed cooking, eating, living, and sanitation
facilities arranged, designed, used or intended for use exclusively as living
quarters for one family.
Earth Sheltered Structure. A building with 50 percent or more of the wall area
covered with a minimum depth of 12 inches of earth.
Easement. A grant by an owner of land for the specific use of said land for a
public or quasi-public purpose.
Energy System, Conventional. An energy system, including supply elements,
furnaces, burners, tanks, boilers, related controls, and energy distribution
components that uses nonrenewable energy sources (such as coal, oil, natural
gas and nuclear materials).
Enforcement Officer. As designated by the City Manager, shall be responsible for
enforcing the provisions of this section.
Equipment Enclosure. A structure, shelter, cabinet, box, or vault designed for and
used to house and protect the electronic equipment necessary and/or desirable
for processing wireless telecommunication signals and data, including any
provisions for mechanical cooling equipment, air conditions, ventilation,
and/or auxiliary electric generators.
Exterior Property Areas. Open space on the premises under the control of owners
or operators of such premises.
Extermination. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by
eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their feed, by poison spraying, fumigating,
trapping or by another recognized and legal pest elimination method.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-11
Family. One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, including
foster children, and up to two boarders, or a group of not more than five
persons (excluding servants) some or all of whom are not related by blood,
marriage or adoption, living together and maintaining a common household.
Final Plat. Final map, drawing, or chart on which the developer's plan of a
development is presented to the City Council for approval and which, if
approved, will be submitted to the County Register of Deeds.
Fire Chief. The Chief of the Fire Department serving the City of Shoreview.
Fire Department. The Fire Department serving the City of Shoreview.
Flood Protection Elevation, Regulatory. An elevation no lower than one foot
above the elevation of the Regional Flood plus any increases in flood
elevation caused by encroachments on the flood plain or floodway.
Floor Area, Gross (GFA). The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building (including cellars and basements) measured from the
exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two
buildings, but not including interior parking spaces, loading space for motor
vehicles, or any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet.
Floor Area, Net (NFA). The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding
stairwells, elevator shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular parking or
loading, restrooms and utility rooms.
Foundation Area. That portion of the lot covered with roofed structures generally
measured to the foundation or footings.
Fuel Station. Any building, land area or other premises, or portion thereof, used
or intended to be used for the retail dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels,
including the sale of automobile accessories and groceries, but not including
any vehicle repair or maintenance.
Grade. The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface, or, regarding signs, the
elevation or level of the ground at the place the sign is to be erected.
Grade, Adjacent Ground Elevation. The lowest point of elevation of the finished
surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building
and the property line or, when the property line is more than five feet from the
building, between the building and a line five feet from the building.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-12
Habitable Space. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking.
Bathroom, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility space, and
similar areas are not considered habitable space.
Hardship. As defined in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 462.357, Subd. 6(2), as may
be amended.
Hazardous Materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property,
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of,
or otherwise managed. Categories of hazardous waste include, but are not
limited to, explosives, flammables, oxiders, poisons, irritants, and corrosives.
Height, Antenna or Tower. The distance measured to the highest point of the
antenna or tower from the mean ground level measured at the base of a freestanding
facility or the projected base as determined by extending the antenna
or tower base down vertically to the ground. For building mounted antennas,
height is measured to the highest point of the equipment enclosure from the
top of the cornice of a flat roof, from the top line of a mansard roof, from a
point on the roof directly above the highest wall of a shed roof, from the
uppermost point on a round or other arch-type roof, or from the highest gable
on a pitched or hip roof.
Height, Building. With the exception of substandard riparian lots, building height
shall be measured as follows: A distance to be measured from the mean curb
level along the front lot line or from the mean ground level for all that portion
of the structure having frontage on a public right-of-way, whichever is higher,
to the top of the cornice of a flat roof, to the top line of a mansard roof, to a
point on the roof directly above the highest wall of a shed roof, to the
uppermost point on a round or other arch-type roof, or to the mean distance of
the highest gable on a pitched or hip roof. For substandard riparian lots,
building height is measured from the highest roof peak to the lowest point at
finished grade. Finished grade is the final grade upon completion of
construction. Grade is defined as the lowest point within 5 feet of the building
in accordance with the Uniform Building Code.
High Tech. Employment base land use activity conducted entirely within a
building and involved in research, testing, development and processing of new
highly specialized products, such as medical and integrated hybrid circuits and
electronic instruments, and which involves little or no toxic by-products and
other industrial wastes and/or pollutants and does not require heavy
transportation needs or exterior storage.
Rev. Date
7/5/11
Ord. #879
Rev. Date
3/19/12
Ord. #890
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-13
Home Occupation. Any occupation carried out for gain by a resident and
conducted as an accessory use within the resident's dwelling unit.
Housekeeping Amendment. A proposed amendment to the Comprehensive Plan
that consists of editorial changes to correct typographical errors or changes to
clarify the meaning of and relationship between plan components or proposed
amendments to elements of the Comprehensive Plan not required by the
Minnesota Land Planning Act.
Illegal Discharge. Any non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system or the
MS4.
Illicit Connections. Either of the following:
(i) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system or the MS4
including but not limited to sewage, process wastewater, wash water
and any connections to the storm drain system or the MS4 from indoor
drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had
been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency; or
(ii) Any drain or conveyance connected from any land use to the storm
drain system that has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement
agency.
Impervious Surface Coverage. Any surface that prevents substantial infiltration
of precipitation and prohibits the growth of vegetation. Such surfaces include,
but are not limited to, driveways, parking lots, patios, roofs, sidewalks, streets,
swimming pools and tennis courts. Impervious materials include asphalt;
brick; concrete; crushed rock or stone; gravel; plastic; and stone. The City
Manager or his/her designee shall determine whether any proposed surface or
material is pervious or impervious. The use of the material shall be
considered when making a determination of the pervious or impervious nature
of any material, i.e., areas subject to repeated pedestrian and vehicular traffic
become compacted and are considered impervious.
Individual Sewage Treatment System. A septic tank and soil absorption system
or other individual or cluster type sewage treatment system as defined in
Chapter 7080 of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's rules.
Industrial Use. The use of land or buildings for the production, manufacture,
warehousing, storage, or transfer of goods, products, commodities, or other
wholesale materials.
Rev. Date
3/19/12
Ord. #890
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-14
Infestation. The presence, within or contiguous to a dwelling or premises, of
noxious insects, rodents, vermin or other pests.
Infrastructure. The various utilities necessary for a contemporary development
project, including water, sewer, streets, etc.
Inoperable Vehicle. A vehicle including, but not limited to, any automobile,
truck, trailer, marine craft, snowmobile, motorcycle, all terrain vehicle, mobile
home, pickup camper, camping trailer, and other equipment for motorized
transportation, that (i) has a missing or defective part that is necessary for the
normal operation of the vehicle, (ii) is stored on blocks, jacks, or other
supports, or (iii) does not display a license or displays a license that is expired.
Unmounted pickup campers or vehicles which are towed shall not be deemed
inoperable vehicles if they otherwise possess all parts and are capable of
normal operation and display a license that is not expired.
Institutional Housing. Housing for students, mentally ill, infirm, elderly, nurses,
physically handicapped and similar housing of a specialized nature.
Kennel. Any place where four (4) or more dogs over six (6) months of age are
kept for private or commercial purposes.
Key Lot. Any lot, the rear lot line of which abuts the side lot line of one or more
adjoining lots or parcels, or any lot, the side lot line of which abuts the rear lot
line of one or more adjoining lots or parcels.
Landing. A horizontal, unenclosed platform that is attached to the principal
structure adjacent to an entry; that not including steps, does not exceed 5 feet
in depth perpendicular to the structure or 7 feet wide; and which leads to a
walkway. It may have a roof (covered landing). (Also commonly referred to
as steps or a stoop.)
Landmark Tree. A well-shaped, healthy tree of significant age for its species with
a trunk diameter as measured four and one-half feet above the ground that
meets or exceeds the following: 15 inches - Ash, Birch, Black Cherry, Cedar,
Maple, Pine, Spruce, Elm, Oak, and other species; and 30 inches - Box Elder,
Cottonwood, and Willow.
Loading Space. A space accessible from a street, alley or way, in a building or on
a lot, for the use of trucks while loading or unloading merchandise or
materials.
Local Street. Those streets identified in the Comprehensive Plan which are of
limited continuity used primarily for access to abutting properties and the
local needs of the neighborhood.
Rev. Date
8/4/08
Ord. 832
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-15
Lot. A parcel of land designated by metes and bounds, registered land survey, or
other accepted means.
Lot Area. The land area within the lot lines, excluding any street rights-of-way
and easements for street rights-of-way.
Lot, Corner. A lot situated at the junction of and fronting on two or more streets.
Lot Coverage. See Impervious Surface Coverage.
Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front property line and the
rear lot line. The greater frontage of a corner lot is its depth and its lesser
frontage is its width.
Lot, Interior. A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot Line, Front. The boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated
public or private street. In the case of a corner lot, it shall be the shortest
dimension on a public street.
Lot Line, Rear. That boundary of a lot line which is most distant from and is or is
approximately parallel to the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten
feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be
deemed to be a line ten feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the
maximum distance from the front lot line.
Lot Line, Side. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front or rear lot line.
Lot of Record. Title for a lot of record must have been created and recorded in
the Office of the Ramsey County Recorder or the Ramsey County Registrar of
Titles prior to April 3, 1991, the effective date of Shoreview Ordinance 552
(Recodification of the Shoreview Code of Ordinances).
Lot Width. The mean width of a lot measured at right angles to the mean depth.
Manufactured Homes. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or
more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or
without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems
contained therein, except that the term includes any structure which meets all
the requirements, and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files
a certification required by the secretary and complies with the standards
established under Minnesota Statutes, Section 327.3.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-16
Manufacturing. Establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical
transformation of materials or substances into new products, including the
assembling of component parts, the manufacturing of products, and the
blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastics, or resins.
Marquee. (See Canopy)
Medical Uses. Uses primarily engaged in furnishing medical, surgical or other
services to individuals, including the offices of physicians, dentists, and other
health practitioners, medical and dental laboratories, outpatient care facilities,
blood banks and oxygen and miscellaneous types of medical supplies and
services.
Mining. The excavation of earth materials such as sand, gravel, rock, industrial
minerals, peat, etc. for the purpose of sale, and including quarrying, well
operation, milling (such as crushing, screening, washing and flotation) and
other preparation customarily done at the mine site or as part of a mining
activity.
Mobile Home. Any vehicle used or constructed to permit its use as a conveyance
upon public streets or highways, and including self propelled or non-self
propelled vehicles designed in a manner to permit long term occupancy as a
dwelling place for one or more persons, having no foundation other than
wheels, jacks or skirtings.
Mobile Home Park. Any site or tract of land upon which two or more occupied
mobile homes are located regardless of the charge or absence of charge for
accommodations.
Motel/Hotel. A building or group of buildings used primarily for the temporary
residence of motorists or travelers.
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4). The system of conveyances
owned and operated by the City of Shoreview and designed or used for
collecting or conveying stormwater, and that is not used for collecting or
conveying sewage. The MS4 includes sidewalks, roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, stormponds, infiltration chambers and basins, rain gardens, storm
drains, and all other stormsewer system infrastructure.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater
Discharge Permit. A permit issued by Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to public waters of the United
States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general
area-wide basis.
Rev. Date
3/19/12
Ord. #890
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-17
Non-Conforming. Initially in compliance with applicable City or predecessor
governmental unit regulations but no longer in compliance due to a change in
such regulations.
Non-stormwater Discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system or MS4 that
is not composed entirely of stormwater.
Nuisance. As defined in Section 210.
Nursing Home. An intermediate care or skilled nursing care facility providing
care to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or
infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. Such facilities must be defined
and licensed as nursing homes by the State of Minnesota under Health
Department regulations (14M) 44-67 and Minnesota Statutes Section 144.56.
Occupant. Any person living and sleeping in a dwelling unit or having actual
possession of said dwelling or rooming unit.
Office Uses. Those commercial activities that take place in office buildings
where goods are not produced, sold or repaired.
Office/Showroom. A multi-tenant building with a gross floor area of at least 30%
finished office space, in addition to showroom, warehousing and distribution
uses including product display, storage, wholesale, and distribution of
manufactured products, supplies, and equipment, but excluding bulk storage
of materials that are inflammable or explosive or that create hazardous or
commonly recognized offensive conditions.
Office/Warehouse. A multi-tenant building with gross floor area consisting of at
least 15% finished office space, in addition to warehousing and distribution
uses including storage, wholesale, distribution of manufactured products,
supplies, and equipment, but excluding bulk storage of materials that are
inflammable or explosive or that create hazardous or commonly recognized
offensive conditions.
Official Flood Plain Map. The Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) panels
numbered 27123C0005G, 27123C0010G, 27123C0020G, 27123C0030G and
27123C0036G, along with the attached Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for
Ramsey County (All Jurisdictions) all dated June 4, 2010 and prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
Open Sales Lot. Any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying, selling,
renting or leasing any goods, materials, or merchandise and for the storing of
the same under the open sky prior to sale.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-18
Open Space. Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set
aside, dedicated, designed or reserved by a developer or governmental unit for
public or private use.
Open Space, Common. A parcel or parcels of land or areas of water, or a
combination of land and water within a development which is designed and
intended for the use and enjoyment of residents of the development. Common
open space includes all land in excess of the individual building lots and land
accepted for public dedication.
Open Space, Usable. The minimum dimension for usable open space shall be ten
(10) feet and the minimum area shall be one hundred (100) square feet or
whatever minimum is required by regulation.
Openable Area. That part of a window or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
Operator. Any person who has charge, care or control of a multiple residence or
rooming house, in which dwelling units or rooming unit are let for occupancy.
Ordinary High Water (OHW) Level. The boundary of public waters and wetlands
and an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been
maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the
landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from
predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the
ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel.
For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary high water level is the operating
elevation of the normal summer pool.
Outside Display Area. An area set aside for the display of materials and/or
products for sale or lease.
Owner. Owner or owners of the freeholder of the premises or lesser estate
therein, a mortgagor or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver,
executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a
building, including their manager and agents.
Parapet. A low wall which is an architectural component of a flat roofed building
and which extends above the roof line of the building to which attached.
Parking Space. An area to be used exclusively as a temporary storage space for
one motor vehicle.
PartyWall. A common wall which divided two (2) independent structures.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-19
Pawnbroker Shop. “Pawnshop” means the location at which or premises in which
a pawnbroker regularly conducts business.
Pedestrian Way. A public right-of-way across or within a block or development
reserved for people traveling on foot.
Permitted Use. A term used in zoning ordinances that refers to a list of uses that
are specifically allowed in a zoning district.
Planned Unit Development (PUD). A type of development which may
incorporate a variety of land uses planned and developed as a unit. The
Planned Unit Development is distinguished from the traditional subdivision
and site plan approval processes of development in that development
standards such as setbacks, height limits, and minimum lot sizes may be
altered by negotiation and agreement between the developer and the
municipality, except that land uses and densities shall be consistent with that
permitted by the Land Use Plan.
Person. An individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
Plumbing or plumbing fixtures. Water heating facilities, water pipes, gas pipes,
garbage disposal units, water closets, waste pipes, sinks, installed
dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing
machines or other similar equipment, catch basins, drains, vents, or other
similarly supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, gas, sewer
or vent lines.
Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ammunition and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage; dissolved and particulate metals; feces and
animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or
structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Porch, Unenclosed. A horizontal roofed platform, attached or unattached to a
dwelling, with a wall system that consists of roof support members, with or
without railings, and no doors, screens or windows. If attached to a dwelling,
the platform is larger than permitted for a landing, not including steps and
ramps.
Porch, Enclosed. A horizontal roofed platform, attached or unattached to a
dwelling, heated or unheated, with a wall system that consists substantially of
Rev. Date
3/19/12
Ord. #890
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-20
screens, windows, and/or doors. If attached to a dwelling, the platform is
larger than permitted for a landing, not including steps and ramps.
Preliminary Plat. A tentative map, drawing or chart of a proposed subdivision
meeting requirements herein enumerated.
Premises. A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the building or structures
thereon.
Principal. Something of primary importance.
Principal Unit. The existing single family dwelling located on a host parcel.
Private Antenna or Tower. An antenna or other device and/or associated tower
designed for the private use and enjoyment of the property owner that will not
be used to provide a telecommunications service with the intent to make a
profit. These devices include, but are not limited to, devices designed for
reception of television broadcast signals, multi-channel multipoint distribution
service, direct broadcast satellite services, AM/FM radio, telephone, internet,
or any facility designed to transmit or receive amateur radio or citizen band
radio.
Property Line. A line of record separating a parcel (or lot) which divides a parcel
from another parcel or from a public or private street or any other public
space.
Public/Quasi-Public Facilities. Uses such as schools, churches, and government
buildings and facilities, including parks, playgrounds, trails and other
recreational areas.
Public Waters. As defined in Minnesota Statutes Section 103G, Subd. 15 and any
amendments thereto.
Recreation Vehicle. A vehicle used or designed for use for temporary residential
occupancy including but not limited to campers, motorhomes, mobile homes,
pickup campers, camping trailers, tent trailers and travel trailers.
Recreational Equipment. Play apparatus, such as swing sets, slides, sandboxes,
poles for nets, canoes and kayaks less than 18 feet in length, paddle boats,
picnic tables, lawn chairs, barbeque pits and similar equipment or structures
but not including tree houses, swimming pools, playhouses or sheds utilized
for storage or equipment.
Recreational Facility. A facility, not used for commercial purposes, that is
located on or next to the ground, including but not limited to: putting greens,
volleyball, tennis and basketball courts; batting, pitching soccer and golf cages
Ord. 874
Rev. Date
11/15/10
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-21
and nets; hockey and ice rinks; skate board ramps, trampolines, portable
flooring for aerobics, dance, and weight lifting.
Rest Home. A private home for the care of children, aged or infirm, or a place of
rest for those suffering from bodily disorders. Such home does not contain
equipment for surgical care or from the treatment of disease, injury or mental
care, nor provides maternity care.
Restaurant. An establishment, where food and drink are prepared and served for
human consumption, principally within the establishment or for take-out to be
consumed off-premises. Musical entertainment may be offered within a
restaurant when clearly secondary to the restaurant use.
Right of Way. The land covered by a public road or other land dedicated for
public use or for certain private use; such as land through which a power line
passes, above or underground.
Riparian Lot. A lot of record that abuts a public water that is subject to the City
of Shoreview's Shoreland Management regulations.
Roof Line. The uppermost line of the roof of a building, or in the case of an
extended facade, the uppermost height of said facade.
Sanitary Sewer System. Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, force mains, and
all other appurtenances used for conducting domestic and non-domestic
sewage to a treatment facility.
Satellite Earth Station. The antenna and all other equipment necessary for
processing electronic signals traffic (including, but not limited to voice, data,
and video) received from terrestrial distributions prior to transmission via
satellite and of traffic received from the satellite prior to transfer of channels
of communication to terrestrial distribution systems.
Seasonal Residential Sales Event. An advertised event hosted by one or more
households at a residence of one of the participants which involves the sale of
merchandise, generally on a non-appointment basis. The merchandise may
include but is not limited to handcrafted items, used household or personal
items, new merchandise, and agricultural produce. These events are more
commonly referred to as garage or estate sales and boutiques.
Setback. The minimum horizontal distance, measured in feet between a structure
and a property line, top of bluff, OHW level or between two structures such as
in the case of freestanding signs or on-site sewage treatment systems.
Shopping Center. A group of commercial establishments planned, developed, and
managed as a unit with off-street parking provided on the property.
Rev. Date:
4/18/05
Ord. #774
Rev.Date
7/5/11
Ord. #879
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-22
Shore Impact Zone. Land located between the OHW level of a public water and a
line parallel to the OHW at a distance equal to 50 percent of the minimum
required building setback from the OHW level.
Shoreland. Land located within the following distances from public water: (1)
1,000 feet from the ordinary high water mark of a lake, pond, or flowage; and
(2) 300 feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a flood plain
designated by ordinance on such a river or stream, whichever is greater. The
limits of shorelands may be reduced whenever the waters involved are
bounded by topographic divides which extend landward from the waters for
lesser distances and when approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
Sidewalk. An improved pedestrian surface that is typically located adjacent to a
roadway.
Sign. See Section 208.020.
Slope, Bluff. A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment having all
of the following characteristics:
Part or all of the feature is located in the shoreland area;
The slope rises at least 25 feet above the ordinary high water level;
The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25 feet above the
ordinary high water level averages 30 percent or greater; and
The slope must drain towards the water body.
Slopes, Steep. Slopes between 12% and 18% for horizontal distances of 50 feet
or more, including all soils grouped in County Soil Survey Slope Class C.
Slopes, Very Steep. Slopes between 19% and 30% for horizontal distances of 50
feet or more, including all soils grouped in County Soil Survey Slope Classes
D, E, F.
Snowmobile. A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice steered
by skis or runners.
Solar Collector. A device, or combination of devices, structure, or part of a
device or structure that transforms direct solar energy into thermal, chemical
or electrical energy and that contributes significantly to a structure's energy
supply. No window or skylight smaller than 30 square feet in area shall be
construed as a solar collector within the meaning of this definition.
Solar Energy. Radiant energy (direct, diffuse and reflected) received from the
sun.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-23
Solar Energy System. A set of devices whose primary purpose is to collect solar
energy and convert and store it for useful purposes including heating and
cooling of buildings and other energy-using processes, or to produce
generated power by means of any combination of collecting, transferring or
converting solar-generated energy.
Solar Energy System, Active. A solar energy system that requires external
mechanical power to move the collected heat.
Solar Energy System, Passive. A solar energy system that uses natural and
architectural components to collect and store solar energy without using any
external mechanical power.
Special Purpose Trailer. A trailer having a gross vehicle weight of less than 1,500
pounds. Special purpose trailers include utility trailers and trailers used to
transport boats, snowmobiles or ATV’s.
Stable. Any building, incidental to an existing residential, principal use, that
shelters horses for the exclusive use of the occupants of the premises.
Storage Area, Outside. An area, subject to certain conditions, set aside for storage
of equipment and materials.
Storm Drainage System. Facilities owned by public agencies/entities other than
the City of Shoreview, by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed,
including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention
and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels,
reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
Stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff, or drainage consisting entirely of water
from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
Stormwater Management Plan. The best management practices and activities to
be implemented by a property owner to identify sources of pollution or
contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant
discharges to stormwater, the stormwater drainage system, the MS4, and/or
receiving waters.
Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor next above; or if there is no floor above, the space
between the floor and the ceiling next above. A basement shall be counted as
a story; a cellar shall not be counted as a story. If the finished floor level
directly above a useable or unused under-floor space is more than six feet
above grade as defined herein for more than fifty percent of the total perimeter
Rev. Date
3/19/12
Ord. #890
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-24
or is more than twelve feet above grade as defined herein at any point, such
usable or unused underfloor space shall be considered as a story.
Story, First. The lowest story in a building which qualifies as a story, as defined
herein, except that a floor level in a building having only one floor level
below grade, as defined herein, for more than fifty percent of the total
perimeter, or more than eight feet below grade, as defined herein, at any point.
Street. A public way for vehicular traffic designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road arterial, lane, place or however
otherwise designated. The width of a street is measured between right-of-way
lines.
Street Frontage. The proximity of a parcel of land to one or more streets. An
interior lot has one (1) street frontage and a corner lot has two (2) frontages.
Street Line. The line coinciding with the lot and the street right-of-way line.
Street, Private. A street serving as vehicular access to two or more parcels of
land, which is not a through street, and which is not dedicated to the public
but is owned by one or more private parties.
Structure. A combination of materials to form a construction for use, occupancy,
or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the surface of land or
water.
Structure, Alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a building such
as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or any change in the dimension
or configuration of the roof or exterior walls.
Subdivider. Any person commencing proceedings under this ordinance to effect a
subdivision of land for himself or others.
Subdivision. The separation of an area, parcel or tract of land under single
ownership into two or more parcels, tracts, lots or long term leasehold
interests, except those separations specified in Chapter 462.358, Subd. 4b of
Minnesota Statutes and any amendments thereto.
Substandard Lot. A lot of record that does not meet the minimum standards of the
zoning district in which it is located.
Supplied. Installed, furnished or provided by the owner or operator.
Swimming Pool. Any enclosure, above or below grade, having a water surface
area exceeding one hundred square feet and a water depth greater than
eighteen inches at any point.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-25
Temporary Sales Office. A temporary place of business on the premises of a
development used to promote real estate purchases exclusively within that
development. Such offices may remain until 80% of the development is sold.
Toe of Bluff. Lowest elevation of the lowest 50-foot long segment of a bluff.
Top of Bluff. Highest elevation of the highest 50-foot long segment of a bluff.
Tower. Any self-supporting pole, spire, or structure, or any combination, that is
constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas and
all supporting lines, cables, wires, bracing and linkage systems designed. This
definition includes, but is not limited to, lattice towers, guy towers and
monopole towers. A tower does not include building mounted Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities (WTF).
Townhouse. A one-family dwelling in a row of at least three such units in which
each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located
over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or
more common fire resistant walls.
Transit Bench. A bench rest maintained on a publicly dedicated street or right-ofway
for the convenience and comfort of persons waiting for buses or other
vehicles.
Truck Terminal. A building or area in which trucks, including tractor or trailer
units, are parked, stored, or serviced, including the transfer, loading or
unloading of goods. A terminal may include facilities for the temporary
storage of loads prior to transshipments.
Undeveloped Land. Land which is not developed with structures of the maximum
number, type, bulk and height allowed by the integrated Development
Ordinance of Shoreview.
Use. The method or manner of employing a lot or structure.
Use, Principal. The specific primary purpose for which land is used.
Utilities. Underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or
distribution systems; collection, communication (excluding wireless
telecommunication facilities), supply or disposal systems, including poles,
wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants or other similar equipment and accessories in conjunction
therewith; but not including buildings.
Rev. Date
7/5/11
Ord. #879
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-26
Variance, Standard. A departure from the standards of this ordinance, but not
including land use, building use, or administrative procedures granted only
upon a demonstration of hardship.
Vehicle Sales. Any land or buildings used for in the sale of automobiles, light
trucks, travel trailers, recreational vehicles, boats and motorcycles.
Ventilation. The process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical
means to or from any space.
Veterinary Clinic. A commercial activity catering to the medical needs of
animals and having no outside runs or shelters for the keeping of animals.
Warehousing. The storage of materials or equipment within an enclosed building
as a principal use including packing and crating.
Waste Container. A disposable or non-disposable receptacle that is waterproof
and fly tight, used primarily for storage of refuse and other waste materials
between collections by households accumulating small quantities of refuse or
other waste materials.
Waste Materials. All other discarded, combustible or noncombustible, organic or
inorganic materials infrequently accumulated in the operation of a house,
including but not limited to, vehicles, vehicle parts, major appliances,
furniture, building materials, animal manure, trees, limbs and trunks, metal
scrap, and other material that cannot be temporarily stored in a waste
container or bundle because of its size or shape.
Wastewater. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from a facility.
Watercourse. A ditch, stream, creek, swale, or other defined channel intended for
the conveyance of water, runoff, groundwater discharge or similar hydraulic
or hydrologic purpose.
Wetland. As defined by the Wetland Conservation Act of 1987 and amended in
1992.
Wholesaling. The selling of goods, equipment and materials by bulk to another
business that in turn sells to the final customer.
Wireless Telecommunication Facility. Equipment, including commercial
antennas, commercial telecommunication towers, and equipment enclosures,
designed for the transmission and reception of all types of data, including, but
not limited to, writing, signs, signals, pictures, and sounds of all kinds without
the aid of wire, cable, or other like connections between the points of origin
Rev. Date
7/5/11
Ord. #879
Rev. Date
3/19/12
Ord. #890
Rev. Date
2/19/13
Ord. #905
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-27
and reception of such transmission, including all instrumentalities and
apparatus incidental to such transmission. As used in the Shoreview
Municipal Code, the term "wireless telecommunication facility" shall not
include amateur radio antenna or towers; mobile transmitting devices, such as
vehicle or handheld radios/telephones and their associated transmitting
antennas; satellite earth stations; or broadcast towers.
Workmanlike. Whenever the words “workmanlike state of maintenance and
repair” are used in this ordinance they shall mean the standards of the trade or
industry involved.
Yard. The space between a lot line and building line that is unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be permitted by the
Development Ordinance. All ground, lawn, court, walk, driveway or other
open space constituting part of the same premises as a resident building.
Yard, Front. A space extending the full width of the lot between any building and
the front lot line, and measured at the closest point to the front lot line. The
front yard includes any area between any building and the front lot line that is
not a side yard, as defined. Such front yard is unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward except as may be permitted in the Development
Ordinance.
Yard, Rear. A space extending the full width of the lot between the principal
building and the rear lot line, and measured at the closest point of the rear lot
line. The rear yard includes any area between any building and the front lot
line that is not a side yard, as defined. Such rear yard is unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be permitted in the
Development Ordinance.
Yard, Required. The open space between the lot line and the buildable area
having the width or depth required in the district in which it is located.
Yard, Side. A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the
principal building and side lot line measured from the side lot line to the
closest point of the principal building. Such side yard is unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be permitted in the
Development Ordinance.
Zero Lot Line. The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or
more of the building's sides rest directly on a lot line.
Zoning District. An area within the limits of the zoning jurisdiction for which the
regulations and requirements governing use, lot and bulk of structures and
premises are uniform.
Rev. Date:
4/18/05
Ord. #774
Rev. Date
4/18/05
Ord. #774
Rev. Date
4/18/05
Ord. #774
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 202. Definitions 202-28
Zoning District Map. A map showing the boundaries of the zoning districts as
established by the Development Ordinance and designated as the "Zoning
District Map."
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-1
203 Administration
203.010 General Provisions.
(A) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this code to repeal,
abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of
this ordinance shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this
ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
(B) Applications and Fees.
(1) Application. An application may only be submitted by the property
owner, individual or other entity that has legal interest in the property.
(2) Forms. Application shall be made on forms provided by the City and shall
include all information and data requested. The applicant shall meet with
the Community Development Department to receive the proper forms and
information.
(3) Documents. The applicant must provide complete documentation as
prescribed by this ordinance or requested by the City Manager. The City
Manager shall require a survey of the property, prepared by a registered
and licensed surveyor, if necessary to review the application. The City
Manager shall determine if the application is complete and then schedule
the complete application for the next available Planning Commission
meeting.
(4) Other Agencies. Upon receipt of the completed application, the City
Manager shall refer copies to pertinent City staff and other public agencies
for review and comment. If within 30 days, any agency fails to submit a
report or request an extension, the City may proceed.
(5) Time. A recommendation/decision must be completed by each of the
various reviewing entities within 60 days from the date of receipt. The
City must render a final decision within a period not to exceed 6 months.
(C) Lapse and Reapplication.
(1) Lapse. A permit or approval which has been granted but not used shall
become void one year after its effective date. A permit which has become
void may be renewed in accordance with the procedures herein established
for an original application.
(2) Reapplication. No application for the same or substantially the same
request shall be made within six months of the date of denial.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-2
(3) Fees. Fees for the various applications shall be as determined by City
Council resolution. A copy of the current fee schedule shall be kept on
file by the City Manager.
(D) Enforcement and Penalty. This ordinance shall be administered and enforced
by the City Manager. The City Manager may institute, in the name of the City
of Shoreview, all appropriate actions or proceedings against violators as
provided by law. Any person, firm or corporation, who violates or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
(E) Interpretation and Intent. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements
adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety and welfare. To protect
the public, among other purposes, such provisions are intended to provide for
adequate light, pure air, safety from fire and other danger, prevent undue
concentration of population, provide ample parking facilities, regulate the
location and operation of businesses, industries, dwellings and buildings for
other specified purposes, preserve property values by providing for orderly
and compatible development of the various land uses, provide for
administration of this ordinance, provide for amendments hereto, and provide
for official recording of this ordinance and all amendments hereto.
(F) Separability. If any part of this ordinance is held to be unconstitutional or
otherwise illegal, the remainder of this ordinance shall be deemed and held to
be valid and remain in force and effect as if such portion had not been
included herein. If this ordinance or any provision herein is held to be
inapplicable to any person, property or work, such holding shall not affect the
applicability hereof to any other person's property or work.
(G) Warning and Liability Disclaimer. This ordinance does not imply that areas
outside the Flood Plain Districts or land uses permitted within such districts
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create
liability on the part of the City of Shoreview, or any officer or employee
thereof, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or
any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
203.020 Review Process.
(A)Public Hearing. Applications that require review via a public hearing shall be
processed after receipt of a complete application that contains all the required
submittal information. The City Manager shall refer the application to the
Planning Commission and establish a date for hearing of the application. The
application shall be heard and acted on by the Planning Commission and City
Council in accordance with Minnesota Statute 15.99.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-3
(1) Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing, preceded by published and/or mailed notice as required by the
terms of Section 203. Upon review of the application in accordance with
the requirements of the Development Ordinance, the Planning
Commission will forward the application to the City Council with a
recommendation of approval or denial and the reasons thereof, or shall
table the application for further consideration.
(2) City Council. The City Council may hold a public hearing in lieu of a
public hearing by the Planning Commission. Upon receipt of the Planning
Commission report, the City Council shall consider the application. The
City Council shall, taking into consideration the advice and
recommendations of the Planning Commission, table, grant or deny the
application in accordance with the requirements of the Development
Ordinance.
(3) Notice and Hearing Procedure. Public hearings shall be preceded by
either published notice and/or mailed notice as required by the terms of
Section 203.
(a) Publication. Notice of the purpose, time and place of a public hearing
shall be published at least 10 days before the date of the hearing in the
official newspaper of the City of Shoreview as designated by the City
Council. Affidavits of publication shall be made a part of the record of
the proceedings.
(b) Mailed Notice. Notice of the purpose, time and place of a public
hearing shall be mailed at least 10 days before the date of the hearing
to each recorded owner of property within 350 feet of the perimeter of
the property, which will be the subject matter of the public hearing.
An affidavit containing the names of the property owners and the
addresses to which the notices were mailed shall be made a part of the
record of the proceedings.
(c) Failure to Give Notice. Failure to give mailed notice, or defects in the
notice shall not invalidate the proceedings provided a bona fide
attempt has been made to comply with the mailed notice requirement.
(4) Issuance and Conditions. If approved, the City Council may impose
conditions and safeguards therein to insure that the proposed use will not
be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the community
and that the use is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the
Development Ordinance and the Comprehensive Guide Plan. If denied,
the City Council shall provide the reasons thereof.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-4
(5) Decision. The City Council has the authority to grant or deny the request
in accordance with the requirements of the Development Ordinance upon
majority vote of its membership, unless otherwise stated in this ordinance.
Requests for text amendments, zoning district map amendments,
comprehensive guide plan amendments and planned unit development –
development stage require a 4/5 majority vote of the City Council’s entire
membership for approval.
(B) Planning Commission/City Council Review. Applications that require review
by the Planning Commission and City Council shall be processed after receipt
of a complete application that contains all the required submittal information.
The City Manager shall refer the application to the Planning Commission and
establish a date for hearing of the application. The application shall be heard
and acted on by the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance
with Minnesota Statute 15.99.
(1) Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall hold a hearing,
preceded by mailed notice as required by Section 203, in consideration of
granting the request. The Planning Commission shall review the
application in accordance with the requirements of the Development
Ordinance. Upon review of the application, the Planning Commission will
recommend to the City Council approval and conditions thereof or denial
and the reasons thereof, or shall table the application for further
consideration.
(2) City Council. Upon receipt of the report from the Planning Commission,
the City Council shall consider the application. The City Council shall,
taking into consideration the advice and recommendations of the Planning
Commission, table, grant or deny the application in accordance with the
requirements of the Development Ordinance.
(3) Notice and Hearing Procedure.
(a) Mailed Notice. Notice of the purpose, time and place of a public
hearing shall be mailed at least 10 days before the date of the hearing
to each recorded owner of property within 350 feet of the perimeter of
the property which will be the subject matter of the public hearing. An
affidavit containing the names of the property owners and the
addresses to which the notices were mailed shall be made a part of the
record of the proceedings.
(b) Failure to Give Notice. Failure to give mailed notice or defects in the
notice shall not invalidate the proceedings provided a bona fide
attempt has been made to comply with the mailed notice requirement.
Rev. Date
12/11/07
Ord. #821
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-5
(4) Issuance and Conditions. If approved, the Council may impose conditions
and safeguards therein to insure that the proposed use will not be
detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the community and
that the use is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the
Development Ordinance and the Comprehensive Guide Plan. If denied,
the City Council shall provide the reasons thereof.
(5) Decision. The City Council has the authority to table, grant or deny the
request in accordance with the requirements of the Development
Ordinance upon majority vote of its membership, unless otherwise stated
in this ordinance.
(C) Planning Commission Review. Applications that require review by the
Planning Commission shall be processed after receipt of a complete
application that contains all the required submittal information. The City
Manager shall refer the application to the Planning Commission and establish
a date for hearing of the application. The application shall be heard and acted
on by the Planning Commission in accordance with Minnesota Statute 15.99.
(1) Hearing. The Planning Commission shall hold a hearing, preceded by
mailed notice as required by Section 203, in consideration of granting the
request. The Planning Commission shall review the application in
accordance with the requirements of the Development Ordinance. Upon
review of the application, the Planning Commission shall table the
application for further consideration, approve the application with
conditions thereof or deny the application and provide reasons thereof.
(2) Notice and Hearing Procedure.
(a) Mailed Notice. Notice of the purpose, time and place of a public
hearing shall be mailed at least 10 days before the date of the hearing
to each recorded owner of property within 150 feet of the perimeter of
the property which will be the subject matter of the public hearing. An
affidavit containing the names of the property owners and the
addresses to which the notices were mailed shall be made a part of the
record of the proceedings.
(b) Failure to Give Notice. Failure to give mailed notice or defects in the
notice shall not invalidate the proceedings provided a bona fide
attempt has been made to comply with the mailed notice requirement.
(c) Issuance and Conditions. If approved, the Planning Commission may
impose conditions and safeguards therein to insure that the proposed
use will not be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of
the community and that the use is in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of the Development Ordinance and the Comprehensive
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-6
Guide Plan. If denied, the Planning Commission shall provide the
reasons thereof.
(3) Decision and Appeal. The Planning Commission has the authority to
table, grant or deny the request in accordance with the requirements of the
Development Ordinance upon majority vote of its membership. Decisions
of the Planning Commission shall be final unless the applicant or other
aggrieved party submits an appeal in accordance with Section 203.020(E),
Appeals to Planning Commission Decisions.
(D) Administrative Review. The City Manager shall review the application for
compliance with the regulations of the Development Ordinance after receipt
of a complete application that contains all required submittal information.
(1) Notice. The City Manager shall provide written notification to property
owners in accordance with the requirements of Section 203. Failure to
give a mailed notice or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the review
process provided that a bona fide attempt has been made to contact the
property owners.
(2) Issuance and Conditions. If the City Manager determines that the use is in
compliance with the conditions contained in Section 203, then the City
Manager shall approve or deny the application. Conditions required by
the Development Ordinance shall be applied to the approval. The
application may be denied if the City Manager finds that the request
proposed does not conform to the Development Ordinance.
(3) Decision and Appeal. Decisions of the City Manager shall be final unless
the applicant or other aggrieved party submits an appeal in accordance
with Section 203.020(F), Appeals of Administrative Decisions.
(E) Appeals of Planning Commission Decisions.
(1) Application. Applications to appeal a Planning Commission decision shall
be made on forms provided by the City Manager, who shall forward
completed applications to the City Council for review.
(2) Deadline for Application. Appeals must be made in writing and be
submitted to the City Manager within five business days of the Planning
Commission’s decision.
(3) Review Process. The City Manager shall refer the application to the City
Council and establish a date for hearing of the application. The application
shall be processed in accordance with Minnesota Statute 15.99.
(4) Notice and Hearing Procedure.
Rev. Date
4/18/05
Ord. #774
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-7
(a) Mailed Notice. Notice of the purpose, time and place of the appeal
shall be mailed at least 10 days before the date of the hearing to the
appellant and those property owners notified during the review
process. An affidavit containing the names of the property owners and
the addresses to which the notices were mailed shall be made a part of
the record of the proceedings.
(b) Failure to Give Notice. Failure to give mailed notice, or defects in the
notice shall not invalidate the proceedings provided a bona fide
attempt has been made to comply with the mailed notice requirement.
(5) Criteria for Review. Any appeal must be based on the application’s
compliance or noncompliance with the requirements of the Development
Ordinance.
(6) Decision. The decision of the City Council to table, grant or deny the
appeal requires a majority vote of members present.
(F) Appeals of Administrative Decisions.
(1) Application. Applications to appeal an administrative decision shall be
made on forms provided by the City Manager, who shall forward
completed applications that include the required information to the
Planning Commission, which shall act as the Board of Appeals and
Adjustments for review.
(2) Deadline for Application. Appeals must be made in writing and be
submitted to the City Manager within five business days of the
administrative decision.
(3) Review Process. The City Manager shall refer the application to the
Planning Commission and establish a date for hearing of the application.
The application shall be processed in accordance with Minnesota Statute
15.99.
(4) Notice and Hearing Procedure.
(a) Mailed Notice. Notice of the purpose, time and place of a hearing
shall be mailed at least 10 days before the date of the hearing to the
appellant and those property owners notified during the permit review
process. An affidavit containing the names of the property owners and
the addresses to which the notices were mailed shall be made a part of
the record of the proceedings.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-8
(b) Failure to give mailed notice, or defects in the notice shall not
invalidate the proceedings provided a bona fide attempt has been made
to comply with the mailed notice requirement.
(5) Criteria for Review. Any appeal must be based on the application’s
compliance or noncompliance with the requirements of the Development
Ordinance.
(6) Decision and Appeal. The decision of the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals to grant or deny the appeal requires a majority vote of members
present. Decisions of the Board of Appeals and Adjustments on appeals
shall be final unless an appeal is filed in accordance with Section
203.020(E).
203.030 Permits. Unless otherwise stated in Section 203, the following regulations shall
apply to all permits.
(A)Expiration of Permit. Unless otherwise stated in Section 203, an approved
permit shall expire and be considered null and void one year after it has been
issued if the use has not been established or no construction has taken place,
except that, upon written application of the owner of the affected land prior to
the end of such year, the authorizing body may extend the expiration date of
such permit for an additional period not to exceed one year.
(B) Revocation. If the permittee is not in compliance with the terms of the permit,
a hearing shall be scheduled before the City Council for the purpose of
determining whether to revoke the permit. The hearing shall be preceded by
ten (10) days mailed notice to permittee and those occupants of property
within applicable notification radius of the process under which the permit
was issued.
(C) Renewal. In general, renewal requirements shall be as provided for in each
permit process. The authorizing body may require periodic renewal as a
condition of approval.
(D)Reapplication. No application for a permit with a same or similar request
shall be submitted for a period of 12 months from the date of denial of the
previous application.
(E) Amended Permits. Amended permits shall be requested for changes in the use
or conditions of the existing permit. A request to amend the permit shall be
administered in a manner similar to that required for a new permit.
(F) Other Permits and Approvals. The applicant shall obtain other permits and
approvals from other governmental agencies as required.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-9
203.031 Accessory Apartment Permit.
(A)Application. Applications for an accessory apartment within RE or R-1
zoning districts shall be allowed subject to review by the City Manager.
Applications shall be made on forms provided by the City and shall include
the submittal information indicated on the form.
(B)Notice. The City Manager shall provide written notification to property
owners within 150 feet of the property that a permit has been approved upon
issuance of the permit.
(C) Review Process. Applications for accessory apartments shall be reviewed
administratively by the City Manager in accordance with Section 203.020 (D).
(D)Criteria for Review. The City Manager shall review the completed
application in consultation with the Building Inspector and Fire Chief, and
shall determine whether the application complies with the regulations of the
Development Ordinance and meets the standards in Section 207.010.
(E) Length of Permit. Upon the sale of a home having an accessory apartment
permit, the buyer must renew the permit.
(F) Record of Permit. The City shall require the owner to place restrictive
covenants on the property controlling the use of the accessory apartment. The
City Attorney must approve said covenants. Said covenants shall be filed
with the Ramsey County Recorder or Registrar of Titles.
203.032 Conditional Use Permit (Non-Floodplain).
(A)General. Certain uses, while generally not suitable in a particular zoning
district, may under some circumstances be suitable if conditions are attached.
In those circumstances, conditions may be imposed to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the community and to insure harmony with the
Comprehensive Guide Plan. The permit shall be granted for a particular use
and not a particular person or firm.
(B)Applications. The property owner, individual or other entity that has legal
interest in the property may submit applications for a Conditional Use Permit.
This application shall be filed with the City Manager on the application form
provided by the City and include the required information.
(C) Review Process. Conditional use permit applications shall require a public
hearing and shall be processed in accordance with Section 203.020(A).
(D)Criteria for Review. The Conditional Use Permit may be granted provided the
proposed use is listed as a conditional use for the district in which it is located
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-10
and upon showing that the standards and criteria of the Development
Ordinance will be satisfied in addition to the following:
(1) The use is in harmony with the general purposes and intent of the
Development Ordinance.
(2) The use is in harmony with the policies of the Comprehensive Guide Plan.
(3) Certain conditions as detailed in the Development Ordinance exist.
(4) The structure and/or land use conform to the Land Use Chapter of the
Comprehensive Guide Plan and are compatible with the existing
neighborhood.
(E) Length of Conditional Use Permit. Any use permitted under the terms of a
conditional use permit shall be established and conducted in conformity to the
terms of such permit and of any conditions designated in connection
therewith. The Conditional Use Permits shall remain in effect for as long as
the conditions agreed upon are observed, provided that nothing in this section
shall prevent the City Council from action or amending the Development
Ordinance to change the status of conditional uses.
(F) Record of Permit. A certified copy of any conditional use permit shall be
filed with the Ramsey County Recorder or Registrar of Titles.
203.033 Conditional Use Permits (Floodplain)
Application. Certain uses may be permitted in the FW, FF, GF Districts with a
Conditional Use Permit provided the criteria of Section 205.091 are met so as to
promote the public, health, safety and general welfare.
(A)Application. Certain uses may be permitted in the Floodplain District with a
Conditional Use Permit provided the standards of Section 205.091 are met so
as to promote the public, health, safety and general welfare. Applications for a
conditional use permit in a floodplain shall be made on forms provided by the
City Manager and include the required information.
(B) Review Process. Conditional use permit applications in floodplains shall
require a public hearing and shall be processed in accordance with Section
203.020(A).
(C)Notice and Hearing Procedure. In addition to the notice and hearing
requirements in Section 203.020(A), the City Manager shall submit by mail to
the Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed
Conditional Use sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive
at least ten days notice of the hearing.
Ord. 864
Rev.
4/19/10
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-11
(D) Issuance and Conditions. The City Council may prescribe such conditions
and safeguards, in addition to those specified below, when granting a
Conditional Use Permit as it deems necessary to satisfy the intent and
requirements of Section 205.091, the Floodplain Management Ordinance.
Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities.
(2) Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation.
(3) Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
(4) Requirements for construction of channel modifications, compensatory
storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures.
(5) Flood-proofing measures, in accordance with the State Building Code and
this ordinance. The applicant shall submit a plan or document certified by
a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood-proofing
measures are consistent with the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation
and associated flood factors for the particular area.
(E) Criteria for Review. The City Council shall consider all relevant factors
specified in the Development Ordinance, and
(1) The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities
caused by encroachments.
(2) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to
the injury of others or they may block bridges, culverts or other hydraulic
structures.
(3) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these
systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
(4) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage
and the effect of such damage on the owner.
(5) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community.
(6) The requirements of the facility for a water front location.
(7) The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the
proposed use.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-12
(8) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and the
planned use of the property.
(9) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood
plain management program for the area.
(10)The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles.
(11)The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
(12)Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this ordinance.
(F) Notification of Decision. In addition to Section 203.020(A)(5), the City
Manager shall forward a copy of all decisions granting Conditional Use
Permits to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten (10) days of the
Council’s action.
203.034 Design Review for Substandard Lots.
(A)Administrative Review.
(1) Eligible Projects. Design review for the following projects shall be
reviewed administratively by the City Manager in accordance with Section
203.020(D):
(a) Projects on lots that exceed 80% of the minimum required lot width,
depth, and area.
(b) Driveways, sidewalks, patios, and other at-grade structures.
(c) All detached accessory structures including sheds, garages, and wateroriented
structures.
(d) Attached decks and unenclosed porches.
(e) Enclosed porches, dwelling additions, and additions to an attached
garage, provided said porch or addition is 150 square feet or less.
(2) Application. Administrative design review will be performed as part of
the Building Permit process. In addition to information required for
Building Permit review, the applicant must provide any and all
information requested by the City Manager for the purpose of determining
compliance with the applicable design standards of the Development
Ordinance.
Rev. Date
5/1/06
Ord. #796
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-13
(3) Criteria for Review. The City Manager may grant approval of the design
review only when the proposed improvements comply with the applicable
design standards of the Development Ordinance. Any variances to the
design standards require review and approval by the Planning
Commission.
(4) Expiration. Design review approval shall become void within one year
from the date of approval unless a building permit has been obtained and
construction began or unless the City Manager grants a written extension.
(B)Design Review by the Planning Commission.
(1) Review. The Planning Commission must approve any construction,
reconstruction or expansion of a structure on a substandard lot except for
those projects eligible for administrative review as described in Section
203.034(A). The Planning Commission review shall be in accordance
with Section 203.020(C).
(2) Application. Applications for residential design review shall be made on
forms provided by the City Manager and include the required information.
The City Manager shall forward completed applications to the Planning
Commission.
(3) Criteria for Review. Unless a variance is approved, the Planning
Commission may grant approval of the design review only when the
proposed improvements comply with the applicable design standards of
the Development Ordinance.
(4) Expiration. Design review approval shall become void within one year
from the date of approval unless a building permit has been obtained and
construction began or unless the Planning Commission grants an
extension.
203.035 Grading Permit.
(A)Grading means any land disturbance activity and includes construction,
landscaping, clearing and grubbing, excavating, transporting soil and earth
material, and filling of land.
(B) Permit Required. A grading permit or a building permit must be obtained
from the City before commencing any of the following activities:
(1) Any grading in a wetland area.
Rev. Date
5/1/06
Ord. #796
Rev. Date
5/1/06
Ord. #796
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-14
(2) Grading within any Buff or Shore Impact Zone or on any Steep Slope
which will involve the movement of more than five (5) cubic yards of soil
material, or disturb an area of more than 500 square feet.
(3) Grading elsewhere in the City which will involve the movement of more
than ten (10) cubic yards of soil material or disturb an area of more than
1,000 square feet.
(4) Grading in association with detached single family residential construction
does not require a separate grading permit; however, all of the
requirements of this section are to be requirements of the building permit.
(5) In Short Impact Zones, Bluff Impact Zones and on Steep Slopes, a
Grading Permit is required to construct, maintain, repair or reconstruct a
retaining wall, as specified in Sec. 209.080(G)(1)(b) and (c).
(6) Any grading that modifies the historic or approved drainage pattern in a
significant manner, as determined by the Public Works Director.
(C) Timing. A grading permit may not be issued until after the City Council has
granted the applicant a preliminary plat, site and building plan, or equivalent
approval if required by Section 203.
(D)Applications. Applications for a grading permit shall be made on forms
provided by the City Manager and include the required information.
(E) Review Process.
(1) Administrative Review. Applications for grading permits may be
reviewed administratively by the City Manager in accordance with Section
203.020(D) (Administrative Review) if the proposed grading activities
will involve no more than 2,000 cubic yards of soil or disturb an area no
larger than 30,000 square feet.
(2) Planning Commission/City Council Review. All other grading permit
applications shall require Planning Commission review and City Council
action in accordance with Section 203.020(B) (Planning Commission/City
Council Review).
(F) Criteria for Review. The City shall review the application in accordance with
the standards in Section 209.040 (Soils, Slopes, Grading and Erosion and
Sediment Control) and evaluate possible soil erosion, water quality, and view
degradation impacts. When deemed by the City to be necessary, conditions
may be attached to the permit issuance to minimize the stated impacts.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-15
(G)Erosion Control Agreement. The City shall require an applicant for a grading
permit to enter into an Erosion and Sediment Control Agreement per Section
203.080(B) (Erosion and Sediment Control Agreements).
(H)Grading Certification. An as-built survey, prepared by a surveyor licensed
and registered by the State of Minnesota, shall be submitted upon completion
of the permitted work for the following:
(1) All new principal structures.
(2) Any development requiring construction, enlargement and/or alteration
of stormwater management infrastructure, including, but not limited to,
ponds, pipes or infiltration basins.
(3) Substantial addition or alteration of an existing principal building. A
substantial addition is defined as an improvement valued in excess of
50% of the Market Value of the building, as determined by the real
estate tax statement for the parcel exclusive of the value of the land, or
an expansion of the foundation area of the existing principal building by
more than 50%.
(4) Any addition or land alteration that modifies the site drainage pattern in
a manner that significantly alters the historic or approved site drainage,
as determined by the Public Works Director.
The Grading Certification shall include such detail as required by the City
Manager and shall be submitted prior to issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy for the structure.
(I) Erosion and Sediment Control and Grading Certification Escrows. An
Erosion and Sediment Control Escrow shall be submitted that is sufficient to
insure the installation, completion, and maintenance of the erosion and
sediment control plan and practices and to insure the site is revegetated and
landscaped in compliance with the approved grading plan. A Grading
Certification Escrow shall be submitted that is sufficient to insure that the
required location and elevation information for the site is collected and
submitted to the City for review. The method for determining the amount of
the Erosion and Sediment Control and Grading Certification Escrows shall be
ordained from time to time by the City Council.
(J) Administrative of Escrow. The escrow may be administratively reduced,
upon written request by the poster of the escrow, as phases of the project are
completed. Upon project completion, the escrow may be administratively
returned.
Ord. 859
Rev. 11/2/09
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-16
(1) The City may, at its discretion, use the erosion and sediment control and
grading certification escrow monies to bring the grading into
conformance with the permit, erosion control plan, or any standards set
forth in Section 209.040 (Soils, Slopes, Grading and Erosion and
Sediment Control), including, but not limited to, surveying, street
sweeping, silt fence repair, turf establishment, and silt fence removal, in
the event that the applicant does not correct deficiencies after 24-hour
notice by the City.
(2) If it becomes necessary for the City to utilize all or a portion of the
surety, Developer shall immediately deposit cash in an amount sufficient
to re-establish the original surety amount and, until Developer makes
such a deposit, no further development may occur on the Property.
(K)Expiration. Grading permits issued by the City shall expire by limitation and
become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced
within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance or if the authorization is
suspended or abandoned at any time after the work has commenced for a
period of one hundred and eighty (180) days. In any case, all permits expire
within one year of issuance.
(L) Other Permits and Approvals. The applicant shall obtain all required permits
from agencies having jurisdictional authority, including, but not limited to the
Department of Natural Resources, the Army Corps of Engineers, Grass Lake
Watershed Management Organization, Vadnais Lake Watershed Management
Organization, Rice Creek Watershed District, and/or Ramsey County.
203.036 Home Occupation Permit.
(A)Permit Required. Except as provided herein, no person shall conduct a home
occupation without obtaining a permit.
(B)Waiver. The City Manager is authorized to waive the permit requirement if
the home occupation can be conducted subject to the following restrictions:
(1) No services shall be provided to customers on the premises.
(2) Only vehicles routinely associated with single-family dwelling uses
(including conventional automobiles, vans, minivans, sport utility vehicles
and pickup trucks but excluding step vans or similar sized delivery
vehicles) may pick up or deliver home occupation materials to the
premises.
(3) Compliance with the standards contained in Section 207.020 (Home
Occupations).
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-17
(C)Application. An application for a home occupation permit shall be made on
forms provided by the City Manager and include the required information.
(D)Review Process and Criteria. The City Manager shall review the application
in accordance with Section 203.020(D) and the standards stated in Section
207.020 (Home Occupations).
(E) Notice. The City Manager shall provide written notification to property
owners within 150 feet of the property that a permit has been issued upon
issuance of the permit. Failure to give a mailed notice or defects in the notice
shall not invalidate the review process provided that a bona fide attempt has
been made to contact the property owners.
203.037 Mining Permit.
(A)Permit Required. No individual shall mine nor operate an excavation
operation of any type without securing a permit. A Conditional Use Permit, in
accordance with the procedures of Section 203.032 (Conditional Use Permit
[Non-Floodplain]) or Section 203.033 (Conditional Use Permit [Floodplain])
shall be required in order to conduct a mining operation in any district.
(B)Application. Applications for a mining permit shall be made on forms
provided by the City Manager and include the required information.
(C) Conditions. Terms of the permit shall include provisions which:
(1) Provide for a two-year review and renewal process to ensure compliance
with these regulations.
(2) Requires processing machinery to be located consistent with the structure
setback requirements from ordinary high water elevations of public waters
and from bluffs.
203.038 Relocated Structure Permit. The relocation of a structure, excluding accessory
buildings of less than 120 square feet or other temporary structures, from one
location to another location in the City or from a location outside the City to a
location in the City shall require a Conditional Use Permit in accordance with
Section 203.032 (Conditional Use Permit).
203.039 Riparian Lot – Detached Accessory Structure Permit.
(A)Permit Required. A permit is required to place any detached accessory
structure in the front yard of a riparian lot within the RE or R-1 zoning
districts.
Rev. Date
4/18/05
Ord. #774
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-18
(B)Application. An application for a riparian lot detached accessory structure
permit shall be made on forms provided by the City Manager and submitted
with the required information.
(C) Review Process. Applications for riparian lot detached accessory structure
permit shall be reviewed in accordance with Section 203.020(D)
(Administrative Review).
(D)Notice. The City Manager shall provide written notification to property
owners within 150 feet of the subject property upon issuance of the permit.
Failure to give a mailed notice or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the
review process provided that a bona fide attempt has been made to contact the
property owners.
(E) Criteria for Review. The City Manager shall review the completed
application in consultation with City Department Heads to make the following
determinations:
(1) That the request is in general character with surrounding properties.
(2) The request will not cause a traffic sight problem or endanger public
health or safety.
(3) The request will not encroach upon a public right-of-way, easement or
utilities.
(4) A minimum front setback of 30 feet is maintained, unless the
characteristics of the subject property (topography, drainage, utility
locations, lot coverage limitations) require this setback to be reduced and
the proposed setback is generally consistent with neighboring properties.
In no case shall the front setback be less than 20 feet unless the Planning
Commission approves a variance in accordance with Section 203.070
(Variances).
203.040 Sign Permit.
(A)Permit Required. A permit shall be obtained prior to the installation,
alteration or display of any sign for which a permit is required, including the
installation or alteration of illumination of a sign whether direct or indirect,
internal or external. No sign permits shall be approved unless the City
Manager finds that the proposed sign meets the standards of Section 208,
Signs, or is consistent with a Comprehensive Sign Plan approved for the
property.
Rev. Date
2/4/08
Ord. No.
824
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-19
(1) Application. Application for a sign permit shall be made on a form
provided by the City Manager and shall be submitted with the required
information.
(2) Review Process. The City Manager shall administratively review the
application in accordance with Section 203.020(D) (Administrative
Review) and for compliance with the Development Ordinance and the
standards in Section 208 (Signs).
(3) Expiration. Sign permits shall become null and void if the sign is not
installed within 180 days after the issuance of a permit.
(B) Permit Exemptions. No permit will be required under this article for the
following types of signs, subject to the limitations specified in Section 208:
(1) Window.
(2) Address.
(3) Temporary real estate, except off-site direction sites for residential
developments, as regulated in Section 208.040(B)(13)(b).
(4) Political opinion.
(5) Civic event.
(6) Public traffic control.
(7) Construction.
(8) Garage sale.
(9) Traffic directional signs.
(10)Public notices or any sign relating to an emergency.
(C) Comprehensive Sign Plan
(1) Administrative Review.
(a) Eligible Projects. Comprehensive Sign Plan review for multiple signs
for a building or property may be reviewed administratively by the
City Manager, in accordance with Section 203.020(D), provided any
deviations proposed are minor, not to exceed the following:
(i) Free-standing Signs
i. The area of the free-standing sign exceeds the maximum area
permitted by no more than 5%.
ii. The height of the free-standing sign exceeds the maximum
height permitted by no more than 2 feet.
(ii) Wall Signs
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-20
i. The number of wall signs exceeds the maximum number
permitted by one.
ii. The length of the wall sign exceeds the maximum length
permitted by no more than 5%.
iii. The allowable area of the wall sign exceeds the maximum area
permitted by no more than 5%.
(b) Application. Applications for Comprehensive Sign Plan review shall
be made on forms provided by the City Manager and be accompanied
by detailed drawings to show the dimensions, design, structure and
location for the sign. The applicant must provide any and all
information requested by the City Manager for the purpose of
determining compliance with the standards of Section 208 of the
Development Ordinance.
(c) Criteria for Review. The City Manager may grant approval of the
Comprehensive Sign Plan only when the proposed signs comply with
the other provisions of Section 208 of the Development Ordinance.
(2) Comprehensive Sign Plan Review by the Planning Commission/City
Council.
(a) Review. Comprehensive Sign Plan applications not eligible for
administrative review shall be processed in accordance with Section
203.020(B).
(b) Application. Applications for Comprehensive Sign Plan shall be made
on forms provided by the City Manager and be accompanied by
detailed drawings to show the dimensions, design, structure and
location for each sign. The City Manager shall forward completed
applications to the Planning Commission.
(c) Criteria for Review. Approval of the Comprehensive Sign Plan may
be granted only when the proposed signs comply with the standards of
Section 208 of the Development Ordinance. When a deviation is
proposed, approval shall be based on findings that:
i. The plan proposes signs consistent in color, size and materials
throughout the site.
ii. Approving the deviation is necessary to relieve a practical
difficulty existing on the property.
iii. The proposed deviations from the standards of Section 208 result
in a more unified sign package and greater aesthetic appeal
between signs on the site.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-21
iv. Approving the deviation will not confer a special privilege on the
applicant that would normally be denied under the Ordinance.
v. The resulting sign plan is effective, functional, attractive and
compatible with community standards.
(3) Length of Comprehensive Sign Plan Approval. Any signs permitted under
the terms of Comprehensive Sign Plan approval shall be installed and
maintained in conformity to the terms of such plan and any conditions
designated in connection therewith. The approval shall remain in effect
for so long as the conditions agreed upon are observed, provided that
nothing in this section shall prevent the City Council from action or
amending the Development Ordinance.
203.041 Site and Building Plan Review.
(A)Permit Required. Approval is required for all site and building plans for the
improvement, development, alteration, or expanded use of any property in any
district except property utilized or proposed for utilization in connection with
single-family detached dwellings.
(B)Application. An application for site and building plan review shall be made
on forms provided by the City Manager and shall be submitted with the
required information.
(C) Review Process. Site and Building Plan Review applications shall be
processed in accordance with Section 203.020(B) (Planning Commission/City
Council Review).
(D)Criteria for Review. The Site and Building Plan review may be granted
provided the proposed use is listed as a permitted use for the district in which
it is located and upon showing that the standards and criteria of the
Development Ordinance will be satisfied and that the use is in harmony with
the general purposes and intent of the Development Ordinance and the
Comprehensive Guide Plan.
(E) Length of Site and Building Plan Approval. Any use permitted under the
terms of Site and Building Plan approval shall be established and conducted in
conformity to the terms of such permit and any conditions designated in
connection therewith. The approval shall remain in effect for so long as the
conditions agreed upon are observed, provided that nothing in this section
shall prevent the City Council from action or amending the Development
Ordinance to change the status of said approval.
(F) Agreement. The applicant may be required to enter into a Development
Contract in accordance with Section 203.080(A).
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-22
203.042 Special Purpose Fences. Fences for special purposes and fences differing in
construction, height, or length, may be permitted in any district in the City by the
issuance of a special fence permit approved by the City Council. Before issuing
such a permit the City Council may require the applicant to secure in writing the
consent of the adjoining property owners to the issuance of such a permit. The
City Council may also submit the matter to the Planning Commission for its
recommendation.
203.043 Temporary Sale/Event Permit.
(A)Permit Required. Except as provided here, no person shall conduct a
temporary sale or event without first obtaining a permit to do so. Temporary
sales and events include, but are not limited to, sale of merchandise by
temporary vendors, temporary promotional sales by merchants, seasonal
residential sales, seasonal sales of seasonal merchandise, sale of flowers or
produces, fairs, carnivals and arts and craft sales.
(B) Exceptions. The following temporary sales and events do not require a
permit:
(1) Temporary promotional sales within fully enclosed buildings.
(2) Up to two (2) seasonal residential sales per residential address per
calendar year provided each sale does not exceed four (4) consecutive
days.
(3) Art and craft sales conducted by non-profit organizations within a fully
enclosed public or quasi-public building such as a school, church, or
community center.
(4) Produce of farms or gardens provided the produce is grown by the person
conducting the sale.
(C)Application. An application for a temporary sales/event permit shall be made
on forms provided by the City Manager and shall be submitted with the
required information.
(D)Criteria for Review. All temporary sales and events must comply with the
standards in Section 207.030 (Temporary Sales/Events).
(E) Review Process. The City Manager shall review the application
administratively in accordance with Section 203.020(D).
(F) Mailed Notice. For seasonal residential sales, the City Manager shall provide
written notice of the City’s decision to issue the permit to property owners
within 150 feet of the perimeter of the subject property. Failure to give mailed
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-23
notice, or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings provided a
bona fide attempt has been made to comply with the mailed notice
requirement.
(G)Exceptions to Standards. Any proposed temporary sale or event that does not
comply with the standards in Section 207.030 (Temporary Sales and Events)
may be approved upon review and recommendation by the Planning
Commission and approval by the City Council in accordance with Section
203.020(B). The City Council may attach reasonable conditions to ensure that
the proposed temporary sale or event is compatible with surrounding land uses
and to protect the public health, safety, or welfare.
203.044 Tower/Antenna Permits.
(A)Private Antenna/Tower Permit.
(1) Purpose. The City’s private antenna/tower permit regulations are adopted
to:
(a) Provide the minimum practical regulation to address the aesthetic,
health, safety, and welfare concerns associated with private antennas
and towers.
(b) Reasonably accommodate private antennas and towers.
(2) Permit Required. Private antenna/tower permits shall be required in
accordance with Section 207.040(A).
(3) Application. An application for a private antenna/tower permit shall be
made on forms provided by the City Manager and shall be submitted with
the required information.
(a) A site plan drawn to scale showing the proposed location of the
antenna/tower and the dimensions relative to property lines, structures
on the site, and structures on adjacent properties. The City Planner
may require that this site plan be prepared by a licensed and registered
surveyor to ensure its accuracy.
(4) Review Process. Applications for private antenna/tower permits shall be
reviewed in accordance with Section 203.020(B) (Planning
Commission/City Council Review).
(5) Review Criteria. The Planning Commission and City Council shall review
the application for conformance to the standards in Section 207.040(A)
(Private Antennas/Towers) as well as the following:
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-24
(a) The reasonable necessity for the private antenna/tower.
(b) The appropriateness of the facility design.
(c) If the request is for an amateur radio facility greater than 55 feet in
height, the recommended hours of operation for those times when the
facility will be extended to more than 55 feet above grade.
(d) The appropriateness of construction materials and assembly.
(e) Maintenance requirements.
(f) The distance of the private antenna/tower from adjoining property
lines.
(g) Other conditions as necessary to prevent the private antenna/tower or
its use from becoming a nuisance to surrounding property owners.
(6) Agreement. The permittee shall be required to enter into a Private
Antenna/Tower Agreement in accordance with Section 203.080(D).
(7) Review and Revocation. The City Manager shall periodically inspect the
property for compliance with the provisions of the private antenna/tower
agreement. If the permittee is not in compliance with the terms of the
agreement, a hearing shall be scheduled before the City Council for the
purpose of determining whether to terminate the agreement. The hearing
shall be preceded by ten (10) days mailed notice to property owners of
record within 350 feet of the property on which the private antenna/tower
is located.
(8) Removal. Use of the private antenna/tower shall be discontinued upon
termination of the private antenna/tower agreement and prior to the
transfer of title for the property on which the facility is located. The
property owner shall, at his or her cost, disassemble and remove the
private antenna/tower within thirty (30) days of termination of the private
antenna/tower agreement, or the purchaser of the property shall apply for a
new permit within thirty (30) days of transfer of title.
(B) Broadcast Tower Permit. Broadcast towers are allowed in the (T) Tower
District only and must obtain a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Section
203.032.
(1) Required Documentation. The following shall be submitted at the time of
application for a Conditional Use Permit pursuant hereto:
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-25
(a) Site Plan. A plan or plans drawn to scale and acceptable to the City
Manager including the following information and detail:
(i) A boundary survey of the property.
(ii) A two-foot contour map of the property.
(iii)Locations of existing and proposed public utilities and easements,
each Broadcast Tower, Accessory Equipment and Structures,
Broadcast Buildings, Related Broadcast Uses and Other Uses.
(iv)Ground elevations for Broadcast Towers and/or Accessory
Equipment and Structures.
(b) Tower Diagram. A detailed drawing of the Broadcast Tower structure
clearly describing the height of the structure and all equipment located
on the structure drawn to a scale acceptable to the City Manager.
(c) Structural Integrity Report. A report prepared by a registered engineer
stating that the configuration of the tower structure complies with
applicable Federal or State of Minnesota safety regulations, or, in the
case of the addition or replacement of a Broadcast Tower and a tower
1200 feet or less in height AMSL as such towers are described in the
original Conditional Use Permit issued hereunder to the property
owner, a report prepared by a registered engineer stating that the
design and proposed method of constructing such added or replaced
tower complies with applicable Federal and State of Minnesota safety
regulations.
(d) Health Study. A report of an independent consultant acceptable to the
City and the property owner indicating that Broadcast Tower
operations of the applicant together with operations or reasonably
foreseeable operations of all other Broadcast Towers shall not violate
any Federal or State of Minnesota health standards established for
radio frequency transmission and shall not result in any known risk to
public health.
(e) Operating Agreement. An agreement with the City and each property
owner which shall describe the property owners’ obligation with
respect to (a) control of ice build-up on a Broadcast Tower and
Accessory Equipment and Structures; (b) responding to complaints by
individuals residing within the City regarding interference to consumer
electronic equipment; (c) designation of an operator representative to
deal with complaints associated with operation of a Broadcast Tower;
(d) lighting of a Broadcast Tower; (e) financial consideration; and (f)
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-26
cooperation with a citizens committee regarding matters relating to the
conditional uses.
(C) Wireless Telecommunication Facility (WTF) Permit.
(1) Purpose. The City’s WTF permit regulations are adopted to:
(a) Minimize negative impacts of WTFs through careful siting and design
standards.
(b) Protect the public health and welfare through appropriate safety
standards.
(c) Ensure development of these facilities at a scale compatible with and
proportionate to existing development.
(d) Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services to
residents and businesses of the City.
(2) Permit Required. No person shall install a new WTF without first
obtaining a WTF permit.
(3) Preapplication Conference. The applicant shall present a sketch and basic
supporting data of the proposed WTF to the City Manager who shall
review the sketch and the City’s WTF standards with the applicant at a
preapplication conference. The City Manager may, at his or her
discretion, forward the sketch to the Planning Commission, the City
Council, another appropriate citizen committee or commission, or to
neighboring property owners for review and comment.
(4) Application. Applications for a WTF Permit shall be made on forms
provided by the City Manager and shall be submitted with all of the
required information. A completed application shall include an application
fee and escrow deposit in an amount prescribed by City Council, and a
signed WTF Escrow Deposit Agreement (see Section 203.080).
(5) Complete Application. The City Manager shall review the submitted
application form and other materials specified in Section 203.044(C)(4) to
determine whether the application is complete. The City Manager may
waive, in writing, certain application requirements when determined
unnecessary for review of the application. All items deemed necessary by
the City Manager must be submitted for the WTF application to be
complete and for review of the application to proceed. Applications found
to contain material errors shall not be deemed complete until such errors
are corrected.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-27
(6) Review Process.
(a) Planning Commission/City Council Review. In accordance with
Section 203.020 (B), applications for a WTF permit shall be reviewed
by the Planning Commission and City Council.
(i) Planning Commission Review. Upon receipt of a completed
application, the City Manager shall schedule a hearing before the
Planning Commission which shall be preceded by ten days mailed
notice to the property owners of record located within 350 feet of
the parcel on which the WTF will be located. The Planning
Commission shall make findings based upon the standards in
Section 207.040(B)(3) and shall submit its recommendations to the
City Council.
(ii) City Council Review. Upon receipt of the Planning Commission
recommendation, the City Council shall review the application.
The City Council may approve the application subject to
conditions, table its review until a date certain, or deny the
application for a WTF permit. The decision of the City Council
shall be based the WTF standards specified in Section
207.040(B)(3) and on the information provided in the written
record. Notice of the Council’s decision shall be provided to the
applicant in writing. If the application is approved by the City
Council, a WTF Permit shall be issued upon the execution of a
WTF Agreement in accordance with Section 203.080(E),
compliance with the conditions of approval, and demonstration
that the WTF complies with all applicable building, fire, and safety
codes.
(7) Recovery of City Costs. At the time of application for a WTF permit, an
escrow deposit shall be posted in an amount determined by the City
Council. The City may charge against this deposit to recover its costs for
reviewing the WTF application. These costs may include, but are not
limited to, City staff time over and above that covered by the application
fee, consultant fees, and fees for third-party review. If a WTF permit is
approved, as a condition of approval, deposit of additional escrow funds
may be required. The City will charge against this deposit to offset the
City’s costs to monitor construction and ensure compliance with the
conditions of approval and standards in this ordinance. These charges
may include, but are not limited to, City staff time, consultant fees, and
fees for third-party review, monitoring, and inspection. Once construction
has been completed and the permittee has complied with all conditions of
approval, any remaining deposit funds shall be refunded to the party or
entity that posted the escrow deposit. Refund of the deposit shall not be
construed to limit the City’s ability to recover future costs associated with
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-28
review or monitoring on-going operation of the WTF or future
modifications, amendments, or transfer of the facility.
(8) Review and Revocation. The City Manager shall periodically inspect the
WTF and the property where it is located for compliance with the
provisions of the WTF agreement. If the permittee is not in compliance
with the terms of the agreement, a hearing shall be scheduled before the
City Council for the purpose of determining whether to terminate the
agreement.
(9) Criteria for Review. The WTF Permit may be granted provided the
proposed use is listed as a permitted use for the district in which it is
located and upon showing that the standards and criteria of the
Development Ordinance will be satisfied and that the use is in harmony
with the general purposes and intent of the Development Ordinance and
the Comprehensive Guide Plan.
(10)Length of Approval. Any use permitted under the terms of the WTF
Permit approval shall be established and conducted in conformity to the
terms of such permit and any conditions designated in connection
therewith. The approval shall remain in effect for so long as the
conditions agreed upon are observed, provided that nothing in this section
shall prevent the City Council from acting or amending the Development
Ordinance that changes the status of an approved WTP to a legal nonconfirming
use.
(11)Agreement. If the City Council approves the application, a WTF Permit
may be issued upon the execution of a Wireless Telecommunication
Tower/Antenna Agreement. The agreement or a summary of the
agreement approved by the City Manager in recordable form, shall be
signed by the applicant and property owner and the terms of the agreement
shall include those identified in Section 203.080(E).
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-29
This page intentionally left blank
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-30
203.050 Amendments
203.051 Development Ordinance Text Amendment.
(A)Application. Requests for amendments to the text of the Development
Ordinance may be initiated by the City Council, the Planning Commission or
an affected property owner. An application for a text amendment shall be
made on a form available from the City Manager and shall be submitted with
the required information.
(B) Review Process. Applications for amendments to the Development Ordinance
text shall be reviewed via the public hearing process in accordance with
Section 203.020(A), except that no mailed notice shall be required.
(1) If the request is to rezone a parcel to the Telecommunications Overlay
District, the Planning Commission must also make the following
additional findings:
(a) That the new site is necessary and that useable sites already
appropriately zoned are not located within a ½-mile radius of the
proposed new site; and
(b) That the proposed site will further the City’s objective that all antennas
and towers be designed to blend into the surrounding environment; and
(c) That there are site features such as trees, topography, buildings, or
utility poles that reduce or eliminate the visual impact of the proposed
tower;
(d) That there are no public health or safety issues with the proposed site.
(e) That the proposed site can comply with the standards in Section 207.
(f) That the proposed site would provide new opportunities for
collocation.
(g) That the proposed site is necessary to reasonably accommodate a
wireless telecommunications service.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-31
(C)Decision. The City Council has the authority to grant or deny the amendment
based on a 4/5-majority vote of its entire membership.
203.052 Zoning District Boundary Amendment.
(A)Application. Requests for the rezoning of property may be initiated by the
City Council, the Planning Commission or an affected property owner. An
application for a zoning district boundary map amendment shall be made on a
form provided by the City Planner and shall be submitted with the required
information.
(B) Review Process. Applications for amendments to the Zoning District Map
boundaries shall be reviewed via the public hearing process in accordance
with Section 203.020(A).
(C) Criteria for Review. The Planning Commission and City Council shall
consider the following when making recommendation or decision regarding
the zoning district amendment:
(1) That the proposed rezoning is consistent with the policies of the
Comprehensive Guide Plan and with the general purpose and intent of the
development regulations.
(2) That the development facilitated by the proposed rezoning will not
significantly and adversely impact the planned use of the surrounding
property.
(a) Rezoning proposals are exempt from this finding:
(i) When only one zoning district option is available for the site on the
current Land Use Plan Map designation; or
(ii) When the proposed zoning district option is not the most intensive
option identified for the site by the Land Use Plan Map
designation.
(b) When more than one zoning district option exists, the base line from
which to measure any significant adverse impact relative to the
planned use of surrounding property shall be:
(i) The current zoning if such zoning is not planned unit development
(PUD);
(ii) The underlying or assigned zoning if the current zoning is planned
unit development (PUD); or
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-32
(iii)When rezoning from Urban Underdeveloped (UND), the most
restrictive zoning district option permitted by the current Land Use
Plan Map designation for the site.
(3) That the applicant is willing to enter into a development agreement with
the City as a condition of rezoning approval.
(D)Decision. The City Council has the authority to grant or deny the amendment
based on a 4/5-majority vote of its entire membership.
203.053 Comprehensive Guide Plan Amendment.
(A)Application. Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan may be initiated by the
City Council or Planning Commission, a resident of the City or property
owner within the City. An application for an amendment shall be made on a
form provided by the City Manager and shall be submitted with the required
information.
(B) Metropolitan Council. All proposed amendments, except housekeeping
amendments and amendments to the Capital Improvements Program, must be
submitted by the City Manager to the Metropolitan Council and affected
governmental units for comment. No amendment may be put into effect until
accepted by the Metropolitan Council.
(C) Review. The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing and
a notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be published at
least ten (10) days before the hearing. The Planning Commission shall make a
recommendation to the City Council.
(D)Criteria for Review. The Planning Commission and City Council shall
consider the following elements when making recommendation or decision
regarding the Comprehensive Plan amendment:
(1) The site and the characteristics of adjoining planned land uses;
(2) Probable building mass differences;
(3) Traffic generation;
(4) Separation to dissimilar land uses;
(5) Carrying capacity of the site (sewer, water, access, topography, etc.), and
(6) Buffering potential of dissimilar but adjoining land uses.
(E) Decision. The City Council has the authority to grant or deny the amendment
based on a 4/5-majority vote of its entire membership and the adoption of a
resolution.
Rev. Date
6/2/08
Ord. #829
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-33
203.060 Planned Unit Development (PUD) Procedures.
(A) Preapplication Conference. The developer shall contact the City Manager to
establish a preapplication conference for the purpose of acquainting the City
with the developer's plans and the developer with the City's procedures,
standards and concerns.
(B) Concept Stage PUD (Optional).
(1) Purpose. Concept Stage PUD review is optional and designed to address
the appropriateness of a proposal from the perspective of general land use
compatibility. Concept Stage PUD review provides an opportunity for the
applicant to submit a plan to the City showing the basic intent and the
general nature of the entire development without incurring substantial
cost. The Concept Stage PUD is a public review process that allows the
applicant to receive comments from the City and nearby property owners
regarding the proposed development. The process is also intended to
allow the City and general public a forum to identify more specific
development issues and potential concerns that may require the applicant
to provide further information and additional analysis at the Development
Stage.
(2) Application. A Concept Stage PUD application shall be made on a form
provided by the City Manager and shall be submitted with the required
information.
(3) Review Process. The City Manager shall forward the Concept Stage
application to the Planning Commission and City Council for review. The
Planning Commission will offer comments and suggestions regarding the
Concept Plan to the applicant. These comments and suggestions will be
forwarded to the City Council, who shall also review the proposal and
provide feedback to the applicant. The Council will not take any formal
action to approve or deny the application. No comments, remarks or
observations made by the City Council, Planning Commission or City
Staff on the Concept Plan are binding on the City for subsequent stages.
(4) Notice and Hearing Procedure.
(a) Mailed Notice. Notice of the proposal, time and place of the hearing
shall be mailed at least 10 days before the date of the hearing to each
recorded owner of property within 350 feet of the perimeter of the
property which is the subject of the review.
(b) Failure to Give Notice. Failure to give mailed notice or defects in the
notice shall not invalidate the proceedings provided a bonafide attempt
has been made to comply with the mailed notice requirement.
Rev. Date
2/5/07
Ord. #811
Rev. Date
2/5/07
Ord. #811
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-34
(C) Development Stage PUD.
(1) Purpose. The Development Stage PUD application is intended to provide the City
with detailed site and subdivision plans. Development Stage PUD approval, in
particular for multiple-phase developments, must establish a scheme or guidelines
for the building design, lighting, landscaping, surface water, parking, access and
signage aspects of the development. For multi-phase developments, development
stage plans consist of a general plan for the entire development and separate
detailed plans for each of the phases.
(2) Application Requirements. An application for a Development Stage PUD shall be
made on a form provided by the City Manager and shall be submitted with the
required information.
(3) Review Process. After receipt of a complete application that contains all the
required information, the City Manager shall process the application with
Planning Commission/City Council review in accordance with Section
203.020(A)(Public Hearing). A 4/5 majority vote by the City Council is required
for approval.
(4) Site and Building Elevation Plans. In cases where the applicant chooses to submit
detailed site, landscaping, signage, lighting, surface water management, and
building elevation plans as part of the Development Stage PUD approval, a
separate Site and Building Elevation plan application may be waived by the City
Council for all or part of a PUD.
(5) Criteria for Review. Development Stage PUD Plan approval shall not be granted
unless the City Council makes the following findings:
(a) That the proposal complies with the Shoreview Comprehensive Guide Plan.
(b) That in those cases where the plan does not comply with the minimum
standards of this ordinance, the deviation is to permit a development that
provides a benefit to the city as a whole which include but are not limited to
the following:
(i) Use of architectural enhancements to the overall building design that
exceed building design standards found in a typical development by
including the use of high quality building materials, decorative features
and accents.
(ii) Enhancement of public infrastructure including but not limited to
streetscaping, street design, sidewalks, open space and trails.
Rev. Date
2/5/07
Ord. #811
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-35
(iii) Use of innovative materials and techniques to minimize stormwater runoff
from the site and enhance water quality.
(iv) Incorporation of sustainable building practices such as green building
standards and or Leadership in Energy and Environment Design (LEED)
practices into the overall site design and building plans.
(v) Includes a specified percentage of affordable housing in accordance with
the income and housing costs guidelines for the Twin Cities
metropolitan area.
(vi) Provides housing that entails a range of housing options to meet resident
preferences and circumstances at all life stages (life-cycle housing) that
supports the City’s life-cycle housing goal as identified in the
Comprehensive Plan.
(vii) Incorporates the historic preservation of private or public structures,
places or parks.
(viii) Eliminates blighted structures or incompatible uses through
redevelopment or rehabilitation.
(ix) Incorporates transportation demand management or public transit.
(x) Preserves and concentrates open space by providing common open areas
or reserving specific amounts of open space on each parcel.
(c) In those instances where a site is to be redeveloped or where the site is
adjoined by developed property, that development via a PUD is desirable to
insure compatibility with the adjoining land use(s).
(d) That there is no significant adverse impact of the proposed development on
surrounding properties.
(e) That the plan evidences a direction toward preservation, enhancement, and
protection of natural features existing on the property or if the property does
not contain natural features worthy of protection, the plan is designed to
minimize land alteration and incorporates native plant materials into the
landscaping theme.
(f) That the plan does not occupy a designated Flood Plain area or areas
consisting of soils with severe building limitations, or that the applicant has
demonstrated that said plan will not cause significant alteration of existing
topography or natural drainage.
Rev. Date
2/5/07
Ord. #811
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-36
(6) Expiration. Approval of a Development Stage PUD shall become void two
months after the Council approval date if the applicant has not submitted the Final
Stage PUD request, unless a phasing plan or other timeframe has been approved
by the Council or a written request for a time extension has been approved by the
Council.
(D) Final Stage PUD.
(1) Application. A Final Stage PUD application shall be made on a form provided by
the City Manager and shall be submitted with the required information.
(2) Review Process. The City Council shall determine whether the Final Stage PUD
is in compliance with the approved Development Stage PUD. If the City Council
determines that a substantial change to the plans or conditions of approval is
necessary due to unforeseen circumstances or is otherwise required by the
developer, the City Council shall refer the Final Stage PUD to the Planning
Commission for review in accordance with the Development Stage PUD
procedures. Otherwise, if the Final Stage PUD is in compliance with the
Development Stage PUD and with all conditions of approval, the City Council
shall approve the Final Stage PUD. An affirmative vote of at least three Council
members is required for approval of the Final Stage PUD. Upon approval, the
City Council shall also act on the documents as required including plats,
development contracts, erosion control, and public recreational use dedication
fees.
(E) Amendments to Approved PUDs. Revisions to approved Planned Unit Developments
shall be processed as follows:
(1) Minor changes in location, siting, height of buildings and structures and minor
changes to street, and easement locations may be authorized by the City Manager
without additional public hearings, if required by engineering or other
circumstances not foreseen at the time the Development Stage PUD was
approved.
(2) All substantial changes shall require amendments of the Development Stage PUD.
All such amendments shall be processed according to the Development Stage
PUD review rules. Substantial changes shall be defined as, but not limited to:
(a) A change in the use or character of the development.
(b) An increase in the overall lot coverage of structures and other improvements
that has a considerable affect on the development plan.
(c) A major change in traffic circulation.
Rev. Date
2/5/07
Ord. #811
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-37
(d) A reduction of open space or green areas that has a considerable affect on the
development plan.
(e) A reduction of off-street parking or loading areas.
(f) A reduction in the effectiveness or extent of surface water management plan
as determined by the City Engineer.
203.070 Variances.
(A) Application. An application for a variance or variances (herein collectively
“variance”) from the provisions of Chapter 204, 205, 206, 207.050(D), 209
(“Shoreview Development Regulations”) shall be made on forms provided by
the City Manager. Completed applications shall be forwarded to the Planning
Commission.
(B) Review Process. The Planning Commission shall review completed variance
applications pursuant to Shoreview City Code Section 203.020(C) and
Minnesota Statute §15.99. Modifications shall not be made to the variance
application during the review process.
(C) Criteria for Review. The following criteria shall be applied to the City’s
review of a variance application:
(1) Purpose and Intent. The variance request shall comply with the purpose
and intent provisions of City Code Section 201.010 and with the policies
of the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Practical Difficulties. The application for a variance shall establish that
there are practical difficulties in complying with the provisions of the
Shoreview Development Regulations. The term “Practical Difficulties” as
used in the granting of a variance means:
(a) Reasonable Manner. The property owner proposes to use the property
in a reasonable manner not permitted by the Shoreview Development
Regulations.
(b) Unique Circumstances. The plight of the property owner is due to
circumstances unique to the property not created by the property
owner.
(c) Character of Neighborhood. The variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood.
(3) Economic Consideration. Economic consideration alone does not
constitute practical difficulties.
Rev. Date
7/5/11
Ord. #880
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-38
(4) Access to Sunlight. Inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy
systems shall be considered a practical difficulty.
(5) Earth Sheltered Housing. Earth sheltered construction, as defined in
Minnesota Statutes §216(C)06, Subd. 14, shall be considered a practical
difficulty if the property is otherwise in compliance with the Shoreview
Development Regulations.
(6) Non-Permitted Use. A variance shall not be granted if it would allow a
use which is not otherwise permitted in the zoning district where the
property is located.
(D) Conditional Approval. The Board of Adjustments may impose conditions in
granting a variance. A condition must be directly related to and must bear a
rough proportionality to the impact created by the variance.
(E) Expiration. An approved variance, which is not implemented within one year
from the date of approval, shall become void.
(F) Decision and Appeal. Decisions of the Planning Commission shall be final
unless the applicant or other aggrieved party appeals to the City Council.
Appeals shall be processed in accordance with Section 203.020(E).
203.080 Development Agreements.
(A) Development Contract.
(1) Contract Required. A Developer Contract will be required and executed
prior to issuance of all building permits, installation of public or private
infrastructure, recording of a final plat, and final construction plan
approval for multiple-family residential, commercial, office or industrial
developments. The Developer shall enter into a written contract and
submit required financial securities to the City. The Development
Contract will require the Developer to furnish and construct said public
and private infrastructure improvements at his/her sole cost and in
accordance with City approved construction plans and specifications, City
Standards, City Ordinances, City Policies and the Development Contract.
(2) Inspection.
(a) The Development Contract may include provisions for one or more
full-time City personnel or its representative at the City Manager’s
discretion. The Developer shall pay all costs incurred by the City in
conjunction with the development of the plat. The Developer shall
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-39
also provide a qualified and experienced engineer to inspect the
installation of Public Infrastructure.
(b) The Developer shall also instruct its engineer to provide adequate field
inspection personnel to assure an acceptable level of quality control to
the extent that the Developer’s engineer will be able to certify that the
construction work meets the approved City standards as a condition of
City acceptance. All documentation that relates to the installation and
design of the Public Infrastructure shall be made available to the City
for their records and files.
(c) The City’s role as an inspector for the project is to inspect only the
Public Infrastructure and not to be a manager of the project.
(3) Supervision. This contract shall include provision for supervision of
details of construction by City Manager and grant to the City Manager
authority to correlate the work to be done under said contract by any
subcontractor authorized to proceed there under and with any other work
being done or contracted by the City in the vicinity.
(4) Reimbursable Costs. All costs, which accrue by the City during the
inspection or review of the public infrastructure, shall be reimbursed by
the Developer to the City. The City will invoice the developer for the time
spent on the project.
(5) Security.
(a) Required Public Improvements. The developer shall provide a
certified check, a cash deposit, or an irrevocable letter of credit of a
sufficient amount to assure the City that such public improvement and
utilities will be constructed and installed according to approved
specifications. The financial guarantee shall be approved as to form
by the City Attorney and filed with the City. The City Attorney may
permit other forms of financial guarantees upon approval.
(b) Private Improvements. The developer shall provide a certified check,
a cash deposit, or an irrevocable letter of credit of a sufficient amount
to assure the City that landscaping, screening or other improvements
will be completed by a specific date and in accordance with approved
plans. The financial guarantee shall be approved as to form by the
City Attorney and filed with the City. Other forms of financial
guarantees may be permitted upon approval by the City Attorney.
(6) Amount of Financial Guarantee.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-40
(a) Required Public Improvements. The amount of the financial guarantee
shall be 125% of the City Manager’s estimate of the total cost of the
construction and installation of the public improvements and utilities
required above and administrative overhead fees, including costs of
inspection by the City. The City shall be entitled to draw upon said
financial guarantee to reimburse itself for any cost and expense
incurred by the City for completion of the work in the event of default
by the developer and for any damages sustained on account of said
default. Upon completion of the work and the termination of any
liability, the balance of the financial guarantee that remains, if any,
shall be refunded to the developer.
(b) Private Improvements. The amount of the financial guarantee shall be
125% total cost for completion of landscaping, screening or other
improvements by a specific date and in accordance with approved
plans. The City shall be entitled to draw upon said financial guarantee
to reimburse itself for any cost and expense incurred by the City for
completion of the work in the event of default by the developer and for
any damages sustained on account of said default. Upon completion
of the work and the termination of any liability, the balance of the
financial guarantee that remains, if any, shall be refunded to the
developer.
(7) Partial Completion. On written request of the developer, the contract may
provide for completion of part of the improvements covered thereby prior
to acceptance of the improvements. In such event the amount of the
financial guarantee may be reduced in a sum equal to the estimated cost of
the improvements to a minimum of 10% of the total security. The City
will retain the minimum 10% until the warranty period expires or other
acceptable securities are provided to the City in the amount of 10% of the
total project cost. The financial guarantee at any time could be used to
ensure the City’s development fees charged to the project. The City may
also withhold additional securities to cover any outstanding or past due
City Development fees.
(8) Time for Completion. The time for completion of the work and the
several parts thereof shall be determined by the City Council upon
recommendation of the City Manager after consultation with the
developer. This time for completion shall be reasonable with relation to
the work to be done, the season of the year, and proper correlation with
construction activities in the plat and subdivision. The developer may
request the time for completion be extended provided a request is
submitted to the City Manager a minimum of 60 days prior to the
expiration of the completion date.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-41
(9) Warranties. All public infrastructure projects will require a warranty
against poor material and faulty workmanship. The warranty period for all
underground public utility work is a minimum of two years. The one year
warranty period for streets, grading and other public infrastructure shall
commence after the final wear course has been completed and acceptance
by City Council resolution. The warranty period on underground utilities
shall commence following their completion and acceptance in writing by
the City Manager.
(B) Erosion and Sediment Control Agreement.
(1) Agreement Required. Prior to issuance of a grading or building permit,
prior to the construction of the public improvements required by the City,
or prior to release of the final plat by the City, whichever event occurs
first, the City Manager or City Council requires the developer to enter into
an Erosion and Sediment Control Agreement with the City.
(2) Escrow. The developer agrees to deposit with the City an amount that
shall be ordained from time to time by the City Council. These funds may
be utilized by the City to maintain all erosion and sediment control devises
on the development site, including the cleaning of all road and storm
sewer systems, until the City Manager has determined that erosion control
has been satisfied. The security may also be utilized for clean-up or
restoration of areas off of the development site that are directly or
indirectly impacted by conditions on the site. Interest shall not accrue on
these funds. If it becomes necessary for the City to utilize all or a portion
of the surety, Developer shall immediately deposit cash in an amount
sufficient to re-establish the original surety amount and, until Developer
makes such a deposit, no further development may occur on the Property.
Any funds not utilized by the City shall be returned to the developer after
the improvements and the development of the subject property have been
completed and any erosion control permits with other governing agencies
that have jurisdictional authority have been closed out. This deposit shall
be in addition to any other required financial guarantees.
(3) Corrective Action:
(a) Notice of Correction. The City will conduct inspections of the property
from time to time, and will notify the developer of any required correction
by phone, fax, letter, email or posting a correction notice on-site.
(b) Corrective Action Required. The developer agrees, upon notification from
the City Manager that proper erosion control methods are not being taken,
to remedy the problem identified within 24 hours. In the event the remedy
is not satisfactorily in place within that time period, the City may utilize
the surety to complete the necessary work.
Rev. Date
3/25/09
Ord. 847
Rev.
11/2/09
Ord. 859
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-42
(C) Rezoning Agreements.
(1) Agreement Required. Upon a request for rezoning, the City Council may
require the applicant to enter into a rezoning agreement with the City.
(2) Terms. Rezoning agreements shall include the following:
(a) Legal description of subject property.
(b) Current and proposed zoning districts.
(c) A clear reference to the development plans reviewed in conjunction
with the rezoning request.
(d) A statement that the agreement shall expire and the property shall
revert to its original zoning if substantial construction has not taken
place within one year of approval of the rezoning agreement.
Substantial construction shall be defined in the agreement. The
agreement may include a clause, which permits the City Council to
grant a non-renewable extension for a period of time not to exceed one
year.
(e) An ordinance approving the rezoning and directing the City Manager
to make the change on the Zoning Map upon completion of substantial
construction.
(D) Private Antenna/Tower Agreement. Upon approval of a private antenna/tower
permit and before installation of any improvements, the permittee shall enter
into a Private Antenna/Tower Agreement. The agreement shall be signed by
the applicant and the terms of the agreement shall include the following:
(1) A list of the conditions of approval of the private antenna/tower permit.
(2) A statement indicating that failure to comply with the conditions of
approval shall result in the removal of the private antenna and/or tower.
(3) A statement indicating that the expenses incurred by the City to enforce
the provisions of the private antenna/tower agreement shall be reimbursed
by the applicant.
(4) A statement which requires the applicant to utilize the procedures
established by the FCC to resolve any complaints received relating to
interference allegedly caused by the private antenna/tower.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-43
(5) A statement indicating that the private antenna/tower shall be valid during
the term of the private antenna/tower agreement and only while the
applicant resides on the property. The applicant shall agree to notify the
City if he/she no longer resides on the property or of a transfer of title.
(E) Wireless Telecommunication Facility (WTF) Agreement. Upon approval of a
WTF permit and prior to installation of any improvements, the permittee shall
enter into a WTF agreement. The agreement shall be signed by the applicant
and property owner and the terms of the agreement shall include the
following:
(1) A list of the conditions of approval to the WTF Permit.
(2) A statement indicating that failure to comply with the conditions of
approval shall result in the revocation of the permit and removal of the
facility.
(3) A statement indicating that the expenses incurred by the City to enforce
the provisions of the WTF agreement shall be reimbursed by the applicant.
(4) A statement which requires the applicant to utilize the procedures
established by the FCC to resolve any complaints received relating to
interference allegedly caused by the facility.
(5) A statement indicating the permittee will cooperate in good faith and fair
dealing in collocating wireless telecommunication facilities.
(6) A statement indicating that the WTF shall be maintained in good and safe
condition and to preserve its original appearance and concealment,
disguise or camouflage elements incorporated into the design at the time
of approval. Such maintenance shall include, but is not limited to,
painting, repair of equipment, and maintenance of landscaping.
(7) A statement authorizing the City to enter the property for the purpose of
periodic inspections to determine that the site complies with conditions of
approval and all safety and building codes. This statement shall give the
City the right to conduct such inspections at any time upon reasonable
notice to the property owner(s), and that all expenses related to such
inspection shall be borne by the permittee.
(8) A statement indicating that a WTF which has not been used for twelve
(12) successive months shall be deemed abandoned and may, at the sole
discretion of the City, be required to be removed in the same manner and
pursuant to the same procedures as for dangerous or unsafe structures
established by Minnesota State Statutes, Section 463.16.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-44
(9) A statement indicating that the removal of any unused or abandoned tower
or portions of towers shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
(10)A statement requiring the permittee to notify the City that the WTF
continues to be in operation. The notice of continuing operation shall be
sent to the City Planner annually by certified mail during the last two
weeks of the month of December.
(F) Wireless Telecommunication Facility (WTF) Escrow Deposit Agreement. At
the time of application for a WTF permit, the applicant shall enter into a WTF
Escrow Deposit Agreement with the City. The applicant shall submit a deposit
in an amount determined from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
The agreement shall indicate that the funds deposited may be utilized by the
City to offset its costs from review of the WTF permit application and, if the
application is approved, to monitor construction and ensure compliance with
conditions of approval. Interest shall not accrue on these funds. Any funds
not so utilized by the City shall be returned to the applicant after the
installation of the WTF has been completed and the City has determined
compliance with the conditions of approval and the standards in the
Development Ordinance. This escrow deposit shall be in addition to any other
required financial guarantees.
203.090 Administrative Citations
(A) Purpose and Findings. The City Council finds that there is a need for
alternative methods of enforcing the provisions of Section 211. While
criminal fines and penalties have been the most frequent enforcement
mechanism, there are certain negative consequences for both the City and the
accused. The delay inherent in that system does not ensure prompt resolution.
Citizens resent being labeled as criminals for violations of administrative
regulations. The higher burden of proof and the potential of incarceration do
not appear appropriate for most administrative violations. The criminal
process does not always regard City Code violations as being important.
Accordingly, the City Council finds that the use of administrative citations
and the imposition of civil penalties is a legitimate and necessary alternative
method of enforcement. This method of enforcement is in addition to any
other legal remedy that may be pursued for City Code violations.
(B) Administrative Citations and Civil Penalties. This Section governs
administrative citations and civil penalties for violations of Section 211.
(C) General provisions. A violation of Section 211 may be subject to an
administrative citation and civil penalties. Each day a violation exists
constitutes a separate offense.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-45
(D) Administrative Citation. The City Manager and his/her designee may issue an
administrative citation upon the finding that a Code violation has occurred. The
citation must be issued in person or by mail to the property owner and/or person
responsible for the violation offense. The citation must state the date, time, and
nature of the offense, the name of the issuing officer, the amount of the
scheduled civil penalty, and the manner for paying the civil penalty or appealing
the citation.
(1) Response to Citation. A recipient shall respond to the citation within
4 days of receipt. The recipient may:
(a) Admit the violation stated in the citation and agree to pay the fine.
Payment of the civil penalty constitutes admission of the violation.
(b) Deny the violation stated in the citation and request a hearing within
fourteen (14) calendar days after issuance.
(E) Administrative Hearing.
(1) Hearing Officers. The City shall maintain a list of hearing officers
Available to conduct hearings on the merits of an administrative citation,
if requested by a recipient. Hearing officers shall have executed a contract
to provide hearing officer services with the City of Shoreview. The
hearing officer is not a judicial officer but is a public officer as defined by
Minn. Stat. § 609.415. The hearing officer must not be a City employee.
The City Manager must establish a procedure for evaluating the
competency of the hearing officers, including comments from accused
violators and City staff. These reports must be provided to the City
Council.
(a) Removal of Hearing Officer. The accused will have the right to
request, no later than five (5) calendar days before the date of the
hearing, that the assigned hearing officer be removed from the case.
One request for each case will be granted automatically by the City
Clerk. A subsequent request must be directed to the assigned hearing
officer who will decide whether he or she can fairly and objectively
review the case. The City Clerk may remove a hearing officer only
by requesting that the assigned hearing officer find that he or she
cannot fairly and objectively review the case. If such a finding is
made, the officer shall remove himself or herself from the case, and
the City Clerk will assign another hearing officer.
(2) Request For Hearing. If the recipient responds by requesting a
hearing, the City Manager shall assign the case to a hearing officer on
the list. The Manager shall notify the hearing officer, the recipient and
the issuing officer of the assignment in writing. The hearing officer
shall schedule a hearing within a reasonable date of receiving the
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-46
notice. Any delays in holding the hearing shall be reported to the City
Manager by the hearing officer.
(3) Citation Materials. At assignment, the City Manager shall transmit a
copy of the citation to the hearing officer. Within five days of
assignment, the issuing officer or the officer's department shall
transmit copies of all materials relating to the citation to the hearing
officer. The hearing officer shall transmit a copy of any materials
received to the recipient at the earliest opportunity but at least three
days in advance of the hearing.
(4) Notice of Hearing. Notice of the hearing must be served on the person
responsible for the violation at least fourteen (14) calendar days in
advance, unless a shorter time is accepted by all parties. Service of the
Notice will be by first class mail and will be complete upon mailing.
(5) Hearing. At the hearing, the hearing officer shall receive the
testimony of any witnesses, witness statements, and comments
presented by the person cited. The hearing officer will consider these
items alongside the materials submitted by the issuing officer, and may
weigh the evidence and make credibility determinations to the best of
the hearing officer's ability. The hearing officer is not required to
apply the rules of evidence in making determinations about the
evidence presented. The issuing officer is not required to attend the
hearing.
(6) Decision/Findings. After considering all of the evidence submitted,
the hearing officer shall determine, by a preponderance of the
evidence, whether the person cited did or did not violate the statute or
statutes identified in the citation. The hearing officer shall make
written findings supporting the determination and transmit them to the
cited person and the City Manager within five days of closing the
hearing. The decision of the hearing officer is final without any further
right of administrative appeal.
(7) Failure to attend the hearing constitutes a waiver of the violator's rights
to an administrative hearing and an admission of the violation. A
hearing officer may waive this result upon good cause shown.
Examples of “good cause” are: death or incapacitating illness of the
accused; a court order requiring the accused to appear for another
hearing at the same time; and lack of proper service of the citation or
notice of the hearing. “Good cause” does not include: forgetfulness
and intentional delay.
(F) Payment Following Finding Of Violation. If the hearing officer finds a
violation, the fine for the Code Violation is due within 30 days of the date the
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 203. Administration 203-47
findings are sent to the recipient. The hearing officer may not alter or reduce
the fine for any offense or combine multiple offenses into a single fine.
Payment of fines due shall be made to the City Manager.
(G) Recovery of Civil Penalties. If a civil penalty is not paid within the time
specified, the City has the authority to take the following actions:
(1) A lien may be assessed against the property and collected in the same
manner as taxes.
(2) A personal obligation may be collected by appropriate legal means.
(3) A late payment fee of 10 percent of the civil penalty may be assessed
for each 30-day period, or part thereof, that the fine remains unpaid after
the due date.
(H) Criminal Penalties. The following are misdemeanors, punishable in
accordance with State Law: (i) failure, without good cause, to appear at a
hearing that was scheduled under Code Section 203.090 (E)(4); (ii) failure to
pay a civil penalty imposed by a hearing officer within 30 days after it was
imposed, or such other time as may be established by the hearing officer.
If the final adjudication in the administrative penalty procedure is a finding of
no violation, then the City may not prosecute a criminal violation in district
court based on the same set of facts. This does not preclude the City from
pursuing a criminal conviction for a violation of the same provision based on a
different set of facts. A different date of violation will constitute a different set
of facts.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 204. Subdivision Standards 204-1
204 Subdivision Standards
204.010 Platting Procedures.
(A) Overview. Except as hereinafter provided, all divisions of property shall be
by means of an approved plat.
(B) Pre-application Conference/Sketch Plan Review. The developer shall present
a sketch of the proposed plat to the City Manager and/or his/her designee who
shall review the sketch and the City's development regulations with the
developer at a pre-application conference. Subsequent to the pre-application
conference, the City Manager and/or his/her designee, in his discretion, shall
forward the sketch plan to the Planning Commission for review and comment
or shall approve the sketch plan and require the developer to submit a
development application on forms provided by the City.
(C) Preliminary Plat.
(1) Application. The property owner, individual or other entity that has legal
interest in the property may submit an application for a preliminary plat on
forms provided by the City Manager and/or his/her designee and shall be
submitted with the required information.
(2) Review Process. After receipt of a complete application that contains all
the required information, the application shall be reviewed through the
public hearing review process in accordance with Section 203.020(A).
(3) Decision. The approval of a preliminary plat by the City Council shall
only constitute acceptance of the design as a basis for the preparation of
the final plat by the owners or subdividers. Subsequent approval by
appropriate officials having jurisdiction will be required of the proposals
pertaining to water supplies, storm drainage, sewage disposal, sidewalks,
grading, gradients and roadway widths and the surfacing of streets, prior
to the approval of the final plat. The subdivider shall also present
evidence that the plat has been reviewed by and meets the requirements of
those responsible for the provision of gas, electric and telephone service.
(D) Final Plat.
(1) Ramsey County Standards. A final plat shall be prepared as in compliance
with the Ramsey County Plat Manual dated April 1981 as adopted by the
Ramsey County Board of Commissioners on April 13, 1981, Resolution
Number 81-288 and any amendments thereto.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 204. Subdivision Standards 204-2
(2) Application. An application for final plat shall be made on forms
provided by the City Manager and/or his/her designee and shall be
submitted with the required information.
(3) Review Process. Within 60 days of the developer's request for final plat
review, the City Council shall either approve or disapprove the final plat if
the applicant has complied with all conditions and requirements upon
which the preliminary plat was expressly conditioned.
(4) Recording. Upon City Council approval and City signatures on the final
plat, the applicant shall record the final plat with the County Register of
Deeds, as provided for by that office.
(5) Effect of Subdivision Approval. For one year following preliminary plat
approval and for two years following final approval, unless the City and
the developer agree otherwise, no amendment to the Comprehensive Plan
or Development Ordinance shall apply to or affect the use, development
density, lot size, lot layout, or dedication required or permitted by the
approved preliminary or final plat.
(E) Plats Not Allowed. No plan will be approved for a subdivision which
includes any area subject to periodic flooding or which contains extremely
poor drainage capabilities which would make adequate drainage of the streets
and lots impossible, unless the subdivider agrees to make improvements
which will, in the opinion of the City Manager and/or his/her designee, make
the area completely safe for occupancy and provide adequate street and lot
drainage.
(F) Exceptions to Platting. The City Council may exempt the applicant of a minor
subdivision resulting in three or fewer parcels, in an area where conditions are
well defined, from complying with all or some of the provisions of the platting
regulations. Minor subdivisions of commercial or industrial properties must
be platted. Minor subdivisions of residential properties shall be reviewed by
the Planning Commission and approved by City Council with submission of a
Certificate of Survey including metes and bounds legal descriptions.
Registered properties may be required by Ramsey County to submit a
Registered Land Survey.
(1) Minor Subdivisions.
(a) Application. The property owner, individual or other entity that has
legal interest in the property may submit an application for a
preliminary plat on forms provided by the City Manager and/or his/her
designee and shall be submitted with the required information.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 204. Subdivision Standards 204-3
(b) Review Process. After receipt of a complete application that contains
all the required information, the application shall be reviewed through
the Planning Commission/City Council review process in accordance
with Section 203.020(B).
(c) Recording. Upon City Council approval and City signatures on the
revised deed, the applicant shall record the deed with the County
Register of Deeds, as provided for by that office within one year of
approval.
(G) Miscellaneous.
(1) Conveyance Restrictions. No conveyance of land in which the land
conveyed is described by metes and bounds shall be made or recorded
without City approval unless such parcel is a separate parcel of record at
the time of the effective date of this ordinance.
(2) Unsuitable Land. No land shall be subdivided which is held unsuitable by
the City of Shoreview for the reason of flooding, inadequate drainage,
water supply or sewage treatment facilities. All lots within the flood plain
districts shall be subdivided and contain a building site outside of the
Floodway Districts (FW, FF, GF) at or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation in accordance with Section 205.091(E), Floodplain
Management Ordinance. For property that is not subject to the provisions
of Section 205.091, all lots shall contain a building site that complies with
the City’s adopted Surface Water Management Plan and the requirements
of Section 209.065.
(3) Energy Bonuses. A density bonus of up to 5 percent may be given to
developments using passive solar energy systems on at least 80 percent of
the dwellings. A density bonus of up to 10 percent may be given to
developments using active solar energy systems for space heating, air
conditioning, and/or domestic hot water heating on at least 30 percent of
the dwellings. Density bonuses shall be calculated based upon the
densities shown on the Comprehensive Land Use Plan Map.
(4) Large Lot Subdivision. Where parcels of land are subdivided into
residential lots greater than 24,000 square feet or 150 feet in width at the
front setback line, the plat shall be designed and shall show (in dashed
lines) how lots can be re-subdivided at some later date.
(5) Building Permits. No building permit shall be issued for any lot, which
has not been subdivided in accordance with this chapter, predecessors to
this chapter, and other regulations applicable to the subdivision of land.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 204. Subdivision Standards 204-4
204.020 Public Recreational Use Dedication. If the City Council reasonably determines
that a proposed development or subdivision will increase the demand for public
recreational uses, such as parks, playgrounds, trails and open space, the City
Council, as part of any subdivision or development, may require the developer to
dedicate, reserve, or otherwise convey to the City a reasonable portion of the total
area of the proposed development or subdivision for public use as parks,
playgrounds, trails or open space; or, in lieu thereof, the City Council, at its option
and in order to facilitate city-wide planning for public recreational uses, may
require the developer to contribute to the City the cash equivalency of such public
recreational use dedication based upon the fair market value of the land at the
time of final plat, PUD final plan or other subdivision approval. The term "land"
includes land, which has utilities or improvements available to it or located on it.
(A) Land Dedication. Land dedication for public recreational use shall not exceed
10 percent of the total area proposed for development or subdivision. In
determining the amount of acreage to be dedicated for public recreational use,
the City Council may consider the amount of open space, park, recreational,
or common areas and facilities which the developer will reserve for use by
occupants of the proposed development or subdivision. No area may be
dedicated for public recreational use unless the City Council determines that
the land is suitable for such purpose.
(B) Cash Equivalent Payment. Where a cash payment is required in lieu of a land
dedication, the City Manager and/or his/her designee shall determine the fair
market value of the land by reference to current market data, if available, or
by obtaining an appraisal of the land from a licensed real estate appraiser.
The developer shall pay the cost of such appraisal before final plat, PUD final
plan, or other subdivision approval. The fair market value conclusions of the
appraiser shall be conclusive. Except as hereinafter provided, the cash
equivalency payment shall be due and payable on or before the execution of a
development agreement or release of the final plat by the City.
(1) Maximum Cash Equivalency Payment. The maximum cash equivalency
payment required on commercial, industrial, office or a mixture of such
uses shall be an amount determined by the City Council and shall not
exceed 10 percent of the fair market value of the land proposed for
development or subdivision. The maximum cash equivalency payment
required on a residential use shall depend upon the density of dwelling
units per acre on the proposed development or subdivision, and shall be
determined by reference to the following table:
Proposed Dwelling Maximum Percentage of
Units Per Acre Fair Market Value
0 - 2 4%
2.1 - 3 5%
3.1 - 4 6%
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 204. Subdivision Standards 204-5
4.1 – 5 7%
5.1 + 10%
(2) Re-subdivision. In the event of a re-subdivision of land on which a
previous cash equivalency payment has been made, the developer shall
receive credit for the amount of previous payment, which was applicable
to the area being re-subdivided.
(3) Installment Payments. The City Council, at its option, may permit the
developer to submit the cash equivalency payment over a period of time
pursuant to an installment payment agreement approved by the City's
Attorney. The agreement shall require the payment of interest on the
unpaid principal and shall require final payment within eighteen months.
The City may withhold development or building permits if the developer
does not comply with the terms of the installment agreement.
(4) Public Recreational Use Fund. Cash payments received in lieu of land
dedications shall be placed in a special fund and used only for the
acquisition or development of land for parks, playgrounds, trails or open
space, or for retirement of debt incurred for such purposes.
204.030 Subdivision Standards.
(A) Block Layout.
(1) Arrangement. A block shall be so designed as to provide two tiers of lots
except where lots back onto a major street, natural feature, railroad or
subdivision boundary, in which case, it may have a single tier of lots.
(2) Length. The maximum length of blocks shall be 1,800 feet and the
minimum length, 500 feet. Blocks over 900 feet long may require
pedestrian ways at least ten feet wide at their approximate center.
(B) Easements.
(1) Utility. Easements at least 10 feet wide centered on the rear and side lot
lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary. They shall have
continuity of alignment from lot to lot and block to block.
(2) Drainage. Drainage easements shall be provided along each side of any
watercourse to establish a storm sewer, drainage or floodway right-ofway.
Its boundaries shall conform substantially with the centerline
alignment of such watercourse.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 204. Subdivision Standards 204-6
(C) Lot Requirements. The following lot standards are intended to create
development patterns that enhance adjacent existing development patterns, by
insuring adequate light, air, and safety.
(1) Substandard Lots of Record. Refer to the requirements set forth in
207.050(C).
(2) Frontage. All lots shall front on a publicly dedicated right-of-way.
(3) Butt Lots. Butt lots shall be discouraged. Where such lots must be used
to fit a particular subdivision plan, such lots shall be at least 15 feet wider
than the average required minimum lot width of the district in which it is
located.
(4) Side Lot Lines. Side lines of lots shall be substantially at right angles to
straight street lines, or radial to curved street lines.
(5) Minimum Lot Lines. No lot shall have a front or rear lot line of less than
30 feet in length.
(6) Double Frontage Lots. Double frontage lots (lots with frontage on two
parallel streets) shall not be permitted except where lots back to a major
thoroughfare. Such lots shall have an additional depth of at least 15 feet in
order to allow for screen planting and berming along the back lot line.
(7) Corner Lots. Corner lots shall be platted at least 15 feet wider than the
minimum width requirements.
(8) Rear Lot Lines. Rear lot lines shall generally abut the rear lot lines of
adjacent developed property, except for lots proposed at the end of a culde-
sac. If this is not possible, the unique characteristics of the parcel
proposed for subdivision must be evident.
(9) Key Lots. Key lots shall be discouraged. Where such lots must be used to
fit a subdivision plan, such lots shall include at least 15 feet more depth or
width than the required minimum lot depth or width of the district in
which it is located.
(10) In the event that proposed parcel results in any adjacent development
parcel meeting the definition of a Key or Butt Lot, the City reserves the
right to require greater lot width or depth for the newly created parcel, and
to increase the structure setback for the proposed subdivision.
(D) Streets.
Rev. Date
8/4/08
Ord. 832
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 204. Subdivision Standards 204-7
(1) Street Layout and Dedication. The arrangement, functional classification,
character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform to
the Comprehensive Plan and the approved Municipal State Aid Street
System.
(2) Half Streets. Half streets shall be prohibited except where it will be
practical to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided.
(3) Private Streets. Private streets may be permitted by the procedures for a
Planned Unit Development.
(4) Street Continuation and Extension. The arrangement of streets shall
provide for the continuation of existing streets from adjoining areas into
new subdivisions.
(5) Cul-de-sacs. The maximum permitted cul-de-sac length is 500 feet.
Where certain topographic features or other unusual circumstances dictate,
special consideration may be given to accepting longer cul-de-sacs.
(6) Future Projection of Streets. Where adjoining lands are not subdivided,
streets in the new subdivision shall be required to extend to the boundary
line of the tract to make provision for future access into adjacent areas.
Temporary turnarounds shall be provided on these streets as approved by
the City Manager and/or his/her designee.
(7) No Dead Ends. In the development of subdivision or a plat, the street
construction may be undertaken in parts or sections of the plat, providing
that the petitioner includes in each separate undertaking streets which will
make a complete circuit so that there will be no dead ends when
construction of a particular section has been completed, except as allowed
per Section 204.030(D)(5).
(8) Design Criteria. See Section 402, Streets.
(E) Utilities.
(1) Undergrounding Required. Except as hereinafter provided, all public or
private utility distribution lines, including cable television distribution
lines, shall be buried underground.
(a) Facilities appurtenant to underground utility distribution lines
including lift stations, hydrants, meters, transformers, pedestals, and
other appurtenances approved by the City Manager and/or his/her
designee do not have to be constructed underground.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 204. Subdivision Standards 204-8
(b) Cable television distribution lines shall be constructed in accordance
with the Cable Franchise Agreement, Ordinance 690.
(c) Temporary aboveground installation of utility distribution lines shall
be permitted when necessitated by emergency repairs to existing
underground utility distribution lines. Temporary aboveground utility
distribution lines shall be permitted to serve a construction project or a
customer where grade cannot be established within a reasonable time
or frozen ground conditions prevent economical placement of
underground utility distribution lines. Temporary aboveground utility
distribution lines shall be replaced by permanent underground utility
distribution lines within one full construction season following the
temporary placement or such later date as may be approved by the City
Manager and/or his/her designee.
(d) The City Council may waive the requirement that utility distribution
lines be constructed underground upon a finding that placement of
utility distribution lines underground would not be compatible with the
proposed development plan; or upon a finding that unusual
topography, soil, or other physical conditions make the installation of
underground utility distribution lines unfeasible.
(2) Utility Company Approval. The developer and/or property owner shall
file a written statement with the City Manager and/or his/her designee
from the appropriate utility company indicating that the developer and/or
property owner has made the necessary arrangements with the utility
company for the construction of underground utility distribution lines.
The statement of utility company authorization shall be filed with the City
Manager and/or his/her designee prior to construction of the underground
utility distribution lines at the time of filing of site plans or prior to final
plat approval, whichever event occurs first.
(3) Dedication or Conveyance of Utility Easements. The developer and/or
property owner shall indicate the location of proposed utility easements on
site plans submitted to the City Manager and/or his/her designee. The
necessary utility easements shall be shown as dedications on the final plat,
or, where formal platting is not required, shall be conveyed to the City
before issuance of building permits.
(4) Maintenance of Utility Easement During Construction. The developer
and/or property owner shall be responsible for establishing and
maintaining a utility easement preliminary grade to within 6 inches of the
final grade. Utility easement areas shall be kept free and clear of all
structures, plantings or obstructions, except fences constructed in
accordance with the Shoreview City Code, so that utility companies may
install and maintain underground distribution lines.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 204. Subdivision Standards 204-9
(5) Excavation Near Existing Underground Distribution Lines. In the interest
of public safety and to avoid possible damage to underground utility
distribution lines, no person shall excavate in any easement containing
underground utilities without first notifying the utility company whose
lines occupy the easement; provided, however, such excavation shall not
be considered in violation of this provision unless the excavator has actual
notice of the existence of the underground utility or unless the easement
has been recorded with the Ramsey County Recorder.
(6) Utilities Located in Floodplain. All public utilities and facilities such as
gas, electrical, sewer and water supply systems to be located in the
floodplain shall be flood proofed in accordance with State Building Codes
or elevated to above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
(F) Water Facilities.
(1) Water supply lines shall be extended and service connections shall be
stubbed into the property line of each lot.
(2) All new structures requiring water facilities shall connect to the municipal
water system if available.
(3) All new plats shall be required to be served with municipal water.
(G) Sewage Treatment.
(1) Sanitary sewer mains and service connections shall be installed to service
all lots and shall be connected to the public system.
(2) All new structures requiring sewage treatment facilities must connect to
the public sanitary sewer facilities. Building permits shall not be issued
for new structures requiring sewage treatment unless public sanitary sewer
is available except as allowed under Section 209.090(D).
(H) Storm Sewer.
(1) All development must provide storm sewer facilities to adequately manage
surface waters.
(2) All systems must be approved by the City Manager and/or his/her
designee.
(3) All systems must be designed to insure that the storm water runoff from a
developed site will leave at no greater rate or significantly lesser quality
than the storm water runoff from the site in an undeveloped condition.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 204. Subdivision Standards 204-10
(4) All storm sewer systems with ponds must be designed to handle the one
hundred year storm event. All storm sewer pipes must be designed at a
minimum to handle the five-year storm event.
(5) No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted that results in
water run off, causing flooding, erosion or deposit of minerals on adjacent
properties. Such run off shall be properly channeled into a storm drain,
watercourse, ponding area or other public facilities.
(I) Monuments. Monuments of a permanent character as required by Section
505.02, M.S.A., shall be placed at each corner or angle on the outside
boundary of the subdivision. Pipes or steels rods shall be placed at each
corner of each lot and at each intersection of street centerlines.
(J) Construction Plans.
(1) Engineer Drafting. Construction plans for the required improvements
conforming in all respects to the standards of the City and the applicable
ordinances, shall be prepared at the subdivider's expense by a registered
professional engineer and said plans shall contain his seal. Such plans
together with the quantity of construction items shall be submitted to the
City Manager and/or his/her designee for approval.
(2) As-Builts. Upon the City Manager and/or his/her designee's certificate of
compliance, the subdivider shall furnish the City with as-built drawings
prepared by a registered professional engineer showing the improvements
as built or in place.
(K) Public Utility and Improvement Dedication. As part of any subdivision or
development within the City, the City Council may require the developer to
dedicate, reserve, or otherwise convey to the City a reasonable portion of the
total area of the proposed development for use as streets, alleys, roads,
sanitary sewer, water mains and appurtenances, storm sewer, storm water
drainage areas or holding ponds, electric, gas, cable television and telephone
transmission lines, and similar public improvements and utilities.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
1
Section 205. Development Districts
205 Development Districts
205.010 General. This Chapter delineates the activities allowed, constrained or prohibited in
each of the development districts established within the City. Each district
represents a context for development that responds to the policy directives of the
City's Comprehensive Guide Plan. In addition to the purposes identified in Section
201.010, the sections of this Chapter identify specific purposes for each
development district.
(A) Zoning Map. The boundaries of the development districts are defined and
established as shown on a map entitled "Zoning Map, City of Shoreview,
Minnesota," and adopted March 2, 2009 which map and all explanatory matter
thereon is hereby made a part of this chapter. Future amendments to the map
may only be accomplished in accordance with Section 203.052, Amendments.
The map shall be maintained by the City Manager or his/her designee who shall
make it available for inspection and/or reproduction.
(1) Zoning Map Amendments. The Shoreview Zoning Map, adopted on
March 2, 2009 is hereby revised as follows:
The Land Use Plan Chapter of the City's Comprehensive Guide Plan
guides future development within the City; the Zoning Map provides the
legal basis for development. When development occurs and zoning
changes are made in development district boundaries subsequent to the
adoption of this ordinance and map, such changes shall be incorporated
into the text and upon the map under the amendment procedures of
Section 203.
a. Zoning Map Revision. The Shoreview Zoning Map, adopted on March 2,
2009, is hereby revised to indicate that the below-described properties
have been rezoned from UND, Urban Underdeveloped, to PUD,
Planned Unit Development, zoning classification pursuant to Shoreview
Ordinance. The underlying zoning for the property shall be C-2 General
Commercial:
Parcel 1 – That part of the Southwest Quarter (SW 1/4) of the
Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4) of Section Twenty-Six (26), Township
Thirty (30), Range Twenty-three (23), lying Southerly of the South
right-of-way line of Trunk Highway 694, except that part platted as
George Reiling Third Addition, Ramsey County, Minnesota.
Parcel 2 – That part of the Southeast Quarter (SE 1/4) of the Northwest
Quarter (NW 1/4) of Section Twenty-six (26), Township Thirty (30),
Range Twenty-three (23), lying Southerly of the following described
line: Beginning at a point on the West line of said Section Twenty-six
(26) distant 754.4 feet North of the West Quarter corner thereof;
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
2
Section 205. Development Districts
thence run Southeasterly at an angle of Seventy-two (72) degrees,
Seventeen (17) minutes with said West section line for 3000 feet and
there terminating.
This property, when platted, will be known as CCCU Commercial
Addition.
b. Zoning Map Revision. The Shoreview Zoning Map, adopted on March
2, 2009, is hereby revised to indicate that the below-described
properties have been rezoned from C1, Retail Service to PUD, Planned
Unit Development, zoning classification pursuant to Shoreview
Ordinance. The underlying zoning for this PUD shall be R3, Multifamily
residential:
That part of Lots 15 and 16, and that part of vacated Emmett Street,
Owasso Park, according to the recorded plat thereof on file and of
record in the office of the Ramsey County Recorder and that part of
the North Half of the Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of
Section 35, Township 30 North, Range 23 West, Ramsey County,
Minnesota, described as follows:
Commencing at the northeast corner of said Section 35; thence on an
assumed bearing of South 89 degrees 29 minutes 29 seconds West,
along the north line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 35, a
distance of 1000.69 feet; thence South 00 degrees 43 minutes 47
seconds West, a distance of 56.70 feet to the southerly right of way line
of the Minneapolis, St. Paul and Sault Ste. Marie Railroad, being a line
that is parallel with and distant 75 feet southerly, as measured at right
angles, from the centerline of the southerly railroad track, being the
point of beginning of the land to be described; thence continue South 00
degrees 43 minutes 47 seconds West, a distance of 51.00 feet; thence
South 65 degrees 10 minutes 39 seconds West, a distance of 251.69
feet; thence South 00 degrees 32 minutes 33 seconds East, a distance of
447.66 feet to the easterly extension of the southerly line of said North
Half of the Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter; thence South
89 degrees 29 minutes 28 seconds West, along said extension, and
along said south line of the North Half of the Northwest Quarter of the
Northeast Quarter, a distance of 581.83 feet to the centerline of Victoria
Street, as it was located prior to its realignment; thence northeasterly a
distance of 101.32 feet, along said centerline of Victoria Street, being a
curve not tangent with the last described line, said curve is concave to
the east, has a radius of 262.04 feet, and a central angle of 22 degrees 09
minutes 11 seconds, the chord of said curve bears North 00 degrees 34
minutes 14 seconds East, and has a chord distance of 100.69 feet;
thence North 11 degrees 38 minutes 49 seconds East, along said
centerline, tangent to said curve, a distance of
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
3
Section 205. Development Districts
554.03 feet to the southerly right of way line of said Minneapolis, St.
Paul and Sault Ste. Marie Railroad, being a line parallel with and
distant 50 feet southerly, as measured at right angles, from the
centerline of the southerly railroad track; thence South 89 degrees 16
minutes 13 seconds East, along said southerly railroad right of way
line, a distance of 378.16 feet to the east line of the North Half of the
Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 35; thence
South 00 degrees 32 minutes 33 seconds East, along said east line, a
distance of 25.01 feet to said southerly railroad right of way line being
a line parallel with and distant 75 feet southerly, as measured at right
angles, from the centerline of said southerly railroad track; thence
South 89 degrees 16 minutes 13 seconds East, along said southerly
railroad right of way line, a distance of 315.46 feet to the point of
beginning. Containing 8.29 acres more or less. Subject to all
easements and restrictions of record.
This property is commonly known as 3588 Owasso Street, which
when platted will be known as Lakeview Terrace.
c. Zoning Map Revision. The Shoreview Zoning Map, adopted on March
2, 2009, is hereby revised to indicate that the below-described property
has been rezoned from OFC, Office to PUD, Planned Unit
Development, zoning classification pursuant to Shoreview Ordinance.
The underlying zoning for this PUD shall be OFC, Office:
Subj To St Part Nely Of Th 49 And Sly Of A L Beg On E L Of And
388 29/1oo Ft S Of Ne Cor Of Sec 25 T 3o R 23 Th S 69 Deg 12 Min
W 357 93/1oo Ft To Cl Of Sd Hwy Of Ne 1/4 Of Sd Sec 25 Tn 30 Rn
23.
This property is commonly known as 4001 Rice Street.
d. Zoning Map Revision. The Shoreview Zoning Map, adopted on March
2, 2009, is hereby revised to indicate that the below-described
properties have been rezoned from UND, Urban Underdeveloped, to
PUD, Planned Unit Development, zoning classification pursuant to
Shoreview Ordinance. The underlying zoning for the property shall be
RE-60, Residential Estate (60):
Lot 9, Block 1, Heather Ridge East 3rd Addition, Ramsey County,
Minnesota and That part of the west 352.30 feet of the East Half of the
Southwest Quarter of Section 1, Township 30, Range 23, Ramsey
County, Minnesota, which lies northwesterly of the centerline of the
former Northern States Power Company right-of-way, EXCEPT the
north 1373.65 feet thereof. Subject to a power line and natural gas
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
4
Section 205. Development Districts
easement in favor of Northern States Power Company and its
successors.
This property, when platted, will be known as The Estates of Heather
Ridge.
e. Zoning Map Revision. The Shoreview Zoning Map, adopted on April
16, 2001, is hereby revised to indicate that the below-described
property has been rezoned from BPK, Business Park to PUD, Planned
Unit Development, zoning classification pursuant to Shoreview
Ordinance. The underlying zoning for this PUD shall be BPK,
Business Park:
Com At Se Cor Of Se 1/4 Th N 0 Deg 2min 55 sec W On E Line
163.7ft To N Line Of Co Rd E For Pt Of Beg; Th S 79deg 0min 25sec
W On Sd N Line 122 Ft Th N 88deg 41min 20sec W On N Line 441 Ft
Th N 1 Deg 18min 40 Sec E 420 Ft Th S 88 Deg 41 Min 20sec E
550.77 ft To Pt On E Line Of Sd Se 1/4 Th S On E Line 394.11 Ft To Pt
Of Beg (subj To Rds & Esmts), In Sec 26 Tn 30 Rn 23, And
Com At Intersection Of E Line Of Se 1/4 and Nly Line Of Co Rd E Th
Swly On Sd Rd Line 122 Ft Th W On Sd Rd Line 501 Ft To Beg Th
Continue W On Rd Line 500 Ft Th N At Ra 420 Ft Th E At Ra 500 Ft
Th S To Beg In Se 1/4 Of Sec 26 Tn 30 Rn 23.
This property is commonly known as 707, 655 and 625 County Road
E.
f. Zoning Map Revision. The Shoreview Zoning Map, adopted on April
16, 2001, is hereby revised to indicate that the below-described
property has been rezoned from O, Office and R1, Detached
Residential to PUD, Planned Unit Development for the following
legally described property:
Lot 4, Block 1, Kozlak Addition, Ramsey County, Minnesota and a
parcel of land in the southwest quarter of Section 13, Township 30,
Range 23, more specifically described as follows:
Beginning at a point 1071.12 feet west and 33.00 feet south of the
center of Section 13 said Township and Range; thence North 87
degrees 31 minutes West a distance of 200.00 feet; thence South 54
degrees 39 minutes 30 seconds East a distance of 336.00 feet;
beginning as shown on the right of way map for County Project 28-
01B on file in the Office of the Ramsey County Engineer, Ramsey
County, Minnesota.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
5
Section 205. Development Districts
This property is commonly known as 4785 Hodgson Road and 506
Tanglewood Drive, which when platted will be known as Applewood
Pointe of Shoreview.
g. Zoning Map Revision. The Shoreview Zoning Map, adopted on April
16, 2001, is hereby revised to indicate that the below-described
property has been rezoned from UND, Urban Underdeveloped to R1,
Detached Residential for the following legally described property:
W 495 Ft Of S 825 Ft Of Ne 1/4 of Ne 1/4 Subj To Rds And Esmts In
Sec 3 Tn 30 Rn 23, Ramsey County, Minnesota.
This property is commonly known as 5878 Lexington Avenue, which
when platted will be known as Autumn Meadows.
h. Zoning Map Revision. The Shoreview Zoning Map, adopted on April
16, 2001, is hereby revised to indicate that the below-described
property has been rezoned from R1, Detached Residential to O, Office
for the following legally described property:
That part of Lot 2, Block 2, Hipkins Addition, Ramsey County,
Minnesota, lying easterly of a line described as commencing at the
northwest corner of said Lot 2; thence easterly, along the north line of
said Lot 2, a distance of 171.53 feet to the point of beginning of the
line to be described; thence southerly deflecting right 90 degrees 03
minutes 23 seconds 93.19 feet to the south line of said Lot 2 and said
line there terminating.
An d
That part of Lot 2, Block 2, Hipkins Addition, Ramsey County,
Minnesota, lying easterly of a line beginning at a point on the south
line of said Lot 2, Block 2, Prachar Addition, distant 113.2 feet east
from the Southwest corner thereof and ending at a point on the north
line of said Lot 2, distant 127.0 feet east of the Northwest corner
thereof, lying northerly of a line described as commencing at the
northeast corner of the Southwest Quarter of Section 13, Township 30,
Range 23 being a cast iron monument; thence South 0 degrees 49
minutes 42 seconds East assumed bearing along the east line of said
Southwest Quarter of Section 13 a distance of 1227.22 feet to the point
of beginning of the line to be described; thence North 89 degrees 22
minutes 40 seconds West a distance of 1001.67 feet to the west line of
the above described property and said line there terminating.
(This property is commonly known as 4693 Hodgson Road)
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
6
Section 205. Development Districts
An d
That Part Of The East 1004.69 Ft Of The Southeast 1/4 Of The
Southwest 1/4 Of Section 13 Township 30 Range 23 Lying Westerly
Of The Centerline Of Hodgson Rd and Lying Northerly Of A Line
Described As; Beginning At A Point On The West Line Of Said East
1004.69 Ft Of The Southeast 1/4 Of The Southwest 1/4 Of Said 15.25
Feet South of The Northwest Corner Thereof Then East To The
Centerline Of Hodgson Road And Said Line There Terminating & In
Said Prachar Addition Except That Part Lying Northerly Of A Line
Described As; Commencing At The Northeast Corner Of The
Southwest 1/4 Of Section 13 Township 30 Range 23 Then South
1227.22 Ft To The Point Of Beginning Of Said Line Then West
100.67 Ft And Said Line There Terminating That Part Of Lot 2 Block
2 Lying East Of A Line Described As Beginning At A Point On The
South Line Of Said Lot 113.20 Ft E Of Southwest Corner Then North
To The North Line Of Said Lot 2 Block 2 And Said Line There
Terminating.
(This property is commonly known as 4685 Hodgson Road)
i. Zoning Map Revision. The Shoreview Zoning Map, adopted on March
2, 2009, is hereby revised to indicate that the below-described
properties have been rezoned from R1, Detached Residential to PUD,
Planned Unit Development:
Lots 1 and 2, Block 1, Commons Park Addition Number Three
(Generally includes properties at 4570/4560 Victoria Street and
805/795 Highway 96)
j. Zoning Map Revision. The Shoreview Zoning Map, adopted on March
2, 2009, is hereby revised to indicate that the below-described
properties have been rezoned from UND, Urban Underdeveloped to
PUD, Planned Unit Development for the following legally described
property:
Lot 23, Auditor’s Subdivision No. 82, St. Paul, Minn.
(This property is commonly known as 4710 Cumberland Street)
k. Zoning Map Revision. The Shoreview Zoning Map, adopted on March 2,
2009, is hereby revised to indicate that the below-described property has been
rezoned from UND, Urban Underdeveloped to R-1, Detached Residential.
Rev. Date
8/1/16
Ord. #945
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
7
Section 205. Development Districts
The Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 3, Township 30,
Range 23 West, Ramsey County, Minnesota, except the south 754 feet and
except the east 360 feet and except the west 560 feet thereof.
(This property has PID No. 03-30-23-42-0001)
l. Zoning Map Revision. The Shoreview Zoning Map, adopted on
March 18, 1991, is hereby revised to indicate that the below-described
property has been rezoned from TOD-1, Telecommunications Overlay
District One, to TOD-2, Telecommunications District Two.
Section 1 Town 30 Range 23 Lot 7 Blk 3 Wester Pines No 2 & Park in
Evergreen Shores And In Sd Sec 1 Tn 30 Rn 23, The S 720 Ft Of N 903
Ft Of E 785 Ft Of W 815 Ft Of Ne ¼ Of Nw1/4 (Subj To Ditch) Sec 1
Tn 30 Rn 23, Ramsey County, Minnesota.
(This property is commonly known as Bucher Park, 5900 Mackubin
Street)
m. Zoning Map Revision. The Shoreview Zoning Map, adopted on March
18, 1991, is hereby revised to indicate the below-described property has
been rezoned from PUD, Planned Unit Development, to R-1, Detached
Residential.
The North 157 feet of the East 30 feet and that part of the East 60 feet
lying South of the North 157 feet of Lot 3, Block 1, Schoonover
Addition, Ramsey County, Minnesota.
(This property is commonly known as 1000 County Road E)
205.015 Pursuant to authority granted by Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.3593, subdivision 9,
the City of Shoreview opts-out of the requirements of Minn. Stat. §462.3593, which defines
and regulates Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings.
205.020 Districts Established. The districts listed below are hereby established for the City:
(A)Business Districts
(1) Retail Service District (C1)
(2) Limited Retail Service District (C1A)
(3) General Commercial District (C2)
(4) Office District (OFC)
(5) Business Park District (BPK)
(B) Industrial District (I)
(C) Tower District (T)
Rev. Date
3/27/19
Ord. 969
Rev. Date
7/17/19
Ord. 972
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
8
Section 205. Development Districts
(D)Residential Districts
(1)Residential Estate District (RE)
(2)Detached Residential District (R1)
(3)Attached Residential District (R2)
(4)Multiple Dwelling Residential District (R3)
(5)Mobile Home Residential District (R4)
(E) Special Districts
(1)Flood Plain Management Districts (FW, FF and GF)
(2)Open Space (OS)
(3)Planned Unit Development (PUD)
(4)Urban Underdeveloped (UND)
(5)Telecommunications Overlay District (TOD-1 and TOD-2)
205.030 Permitted Uses. For those uses not specifically noted, the City Manager or his/her
designee shall make a determination as to whether the proposed use is
permitted. Where a question arises, the Planning Commission shall make a
recommendation to the City Council, which shall make the final determination.
Compatibility with the purpose statement and permitted uses for the district and
with the adjoining planned uses shall be considered when making this decision.
205.035 Prohibited Uses. The following uses are prohibited within the City:
Construction/Heavy Equipment Sales and Rental
Open Sales Lots unless otherwise permitted by the Development Code
Rev.
4/19/10
Ord. #864
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
9
Section 205. Development Districts
205.040 Business Districts Overview. Within the City, business districts have been
established to provide areas suitable for commercial, office and business park
development. These business districts include the following districts:
Limited Retail Service District (C1A)
Retail Service District (C1)
General Commercial District (C2)
Office District (OFC)
Business Park District (BPK)
(A) Purpose. The Business Districts are established to:
(1) Provide adequate space to meet the needs of modern commercial, office
and business park development, including off-street parking and truck
loading areas.
(2) Provide local, convenient retail services close to city residents, large
centers serving the whole community and employment center and
highway-oriented services, located appropriately throughout the City.
(3) Minimize traffic congestion.
(B) Permitted Uses. In addition to the permitted uses listed for each Commercial
District, the following uses are also permitted.
(1) Utilities.
(2) Towers and antennas subject to compliance with the standards in Section
207.040.
(3) Commercial antennas, excluding satellite earth stations, in accordance
with the standards in Section 207.
(4) Free-standing commercial towers are not permitted in business districts
unless the property falls within the Telecommunications Overlay District.
(5) Mobile wireless telecommunications facilities for temporary use during
power outages, natural disasters, or emergencies or for temporary testing
purposes for up to 72 hours.
(6) Private antennas in accordance with the standards in Section 207.040(A).
(7) Satellite earth stations provided that:
(a) The diameter is less than two meters.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
10
Section 205. Development Districts
(b) The ground-level view of these devices is screened from contiguous
properties and adjacent streets.
(8) Public and quasi-public facilities subject to Site and Building Plan review
and upon the Council’s finding that the use(s) will not impede or
otherwise conflict with the planned use of adjoining property.
(C)Required Conditions. In addition to the standards of Section 203-206, the
following specifications shall apply to all Business Districts:
(1) Maximum Building Height. 35 feet; this height may be exceeded if, for
every additional foot of height, there is an additional foot of building
setback on all sides.
(2) Building Setback.
(a) Adjacent to Residential. In all business districts, with the exception of
the Business Park District, a 50-foot minimum building setback is
required from the property line of land planned for residential use. In
the Business Park District (BP), a 75-foot minimum building setback is
required from the property line of land planned for residential use. This
setback area shall serve as a buffer between commercial/office property
and property planned for residential use.
(b) Minor Arterial and Collector Streets. Along minor arterial streets as
identified in the Comprehensive Guide Plan, structures shall maintain
a 40-foot setback. Along collector streets as identified in the
Comprehensive Guide Plan, structures shall maintain a 30-foot
setback.
(c) Shoreland. Lakeside setbacks in shoreland areas shall be regulated by
the Shoreland Regulations in Section 209.080.
(d) Encroachments. The following shall be considered as permitted
encroachments on setback requirements:
(i) In any yard: eaves, gutters, awnings, chimneys, landings,
sidewalks and fences.
(ii) In side and rear yards: decks, open terraces, balconies and porches
provided they are no closer than five feet to any property line.
(These rules do not apply to side yards that adjoin a street.)
Rev. 5/4/09
Ord. 850
(1) Architectural Design. The City design standards specified in Section
206.050 are intended to encourage attractive commercial buildings that are
designed for energy efficiency, resource efficiency (including durability),
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
11
Section 205. Development Districts
indoor environmental quality, and water conservation. When combined
with appropriate site design, the building and grounds will reflect the
aesthetic, environmental and social values of the community.
(2) Storage.
(a) All materials, supplies, finished or semi-finished products and
equipment, except for trucks necessary to the operation of the principal
use, shall be stored within a completely enclosed building in the
Business Districts. Long term outdoor parking or storage of commercial
tractors and trailers is prohibited.
(b) Outside Display Areas. In the Retail Service (C1) and General
Commercial (C2) districts, merchandise which is offered for sale, rental
or lease may be displayed within an outside display area through the
Site and Building Plan review process. Outside display areas shall be
landscaped and provided with trash containers and screening where
necessary, and shall be maintained in a clean and attractive manner.
Outside display areas are prohibited in the Limited Retail Service
District (C1A), Office District (OFC) and Business Park District (BP),
except as permitted for hardware stores.
(5) Signs. As regulated by Section 208.
(6) Refuse. Trash, recyclable materials and associated handling equipment
must be stored within the principal structure or in a dumpster enclosure,
attached or separate from the principal structure constructed of building
materials compatible with the principal structure. All waste material,
debris, refuse and garbage shall be properly contained in a closed
container designed for such purposes. Refuse enclosures shall be sized to
accommodate both refuse and recycling containers and will be reviewed
through the Site and Building Plan review process.
Rev. 5/4/09
Ord. 850
(7) Accessory Structures. Accessory structures shall be permitted in the
Limited Retail Service District (C1A), Retail Service District (C1) and the
General Commercial District (C2) through the Site and Building Plan
review process. Accessory structures are not permitted in the Office
(OFC) and Business Park (BP) Districts.
(8) Parking. Parking space requirements and parking lot design shall be as
required by Section 206.020, Parking.
(9) Fences. Fences may be permitted in the Business Districts subject to
Council approval through the Site and Building Plan review process. All
fences shall comply with the following standards:
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
12
Section 205. Development Districts
(a) Height. Property line fences within a Business District shall not
exceed six (6) feet in height except as follows:
(i) If the applicant can prove to the satisfaction of the City Council
that a fence for security reasons is necessary above said permitted
height, a fence not exceeding eight (8) feet in height might be
erected along the rear, side and front lot lines, provided that such
fence exceeding (5) feet in height is constructed with a set-back
along each property line of fifteen (15) feet.
(ii) Fences erected along a property line in common with any
Residential District shall be subject to the regulations herein set
forth and the provisions pertaining to Residential Districts.
(b) Location. All boundary line fences shall be located entirely upon the
private property of the person, firm or corporation constructing, or
causing the construction of such fence, unless the owner of the
adjoining property agrees, in writing that such fence may be erected on
the division line of the respective properties. The City Manager or
his/her designee may require the owner of property upon which a fence
now exists, or is to be located, to establish lot lines upon said property
by the placement of permanent stakes located by a licensed surveyor or
engineer.
(c) Construction and Maintenance. Every fence shall be constructed in a
substantial professional manner and shall be constructed of a
substantial material reasonably suited to the purpose for which the
fence is proposed to be used. Every fence shall be maintained in a
condition of reasonable repair and shall not be allowed to deteriorate
into disrepair or into a dangerous condition, or constitute a nuisance,
either public or private.
(d) Fencing Material. The framing structure of fences in all Business
Districts shall be placed on the owner’s side of the fence or equally
distributed on both sides. Fencing material may consist of
dimensional, solid sawn, decay resistant lumber, chain link fencing
material with corrosion protection or other materials as permitted
subject to the Site and Building Plan review.
(e) Prohibited Fence Material. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to construct and maintain or allowed to be constructed or
maintained upon any property located within a Business District, any
fence of metal construction, or otherwise, which is charged or
connected with electrical current in such a manner as to transmit said
current to persons, animals or things which intentionally or
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
13
Section 205. Development Districts
unintentionally may come in contact with the same. Barbed wire
fences are prohibited and shall not be constructed or maintained.
205.041 Limited Retail Service District (C1A)
(A)Purpose. In addition to the purposes defined in Section 205.040(A) (Business
District Overview, Purpose) the Limited Retail Service District is intended to
be located on the periphery of residential neighborhoods along collector or
arterial roadways. The principal uses are intended to serve the convenience
retail and personal service needs of nearby residents.
(B) Permitted Uses. In addition to the uses defined in Section
205.040(B) (Overview) the following uses, as well as any similar uses,
are permitted:
Barber/beauty shop
Convenience retail
Day care
Dry cleaner
Florist
Gift/card shop
Medical, dental, weight loss or veterinarian clinic
Off-sale liquor
Personal service office/agency
Photocopying/printing
Restaurant, no drive-up facilities and no more than 1,500 square feet of floor
area
Shoe repair/tailor
Tanning salon
Video rental
(C) Conditional Uses. The following uses may be allowed by a
Conditional Use Permit. Approval of a Conditional Use Permit shall require
compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 203.032(D),
Conditional Use Permits.
Fuel station (capacity of no more than four vehicles at one time).
Dispensing of propane or compressed natural gas.
Restaurants that would exceed 1,500 square feet of area.
(D)Required Conditions. In addition to the conditions of Section 205.042(D)
(Retail Service District), the following specifications apply to properties
within the Limited Retail Service District:
(1) Maximum Number of Buildings and Building Area: Only one principal
structure, not to exceed 15,000 square feet is permitted per property.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
14
Section 205. Development Districts
205.042 Retail Service District (C1)
(A) Purpose. In addition to the purposes defined in Section 205.040(A)(Business District
Overview, Purpose), the Retail Service District is intended to have direct access to an
arterial roadway and to include a variety of retail, personal service, indoor recreation,
restaurant, and office uses. These businesses are intended to be patronized by the
entire community as well as persons from nearby communities. Multi-tenant
commercial structures and free standing uses are permitted within the district.
(B) Permitted Uses. In addition to the uses defined in Section 205.040(B)
(Overview) and 205.044(B) (Office District) the following retail sales
activities and commercial services, as well as similar uses, are permitted:
art/school supplies
auto accessories
bakery goods/deli
barber/beauty shop
books and music
cameras & photo supplies
clothing
computers/software
costume rental
day care
decorating
department stores
financial facilities
florist
fuel station (capacity of no more than four vehicles at one time)
gifts/cards
groceries
hardware
hobby shops
household furnishings
housewares
jewelry
laundry/dry cleaning
lawn and garden supplies
locksmith
luggage
mortuary
music/dance/business school
musical instruments
off-sale liquor
paint/wallpaper/interior
personal care products
pet shops/grooming
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
15
Section 205. Development Districts
pharmacy
photocopying service
photography studio
restaurant
seasonal produce/Christmas tree sales
sewing supplies
shoe sales/repair
sporting goods
tailoring/dressmaking
tanning salons
tobacco
variety shops
video rental/sale
(C) Conditional Uses. The following uses may be allowed by a Conditional Use
Permit. Approval of a Conditional Use Permit shall require compliance with
the requirements set forth in Section 203.032(D) (Conditional Use Permits).
commercial recreation uses
dispensing of propane/compressed natural gas
fuel stations (capacity of five to eight vehicles at one time)
kennels
uses with drive-up facilities or loading docks within 75 feet of land planned
for residential use
(D)Required Conditions. In addition to the conditions of Section 205.040(C)
(Required Conditions), the following specifications apply for the Retail
Service District:
(1) Minimum Lot Size. No minimum lot size.
(2) Minimum Building Setbacks. Front yard of 50 feet; side yard of 10 feet,
except on corner lots the side yard shall be 30 feet; and rear yards of 20
feet.
(3) Maximum Lot Coverage. Not to exceed 70%. Maximum lot coverage
may be increased to 75% if best management practice measures are taken
to minimize negative effects on the environment as documented in the
current editions of Minnesota Construction Site Erosion and Sediment
Control Planning Handbook (MBWSR) and Protecting Water Quality in
Urban Areas (MPCA).
205.043 General Commercial District (C2)
(A)Purpose. In addition to the purposes defined in Section 205.040(A) (Business
District Overview, Purpose), the General Commercial District is intended to
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
16
Section 205. Development Districts
be located at an intersection that includes an arterial roadway. It should not be
located adjacent to an area planned for residential use. This district is intended
to permit uses such as motor vehicle fuel, and service, convenience retail,
restaurant, and motel/hotel uses that will not cause unsafe traffic conditions and
which cater to visitors to the area.
(B) Permitted Uses. In addition to the uses defined in Sections
205.040(B) (Overview) and 205.042(B) (Retail Service District), the
following types of activities, as well as similar uses, are permitted:
dispensing propane/compressed natural gas
equipment sales and rental located within a fully enclosed building
fuel stations
motels, hotels
restaurants
seasonal produce/Christmas tree sales
truck/car washes
vehicle sales and rental located within a fully enclosed building
(C) Conditional Uses.
(1) Approval of a Conditional Use Permit shall require compliance with the
requirements set forth in Section 203.032(D) (Conditional Use Permits). In
addition, when the site abuts land planned for residential use as defined by
the Shoreview Comprehensive Guide Plan, the City may:
(a) prohibit access from a predominately residential street.
(b) restrict the hours of operation for loading docks, drive-up facilities, selfservice
fuel sales, outdoor display/activity areas that are lighted and
have an outdoor speaker system(s) and any use that could promote
loitering, such as a tavern or commercial recreation use.
(c) require greater than minimum setbacks for structures and driveways.
(d) require opaque screening to eliminate headlight glare.
(e) impose any other restriction it deems to be in the public interest. If the
proposed conditional use is an adult establishment, outside storage and
display and accessory structures are prohibited.
(2) The following uses are permitted with a conditional use permit:
adult establishments
automobile rental and service facility
automobile service station
auto body repair and painting
commercial recreation uses
uses with drive-up facilities or loading docks within 75 feet of property
zoned for residential use
pawnbroker shops
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
17
Section 205. Development Districts
(D) Auto Rental and Service Facility. Approval of a conditional use permit for an
auto rental and service facility shall comply with the following standards:
(1) The use is permitted in single-tenant or multi-tenant commercial buildings.
(2) No more than five (5) rental cars for pick-up or drop off in the short term
may be parked and/or stored on the property.
(3) The number of parking stalls provided this use shall be in addition to the
City’s minimum parking requirements for the property and shall be located to
the rear or side of the building.
(4) No servicing of vehicles shall be offered to the general public.
(E)Required Conditions. In addition to the conditions of Section 205.040(C)
(Business District Overview), the following specifications apply for uses in the
General Commercial District:
(1) Minimum Lot Size. No minimum lot size.
(2) Minimum Lot Width. 100 feet.
(3) Minimum Building Setback. A front yard of 50 feet; side yard of 10 feet, except on
a corner lot the side yard shall be 30 feet; and rear yard of 20 feet.
(4) Maximum Lot Coverage. Not to exceed 75%. Maximum lot coverage may
be increased to 80% if best management practice measures are taken to
minimize negative effects on the environment as documented in the current
editions of Minnesota Construction Site Erosion and Sediment Control
Planning Handbook (MBWSR) and Protecting Water Quality in Urban
Areas (MPCA).
205.044 Office District (OFC)
(A) Purpose. The Office District is established to:
(1) Provide a suitable environment for office activities.
(2) Incorporate, within the City, jobs closer to the home without introducing
conflicts of land use.
(B) Permitted Uses.
Office and research activities which are wholly contained within a structure.
Related or supporting commercial uses located in the same building as the
principal use.
Public or quasi-public facilities subject to Planning Commission review and a
City Council finding that the use(s) will not impede or otherwise conflict
with the planned use of adjoining property. The City Council may attach
conditions to its site plan approval to insure that the use will not interfere
with the planned use of adjoining property.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
18
Section 205. Development Districts
Medical, dental, and veterinary offices and clinics.
Licensed day care facilities that occupy less than 49 percent of the leasable
area in a multiple tenant building.
Restaurants that also satisfy the following requirements:
Qualify for the issuance of an intoxicating on-sale liquor license within the
City;
Do not have drive-up order facilities;
Food sales constitute at least 60% of the establishment's gross sales;
Are able to accommodate, by reservation, gatherings of 20 or more
people; and
Except for special occasions, do not accept orders for food after 11:00
p.m.
Utilities.
Towers and antennas subject to compliance with the standards in Section
207.040.
(C) Conditional Uses. Approval of a Conditional Use Permit shall require
compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 203.032(D)
(Conditional Use Permits).
(1)Licensed group day care facilities that are free-standing uses or a primary
use in a multiple tenant building (50 percent or more of the leasable area).
(2)Satellite earth stations with a diameter greater than two meters.
(3)Indoor kennels accessory to veterinary offices and clinics subject to the
following standards:
(a) Minimum Lot Area: 20,000 square feet
(b) The use is located in a single-tenant structure that has a first floor area
of 7,500 square feet or less.
(c) All kennel facilities shall be located within the structure. There shall
be no facilities outside of the structure or exterior evidence of the
kennel operation with the exception of signage.
(d) The kennel facilities shall not exceed 20% of the floor area of the
building in which they are located.
(e) There shall be no more than 40 kennels within the facility and no more
than 10 dog runs.
(f) The applicant shall submit a plan that addresses:
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
19
Section 205. Development Districts
(1)Services offered, including the type of animals boarded.
(2)Compliance with industry standards, licensing requirements and
the regulations of other governmental agencies.
(3)Waste management.
(4)Overnight care.
(5)Exercise.
(6)Noise.
(g) The property on which the kennel is located shall not abut any property
used or zoned as residential, unless separated by a public road right of
way.
(D) Required Conditions. The following specifications apply to all uses in the
(OFC) Office District.
(1)Minimum Lot Size. No minimum lot size.
(2) Minimum Lot Width. 100 feet.
(3) Minimum Setbacks. Front yard of 50 feet; side yard of 10 feet, except that
on the side yard of a corner lot the setback shall be 30 feet; and rear yard
of 20 feet; provided however that in all circumstances where an Office
District abuts property planned for residential use, there shall be a
minimum setback of 50 feet from an office structure to the residential
property line.
(4) Maximum Lot Coverage. Not to exceed 70%. Maximum lot coverage may
be increased to 75% if best management practice measures are taken to
minimize negative effects on the environment as documented in the
current editions of Minnesota Construction Site Erosion and Sediment
Control Planning Handbook (MBWSR) and Protecting Water Quality in
Urban Areas (MPCA).
205.045 Business Park District
(A)Purpose. The Business Park District is established to:
(1) Reserve appropriately located areas for low intensity office, light
industrial and supporting commercial services.
(2) Protect areas appropriate for low intensity office, light industrial and
supporting commercial services from intrusion by inharmonious uses.
(3) Provide opportunities for low intensity office, light industrial and
supporting commercial services to congregate in a mutually benefiting
relationship to each other.
(4) Establish and maintain high standards of site planning, building
architecture, and landscape design that will create an environment
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
20
Section 205. Development Districts
attractive to business park uses and be compatible with adjoining
residential properties.
(B) Permitted Uses. The following activities are permitted in the Business Park
District:
financial institutions
health services, including medical, dental and veterinary
light manufacturing, including fabrication, compounding, processing,
packaging, treatment and assembly of goods, products and materials
high-tech research, development and testing laboratories; and data-processing
businesses, including storage of materials processed on site and
distribution provided these uses are related and supporting activities that
are secondary to the primary use.
office uses
indoor limited retail sales accessory to office/manufacturing uses provided that:
all sales are conducted in a clearly defined area of the principal building
reserved exclusively for retail sales. Said sales area must be physically
segregated from other principal activities in the building.
the retail sales must be located on the ground floor of the principal building.
the retail sales activity shall not occupy more than fifteen (15%) of the gross
floor area of the building.
retail hardware stores that sell small quantities of hardware goods directly to
the consumer and does not sell in bulk to contractors or serve as a supplier
for other businesses provided that:
the retail hardware store is not the primary use of the principal building.
the gross floor area of the retail hardware store shall not exceed 4,000
square feet.
the hardware store is located on the ground floor of the principal building.
outdoor display of seasonal merchandise may only occur on a seasonal
basis. Outdoor display areas shall not exceed 750 feet and must be
screened from view from adjacent properties and arterial roadways.
Screening must include attractive opaque fencing and either planters or
landscaping. Outdoor storage of materials and merchandise is not
permitted.
licensed day care facilities that occupy less than 49% of the leasable space
area in a multiple tenant building.
office space
office/showrooms
office/warehouse
research laboratories, when wholly contained with a building
restaurants that satisfy the following requirements and are contained in an
office building:
qualify for the issuance of an intoxicating on-sale liquor license within the
City of Shoreview.
do not have drive-up order facilities.
food sales constitute at least 60% of the establishment's gross sales.
Rev. Date
5/24/17
Ord. #952
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
21
Section 205. Development Districts
are able to accommodate, by reservation, gathering of 20 or more people.
except for special occasions, do not accept food orders after 11:00 p.m.
utilities.
(C) Conditional Uses. Approval of a Conditional Use Permit shall require
compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 203.032(D)
(Conditional Use Permits).
(1) Satellite earth stations with a diameter greater than two meters.
(2) Towers and antennas subject to compliance with the standards in Section
207.
(D) Required Conditions. The following specifications apply to all uses in the (BP)
Business Park District.
(1) Minimum Lot Size. 1.5 acres.
(2) Minimum Building Setbacks. Front yard or any yard adjacent to a street or
a residential zone shall be 75 feet; rear yards shall be 30 feet; and side yards
shall be 30 feet. Setback areas adjacent to properties planned for residential
use shall be heavily landscaped and include earthen berms, as required in
Section 206.010(I).
(3) Maximum Lot Coverage. Not to exceed 70%. Maximum lot coverage
may be increased to 75% if best management practice measures are
taken to minimize negative effects on the environment as documented
in the current editions of Minnesota Construction Site Erosion and
Sediment Control Planning Handbook (MBWSR) and Protecting Water
Quality in Urban Areas (MPCA).
(E) Design Standards.
(1)Building Materials. Major exterior surfaces of all principal
structures shall be constructed of face brick, stone, glass, stucco,
synthetic stucco, architectural concrete, cast in place or precast
panels, or decorative block. Up to 15 percent of any wall surface
may be constructed of wood, vinyl, or metal, as accent materials,
provided they are appropriately integrated into the overall building
design. No exterior surfaces shall be constructed of sheet
aluminum, asbestos, iron, steel, plain concrete block or corrugated
aluminum. Roofs, except flat roofs, shall be constructed of
commercial grade asphalt shingles, wood shingles, standing seam
metal, slate, tile or copper.
Rev. Date
5/24/17
Ord. # 952
Rev. Date
4/18/05
Ord. # 774
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
22
Section 205. Development Districts
(2)Canopies and Awnings. The design of canopies shall be in keeping
with the overall building design in terms of location, size (scale),
and color. No canopies with visible wall hangers shall be
permitted. Signage on canopies may be substituted for allowed
building signage and shall be limited to 25 percent of the canopy
area. Internally illuminated canopies must be compatible with the
overall color scheme of the building. The area of illumination shall
be considered signage.
(3) Mechanical Equipment. The ground level view of all mechanical
utilities shall be completely screened from contiguous properties
and adjacent streets.
205.050 Industrial District (I)
(A) Purpose. The Industrial District is established to:
(1) Reserve appropriately located areas for industrial related activities.
(2) Protect areas appropriate for industrial uses from intrusion by
inharmonious uses.
(3) Provide opportunities for certain types of industrial plants to concentrate
in a mutually beneficial relationship to each other.
(4) Provide adequate space to meet the needs of modern industrial
development, including off-street parking, truck loading areas and
landscaping.
(5) Provide sufficient open space around industrial structures to protect them
from the hazard of fire and to minimize the impact of industrial plants on
nearby uses.
(6) Establish and maintain high standards of site planning, architecture, and
landscape design that will create an environment attractive to industries
and research and development establishments seeking sites in the
metropolitan area.
(B) Permitted Uses. Permitted uses in the Industrial District are defined below.
These uses are permitted in addition to those permitted uses defined
in Section 205.044 (Office).
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
23
Section 205. Development Districts
assembling
commercial antennas, excluding satellite earth stations, in accordance
with the standards in Section 207
commercial uses, related to or supporting the industrial use located in
the same building
distribution
electronics
fabrication
free-standing commercial towers are not permitted in industrial districts
unless the property falls within the Telecommunications Overlay
District
manufacturing
mini-storage
mobile wireless telecommunication facilities for temporary use during
power outages, natural disasters, emergencies, or for temporary
testing purposes for up to 72 hours
packaging
printing
private antennas in accordance with the standards in Section 207.040(A)
processing
public or quasi-public facilities subject to Site and Building Plan review upon
the finding that the use(s) will not impede or otherwise conflict with the
planned use of adjoining property
satellite earth stations provided that:
(1) the diameter is less than two meters
(2) the ground level view of these devices is screened from contiguous
properties and adjacent streets
towers and antennas subject to compliance with the standards in Section
207.040
utilities
warehousing
wholesale
(C) Conditional Uses. Approval of a Conditional Use Permit shall require
compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 203.032(D)(Conditional
Use Permits). The following activities shall be considered conditional uses in
the Industrial District:
auto body repair and painting
auto service stations
contractor's storage yards
clubs and lodges
gymnastics training and/or exhibition centers, provided the following findings
are made in addition to the standard findings for approval of a Conditional
Use Permit:
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
24
Section 205. Development Districts
(1) The presence and operation of said activity will not significantly
interfere with the functionality or attractiveness of the area for
permitted industrial uses.
(2) Access to and from the site does not require the patrons to travel
through commercial truck docking areas or areas frequented by
heavy machinery. Access to the facility, while on the site, shall
not require pedestrians to travel through commercial truck
docking areas or areas frequented by heavy machinery.
(3) For purposes of determining adequacy of on-site parking, the
standards for commercial recreation uses shall be used as a
guideline if a more definitive basis is not available. Parking space
credit may be given for scheduling gymnastics activities when the
typical industrial uses will be closed for business.
heavy industrial uses that may have a potential negative environmental
impact on adjacent properties due to objectionable noise, heavy truck
traffic, fumes or other nuisances, or may adversely affect health, safety or
welfare.
lumber yards
outside storage areas
satellite earth stations with a diameter greater than two meters
truck terminals
use, manufacture, or storage of hazardous materials that require registration or
licensing with the Minnesota Emergency Response Commission or that
require disclosure by Federal or State law as hazardous materials and
production of hazardous waste in excess of 100 kg/month, provided the
following findings are made in addition to the standard findings for
approval of a Conditional Use Permit:
(1) The use is consistent with the purpose statement of this district.
(2) The applicant/owner demonstrates that all applicable hazardous
material regulations, building code, and fire code provisions will be
satisfied and the application includes statements from the appropriate
regulatory agencies, City Fire Marshall, and City Building Official
concerning compliance with such requirements.
urban container farming – utilizing hydroponics only, as a secondary use on
property. This use is permitted with a CUP if the following findings
are made in addition to the standard findings of a Conditional Use Permit.
As a secondary use
(1) Containers designed specifically for agricultural use are to be used
only.
Rev. Date
7/15/19
Ord. # 974
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
25
Section 205. Development Districts
(2) Containers and vestibules must be maintained such that no rust, paint,
or mechanical defects are present.
(3) To be licensed by the state and or the county to conduct sales if
applicable.
(4) One container shall not exceed 544 square feet with attached
vestibule. Maximum number of containers permitted is 1.
(5) Any equipment or supplies needed for farm operations shall be fully
enclosed within a building.
(6) The container shall not be located in a required front yard. Required
building setbacks for district shall be maintained. Placement will not
interfere with principal use.
(7) A minimum of 3 parking spaces must be provided per 1,000 square
feet of production space.
(8) No retail sales are permitted onsite.
(9) Signs are to be approved with the Conditional Use Permit.
(10)The containers shall meet the City’s Building Code requirements.
(D) Required Conditions.
(1) Lot Size. No minimum lot size; minimum lot width of 100 feet.
(2) Building Setbacks. Front yard shall be 50 feet; rear yard shall be 20 feet;
side yard shall be 10 feet except that side yard setbacks on corner lots
shall be 30 feet. A landscaped 75-foot-setback is required as a buffer
between industrial structures, truck and equipment parking, or outdoor
storage facilities and property designated for residential use. Employee
and visitor parking areas shall be set back at least 20 feet from dedicated
rights-of-way and property planned for residential use. Required setbacks
to property planned for residential use shall be heavily landscaped and
include earthen berms.
(a) Minor Arterial and Collector Streets. Along minor arterial streets as
identified in the Comprehensive Guide Plan, residential structures shall
maintain a 40-foot setback. Along collector streets as identified in the
Comprehensive Guide Plan, residential structures shall maintain a 30-
foot setback.
(b) Shoreland. Lakeside setbacks in shoreland areas shall be regulated by
the Shoreland Regulations in Section 209.080.
(c) Encroachments. The following shall be considered as permitted
encroachments on setback requirements:
(i) In any yard: eaves, gutters, awnings, chimneys,
landings, sidewalks and fences.
(ii)In side and rear yards: decks, open terraces, balconies and
porches provided they are no closer than five feet to any
property line. (These rules do not apply to side yards that adjoin
a street.)
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
26
Section 205. Development Districts
(3) Height. 35 feet; this may be exceeded if for every additional foot of
height there is an additional foot of setback on all sides.
(4) Lot Coverage. Not to exceed 75%. Maximum lot coverage may be
increased to 80% if best management practice measures are taken to
minimize negative effects on the environment as documented in the current
editions of Minnesota Construction Site Erosion and Sediment Control
Planning Handbook (MBWSR) and Protecting Water Quality in Urban
Areas (MPCA).
(5) Parking. Parking space requirements shall be as required by Section
206.020 (Parking).
(6) Signs. As regulated by Section 208 (Signs).
(7) Storage.
(a) All materials, supplies, finished or semi-finished products and
equipment shall be stored within a completely enclosed building in the
Industrial District unless a Conditional Use Permit for an outside
storage area has been obtained.
(b) Outdoor storage areas shall be screened to minimize the visual impact
of the area in accordance with the following requirements:
(i) The screening materials shall consist of both deciduous and
coniferous vegetation species, attractive low or no maintenance
fencing with an opaquing material, landscaped berm, brick or
masonry wall, or any combination of these items. Fencing and
walls shall not exceed eight feet in height. All screening
materials shall be maintained so that dust and other wind blown
materials that originate on the site remain on the site as far as
practical.
(ii) All landscape materials shall comply with the minimum
standards set forth in Section 206.010 (Landscape and
Screening). The City Forester shall approve the species mix,
height, and density of plantings on the basis of year-around
screening needs.
(iii) The materials and equipment within outdoor storage facilities
and truck terminals that are located adjacent to street or highway
right-of-way shall be completely screened from view from the
right-of-way. If a fence or wall is use for screening along a
right-of-way or private road that serves more than one property,
shrubbery and trees shall be planted to enhance the aesthetics of
the fence as viewed from the roadway.
(iv) The materials and equipment within an outdoor storage area and
truck terminals that are located adjacent to property that is not
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
27
Section 205. Development Districts
zoned for Industrial uses shall be completely screened from view
from the adjoining non-industrial property.
(v) Industrial uses requiring bulk exterior storage of hazardous
materials will not be allowed on wet or very wet soils, very
shallow soils or soils with very high or high permeability areas.
(vi)Trucks and/or trailers used to transport materials and supplies to
and from the premises are permitted for a period not to exceed
three (3) days. Trucks and/or trailers used for storage purposes are
not permitted.
(8) Refuse. All waste material, debris, refuse and garbage shall be properly
contained in a closed container designed for such purposes. Said containers
shall be stored within a fully enclosed building or in a screened area upon
review through the site and building plan review process.
(9) Accessory Structures. Accessory structures shall be permitted in the
Industrial District through the site and building plan review process.
(10)Fences.
(a) Location. All boundary line fences shall be located entirely upon the
private property of the person, firm or corporation constructing, or
causing the construction of such fence, unless the owner of the
adjoining property agrees, in writing that such fence may be erected on
the division line of the respective properties. The City Council may
require the owner of property upon which a fence now exists, or is to be
located, to establish lot lines upon said property by the placement of
permanent stakes located by a licensed surveyor or engineer.
(b) Height. Property line fences shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height
except as follows:
(c) Fences along a property line in common with a Residential District
shall be subject to the provisions herein described in Residential
District.
(d) Fences in Industrial Districts which are primarily erected as a security
measure may have areas projecting into the applicant's property on
which barbed wire can be fastened commencing at a point at least seven
(7) feet above the ground.
(e) Such fences shall not be erected within the landscaped portion of the
front yard of any industrial establishment.
(11)Construction and Maintenance. Every fence shall be constructed in a
substantial professional manner and shall be constructed of a substantial
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
28
Section 205. Development Districts
material reasonably suited to the purpose for which the fence is proposed
to be used. Every fence shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable
repair and shall not be allowed to deteriorate into disrepair or into a
dangerous condition, or constitute a nuisance, either public or private.
Any such fence which is or has become dangerous to the public safety,
health and welfare is a public nuisance, and the Building Inspector is
hereby authorized to commence property proceedings in a court of
competent jurisdiction for the abatement thereof.
(12)Fencing Material. The framing structure of fences in all districts shall be
placed on the owner’s side of the fence or equally distributed on both
sides. Fencing material shall be dimensional, solid sawn, decay resistant
lumber. Chain link fencing material with corrosion protection shall be
permitted. Other materials may be permitted subject to the approval of the
City Manager or his/her designee. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation to construct and maintain or allowed to be constructed or
maintained upon any property located within the City, any fence of metal
construction, or otherwise, which is charged or connected with electrical
current in such a manner as to transmit said current to persons, animals or
things which intentionally or unintentionally may come in contact with
the same.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
29
Section 205. Development Districts
205.060 Tower District (T)
(A) Purpose. The Tower District is established to:
(1)Reserve appropriately located areas for Broadcast Towers, Accessory Equipment
and Structures, Broadcast Buildings, and Related Broadcast Uses (such terms being
hereinafter defined).
(2)Provide for the operation and use of Broadcast Towers, Accessory Equipment and
Structures, Broadcast Buildings and Related Broadcast Uses pursuant to Conditional
Use Permits.
(3)Establish and maintain high standards of construction, maintenance and operation of
Broadcast Towers, Accessory Equipment and Structures, Broadcast Buildings, and
Related Broadcast Uses, while protecting the health and safety of surrounding
property users.
(B) Permitted Uses. All land uses in the Tower District shall require a Conditional Use
Permit with the exception of Private antennas in accordance with the standards in
Section 203.032(D) (Conditional Use Permit).
(1)Commercial antennas, excluding satellite earth stations, in accordance with the
standards in Section 207.
(2)Free-standing commercial towers are not permitted in business districts unless the
property falls within the Telecommunications Overlay District.
(3)Mobile wireless telecommunications facilities for temporary use during power
outages, natural disasters, or emergencies or for temporary testing purposes for up to
72 hours.
(4)Private antennas in accordance with the standards in Section 207.040(A).
(5)Satellite earth stations provided that the ground-level view of these devices is
screened from contiguous properties and adjacent streets.
(C) Conditional Uses. The following shall be considered conditional uses in the Tower
District, whether such uses are by an owner of Tower District property (property owner)
or a person who leases from the property owner. Approval of a Conditional Use Permit
shall require compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 203.032(D)
(Conditional Use Permits).
(1) Broadcast Tower. Broadcast Tower means any tower, or towers, described in the
original Conditional Use Permit issued hereunder to the property owner, greater
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
30
Section 205. Development Districts
than 1200 feet in height above mean sea level (AMSL) used for continuous or standby
broadcasting, transmitting, receiving or relaying of radio frequency signals and
information for private, commercial, public or institutional use.
(2) Accessory Equipment and Structures. Accessory Equipment and Structures mean
antennas, wave guides, microwave transmission and reception equipment, up-link
and down-link satellite antennas and other similar equipment, as well as any tower
1200 feet or less in height AMSL described in the original Conditional Use Permit
issued hereunder to the property owner, which are used or useful for, or in
connection with, continuous or stand-by transmission, relay or reception of radio
frequency signals to or from other terrestrial locations or satellites orbiting the Earth
and the use and operation of such Accessory Equipment and Structures.
(3) Broadcast Buildings. Broadcast Buildings mean buildings containing audio, video
and satellite transmitting and receiving equipment and other related equipment and
parts, including standby power generators and vehicles, used or useful for or in
connection with continuous or stand-by use of Broadcast Tower or Accessory
Equipment and Structures, and the use and operation of equipment contained in
such Broadcast Buildings.
(4) Related Broadcast Uses. Related Broadcast Uses mean all anchors and guy wires
necessary to stabilize a Broadcast Tower or Accessory Equipment and Structures, as
well as access roads and vehicular parking areas serving the use of a Broadcast
Tower, Accessory Equipment and Structures, Broadcast Buildings, and outside
storage of materials and refuse.
(5) Expansion, Replacement and Modification of Conditional Uses. The Expansion,
Replacement and Modification of Conditional Uses means expansion, replacement,
modification or addition of a Broadcast Tower, if such Broadcast Tower was
described in the original Conditional Use Permit issued hereunder to the property
owner, as well as the expansion, replacement, modification or addition of
Accessory Equipment and Structures (including a tower 1200 feet or less in height
AMSL described in the original Conditional Use Permit issued hereunder to the
property owner), Broadcast Buildings, and Related Broadcast Uses provided that
said expansion, replacement, modification or addition does not result in a failure to
satisfy any of the required conditions under Section 207.040 (Towers and
Antennas).
(6) Other Uses. Other Uses mean other uses as identified in the Conditional Use
Permit.
(D) Required Conditions.
(1) Minimum Lot size. Tower District lots shall have a minimum area of 40 acres.
(2) Setbacks. Uses within a Tower District shall comply with the following setbacks:
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
31
Section 205. Development Districts
(a) Guyed Broadcast Tower- minimum setback from the property line shall be as
described in the original Conditional Use Permit issued hereunder to the
property owner.
(b) Accessory Equipment and Structures- minimum setback from the property line
shall be 150 feet, except as provided in subparagraph (e) below.
(c) Shoreland - Lakeside setbacks in shoreland areas shall be regulated by the
Shoreland Regulations in Section 209.080.
(d) Broadcast Buildings- minimum setback from the property line shall be 150 feet.
(e) Guy Wire Anchors - minimum setback from the property line for the above
ground portion of a guy wire anchor shall be 20 feet; no minimum setback for
the below ground portion of a guy wire anchor.
(f) Self-Supporting Tower- minimum setback from the property line shall equal the
height above ground of the self-supporting tower or 150 feet from the property
line, whichever is greater, regardless of whether the self- supporting tower is
within the category of a Broadcast Tower or within the category of Accessory
Equipment and Structures.
(g) Outside Material and Refuse Storage- minimum setback from the property line
shall be 200 feet.
(3) Broadcast Tower Replacement. The replacement of a Broadcast Tower or a tower
1200 feet or less in height AMSL, as such towers are described in the original
conditional use permit issued hereunder to the property owner, shall be allowed if
appropriate building permits are approved and the property owner satisfies the
provisions of this ordinance, Section 203.044(B)(1) (Required Documentation) and
the original conditional use permit relating to such towers was issued hereunder to
the property owner.
(4) Maximum Height. The maximum height of a Broadcast Tower shall be 2675 feet in
height AMSL. The maximum height for any Broadcast Building shall be 35 feet.
Accessory Equipment and Structures mounted on top of a Broadcast Building shall
not be considered part of the Broadcast Building for Purposes of determining its
maximum height.
(5) Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be 50%.
(6) Parking. Parking spaces shall be provided at a ratio of 1.5 spaces per employee on
the site, or as required by Section 206.020 (Parking).
(7) Signs. As regulated by Section 208 (Signs).
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
32
Section 205. Development Districts
(8) Outside Material Storage. Any materials, supplies or equipment, other than
Accessory Equipment and Structures, stored outside shall be within approved
outside storage areas that shall not exceed 1000 square feet in the aggregate.
Outside storage areas shall be screened and/or fenced as approved by the City
Manager or his/her designee to minimize the visual impact of the area and the
surface shall be maintained in such a manner that dust and other wind generated
materials are kept to a minimum.
(9) Refuse. All waste materials, debris, refuse and garbage shall be properly contained
in a closed container designed for such Purposes. Said containers shall be stored
within a fully enclosed building or in an area screened and/or fenced as approved by
the City Manager or his/her designee.
(10)Fences.
(a) Location. All boundary line fences shall be located entirely upon the private
property of the person, firm or corporation constructing, or causing the
construction of such fence, unless the owner of the adjoining property agrees, in
writing that such fence may be erected on the division line of the respective
properties. The City Council may require the owner of property upon which a
fence now exists, or is to be located, to establish lot lines upon said property by
the placement of permanent stakes located by a licensed surveyor or engineer.
(b) Height. Property line fences shall not exceed six (6) feet in height except as
follows:
(i) If the applicant can prove to the satisfaction of the City Council that a fence
for security reasons is necessary above said permitted height, a fence not
exceeding eight (8) feet in height might be erected along the rear, side and
front lot lines, provided that such fence exceeding five (5) feet in height is
constructed with a set-back along each property line of fifteen (15) feet.
(ii) Fences erected along a property line in common with any Residential
District shall be subject to the regulations herein set forth and the provisions
pertaining to Residential Districts.
(c) Construction and Maintenance. Every fence shall be constructed in a substantial
professional manner and shall be constructed of a substantial material reasonably
suited to the purpose for which the fence is proposed to be used. Every fence
shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and shall not be allowed
to deteriorate into disrepair or into a dangerous condition, or constitute a
nuisance, either public or private.
(d) Fencing Material. The framing structure of fences in the Tower District shall be
placed on the owner’s side of the fence or equally distributed on both sides.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
33
Section 205. Development Districts
Fencing material shall be dimensional, solid sawn, decay resistant lumber. Chain
link fencing material with corrosion protection shall be permitted. Other
materials may be permitted subject to the approval of the City Planner.
(e) Prohibited Fence Material. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to construct and maintain or allowed to be constructed or maintained
upon any property located within a Business District, any fence of metal
construction, or otherwise, which is charged or connected with electrical current
in such a manner as to transmit said current to persons, animals or things which
intentionally or unintentionally may come in contact with the same. Barbed wire
fences are prohibited and shall not be constructed or maintained.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
34
Section 205. Development Districts
205.080 Residential Districts Overview.
(A) Purpose. The Residential Districts are established to:
(1) Ensure that development conforms to the capacity of the utilities provided in an
optimal way.
(2) Ensure adequate light, air, privacy, and open space for each dwelling unit.
(3) Reserve appropriately located areas for residential development at reasonable
population densities consistent with sound standards of public health and safety.
(4) Provide for a diversity of housing opportunities within the City at varying
densities, costs and environments.
(5) Protect residential properties from excessive noise, illumination, unsightliness,
odors, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat, glare, and other objectionable influences.
(6) Provide residential development at the minimum standards of this ordinance but
not to exceed the gross development densities designated in the Land Use
Chapter of the Comprehensive Guide Plan.
(B) Permitted Uses. Within each of the Residential Districts, the following activities are
permitted:
(1) Commercial antennas, excluding satellite earth stations, in accordance with the
standards in Section 207, provided that the antenna is located on property
associated with a school, church, utility (except utility easements or public rightof-
way), City park greater than 5 acres, or in an R-3 zoning district. Commercial
antennas are not permitted on single-family dwelling properties.
(2) Free-standing commercial towers are not permitted in residential districts unless
the property falls within the Telecommunications Overlay District.
(3) Mobile wireless telecommunications facilities for temporary use during power
outages, natural disasters, or emergencies or for temporary testing purposes for
up to 72 hours.
(4) Public and quasi-public facilities subject to Site and Building Plan review and
upon the finding that the use(s) will not impede or otherwise conflict with the
planned use of adjoining property. The City Council may attach conditions to its
site plan approval to insure that the use will not interfere with the planned use of
adjoining property.
(5) Temporary sales offices.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
35
Section 205. Development Districts
(6) Home occupations subject to obtaining a permit under Section 207.020.
(7) Residential development in accordance with densities shown in the Land Use
Chapter of the Comprehensive Guide Plan.
(8) Two boarders or roomers per household.
(9) The sale of produce with the consent of the property owner.
(10)Utilities.
(11)Towers and antennas subject to compliance with the standards in Section 207.
(12)Private antennas in accordance with the standards in Section 207.040 (Towers
and Antennas) and free-standing private towers 75 feet in height or less provided
a private antenna/tower permits is obtained in accordance with Section
203.044(A).
(13)Residential facilities, day care facilities, group family day care facilities or other
similar type facilities as permitted within residential zones by Minnesota
Statutes.
(14)Seasonal Residential Sales Event subject to the standards and conditions set forth
in Section 203.043 (Temporary Sale or Event Permit).
Rev. Date
4/18/05
Ord. #774
(C) Conditional Uses. The following activities shall be considered conditional uses in
the Residential Districts. Approval of a Conditional Use Permit shall require
compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 203.032 (Conditional Use
Permit).
(1) Residential facilities, day care facilities, group family day care facilities and
similar facilities in excess of the densities allowed as permitted uses in residential
zones by State Statutes.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Free-standing private towers exceeding 75 feet in height, provided that, in
addition to the findings for Conditional Use Permit, a finding is made that the
additional height is the minimum necessary to reasonably accommodate amateur
communications, and a private antenna/tower permit is obtained in accordance
with Section 203.044 (Tower/Antenna Permits).
(4) Controlled Access/Beach Lots. Any such lot created after January 1, 1993, shall
comply with the following requirements in addition to any condition imposed via
the rules set forth in Section 203.032(D) (Conditional Use Permit):
(a) The parcel's width and area shall meet or exceed the requirements set forth in
Section 209.080 (Shoreland Management) for a residential lot.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
36
Section 205. Development Districts
(b) The location, topography, and size of the lot are found to be suitable for the
proposed use by the City Council. In making this determination, the City
Council must find that the proposed recreation activities will not significantly
conflict with the general public's use of the public water or with the normally
anticipated activities and enjoyment of the public water by the adjoining
property owners.
(c) Any parking lot facility and any permanent or temporary accessory structures
to be located on the controlled access/beach lot shall comply with all setback
requirements as if the parcel were a conventional single-dwelling homesite.
All structures shall also be screened by vegetation or topography, as much as
practical, from view from the public water, assuming summer, leaf-on
conditions. If a parking lot is installed, its capacity shall not exceed six
vehicles.
(d) Launching, loading, docking, mooring, beaching or over-water (shore station)
storage shall be limited to six watercraft, unless a marina permit is approved
by the Department of Natural Resources and is found by the City Council to
be compatible with the subject site and the adjoining land uses.
(e) The parcel must be jointly owned by each of the associated nonriparian
property owners who are provided riparian access rights via the controlled
access/beach lot.
(f) The Conditional Use Permit authorizing a controlled access/beach lot shall be
recorded against the title of all benefiting property owners. Said permit shall
include, but not be limited to, the permissible activities and a listing of the
benefiting properties.
(D)Required Conditions. In addition to the standards of Sections 203-206, the following
specifications apply to Residential Districts:
(1) Setbacks.
(a) Corner Lots. Buildings on corner lots shall be set back from both streets, a
distance equal to the established or required front yard setback for the use on
both streets.
Rev. Date
5/20/13
Ord. 907
(b) Minor Arterial and Collector Streets. Along minor arterial streets right of
ways as identified in the Comprehensive Guide Plan, residential structures
shall maintain a 40-foot setback. Along collector streets right of ways as
identified in the Comprehensive Guide Plan, residential structures shall
maintain a 25-foot setback.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
37
Section 205. Development Districts
(c) Shoreland. Lakeside setbacks in shoreland areas shall be regulated by the
Shoreland Regulations in Section 209.080.
(d) Major Subdivisions. The front yard setback for all residential structures in
subdivisions platted after October 21, 2002 may be reduced to a minimum of
25 feet provided the minimum rear yard setback is increased to 35 feet.
Application of the setback provisions shall be described in the Development
Agreement. As of December 27, 2011, this setback provision had been
selected to apply by the Developers to the following Major Subdivisions:
Snail Lake Landing; Villas of Whispering Pines; and Whispering Pines.
(e) Butt lots created after the effective date of this ordinance, principal and
accessory structures shall have a minimum setback of 20 feet from a side lot
line when that side lot line abuts the rear lot line of an existing parcel.
(f) Key lots created after the effective date of this ordinance, principal and
accessory structures shall have a minimum setback of 20 feet from a side lot
line when that side lot line abuts the rear lot line of an existing parcel, or a
minimum 40 feet from a rear lot line when that rear lot line abuts the side lot
line of an existing parcel.
(g) Exceptions to Minimum Front Yard Setback Requirements. Front yard
setbacks established in the following manner shall not be reduced unless a
variance is approved.
(i) New Construction. Where existing dwellings are located on lots which are
immediately adjacent to a vacant lot and have established front yard
setbacks that exceed the minimum front yard setback allowed in the
zoning district by more than fifteen 15-feet, the front yard setback for a
dwelling to be constructed on the vacant lot shall be equal to the average
of the front yard setbacks for such immediately adjacent dwelling plus or
minus 10-feet. If one of the immediately adjacent dwellings is located on
a corner lot or on a lakeshore lot the setback of such dwelling shall not be
utilized when computing the permissible front yard setback for the newly
constructed dwelling, and, in such case, the front yard setback for the
newly constructed dwelling shall be equal to the front yard setback for the
remaining adjacent dwelling plus or minus ten (10) feet.
Rev. Date
5/20/13
Ord. 907
(ii) Additions to Existing Structures.
(aa)On lots where two or more existing adjacent dwellings have
front yard setbacks which exceed the minimum front yard
setback allowed in the zoning district by fifteen (15) or more
feet, the front yard setback for an addition to any of the
Rev. Date
5/20/13
Ord. 907
Rev. Date
8/4/08
Ord. 832
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
38
Section 205. Development Districts
average of the front yard setbacks for such existing adjacent
dwellings.
(bb)On non-riparian lots, if one of the immediately adjacent
dwellings is located on a corner lot or a lakeshore lot, the front
yard setback of such dwelling shall not be utilized when
computing the permissible front yard setback for the addition to an
existing dwelling, and, in such case, the front yard setback for the
addition to an existing dwelling shall not be less than the front yard
setback for the remaining adjacent dwelling, minus ten (10) feet.
(h) Encroachments. The following shall be considered as permitted
encroachments on setback requirements:
(i) In any yard: eaves, gutters, awnings, chimneys, landings, sidewalks and
fences.
(ii) In interior side and rear yards: decks, open terraces, balconies and
unenclosed porches provided they are no closer than five feet to any
property line.
(iii)In front yards and in side yards adjoining a right-of-way of property
zoned for residential use, bay windows and cantilevered habitable area
may encroach up to two feet into the required dwelling setback.
(iv)In side yards of corner lots zoned R-1 adjoining a public right-of-way, atgrade
patios may encroach up to five feet into the required dwelling
setback provided that the side yard does not abut a front yard on an
adjacent property.
(2) Signs. As regulated by Section 208 (Signs).
(3) Storage. Exterior storage of materials and equipment as regulated by Section 211
(Property Maintenance).
(4) Structure Dimensions. All principal structures shall not be less than 20-feet wide
and 30-feet long.
(5) Parking. Parking shall be required as stated in Section 206.020 (Parking).
(6) Swimming Pools.
(a) Setbacks.
(i) RE/R1 Districts. Pools shall not be located within 10 feet of any side or
rear lot line or within 6 feet of any principal structure or frost footing.
Pools shall not be located within any front yard or any side yard abutting
a street.
Rev. Date
5/20/13
Ord. 907
Rev. Date
4/18/05
Ord. #774
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development
Regulations
39
Section 205. Development Districts
(ii) R2, R3, R4 Districts. No part of the water surface of the pool shall be less
than 50 feet from any lot line. All deck area, adjacent patios, or other
similar areas used in conjunction with the pool shall be located at least 30
feet from any lot line. Pools shall not be located within any front yard or
any side yard abutting a street.
(b) Pools shall not be located beneath overhead utility lines nor over
underground utility lines of any type.
(c)Pools shall not be located within any private or public utility, walkway,
drainage or other easement.
(d)In the case of underground pools, the necessary precautions shall be taken during
construction to avoid damage, hazards or inconvenience to adjacent or nearby
property and assure that proper care shall be taken in stock piling excavating
materials to avoid erosion, dust or other infringements upon adjacent property.
(e)All access for construction shall be over the owner's land, and due care shall be
taken to avoid damages to public streets and adjacent private or public property.
(f) To the extent feasible, back-flush water or water from pool drainage shall be
directed onto the owner's property or into approved public drainage ways. Water
shall not drain onto adjacent or nearby private land.
(g)Mechanical support equipment shall be located as follows:
(i) RE/R1 District:
(aa)Pool filter, pool pump, and pool heating equipment shall be located at least
ten (10) feet from a property line.
(bb)Pool pumps shall be located at least 30 feet from an adjoining residence,
except a separation of as little as 20 feet may be permitted if a sound buffer
is provided that complies with the standards contained in the City's noise
control regulations.
(cc)The noise buffer requirements may be waived by the City Manager or
his/her designee where the equipment site adjoins a non-residential land use
or a street right-of-way.
(dd)Sound buffers shall consist of evergreen plantings, a retaining wall, fence
and/or an on-site structure, such as a garage or portion of the dwelling.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
40
Section 205. Development Districts
(ii) R2, R3, and R4 Districts
(aa)No pumps, filter or other apparatus used in connection with or to service
a swimming pool shall be located less than 50 feet from any lot line.
(bb)Adequate screening and landscaping shall be placed between the pool areas
and adjacent property.
(h) All pools shall be enclosed with fencing at least four feet high, but not exceeding six
feet high to prevent uncontrolled entrance of all persons. Such fence shall have selfclosing
and self-latching gates with provisions for locking and shall be completely
installed prior to the filling of the pool.
(i) Lighting for the pool shall be directed toward the pool and not toward adjacent
property.
(7)Fences.
(a) Location. All boundary line fences shall be located entirely upon the private property
of the person, firm or corporation constructing, or causing the construction of such
fence, unless the owner of the adjoining property agrees, in writing that such fence
may be erected on the division line of the respective properties. The City Planner may
require the owner of property upon which a fence now exists, or is to be located, to
establish lot lines upon said property by the placement of permanent stakes located by
a licensed surveyor or engineer.
(b) Height. Fences in front yards or any yard adjacent to a public road right-of-way or
road easement shall not exceed 4 feet in height except:
(i) Fences in a rear yard of a double fronted lot, adjacent to an arterial or
collector roadway, may be up to 6 feet in height.
(ii) On corner lots whose side yard abuts an arterial roadway, fences in that
side yard may be up to 6 feet in height provided that the fence is setback
at least 10 feet from the property line abutting the right-of-way or any
pedestrian or road easement and plantings (shrubs or trees) as approved
by the City are established and maintained between the fence and the
right-of-way or easement.
Fences in other side or read yard shall not exceed 6 feet in height. In no case
shall the combined height of any fence and berm exceed the maximum height
permitted by more than one (1) foot.
(c) Construction. Every fence shall be constructed in a substantial professional manner
and shall be constructed of a substantial material reasonably suited to the purpose for
which the fence is proposed to be used.
(d) Fencing Material. The framing structure of fences shall be placed on the
owner’s side of the fence or equally distributed on both sides. Fencing
material shall be dimensional, solid sawn, decay resistant lumber. Chain
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
41
Section 205. Development Districts
link fencing material with corrosion protection shall be permitted. Other
materials may be permitted subject to the approval of the City Planner.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct and
maintain or allowed to be constructed or maintained upon any property
located within the City, any fence of metal construction, or otherwise,
which is charged or connected with electrical current in such a manner
as to transmit said current to persons, animals or things which
intentionally or unintentionally may come in contact with the same.
Barbed wire fences shall not be constructed or maintained.
205.081 Residential Estate District (RE)
(A)Purpose. In addition to the purposes established in Section 205.080 (Residential
Overview), the Residential Estate District is established to protect and enhance the
character of single-dwelling neighborhoods where lot areas are substantially larger
than required in the R1, Detached Residential District and to protect mature trees and
other significant natural features that would otherwise be lost if more intensive
subdivision were to occur. The term "neighborhood" is intended to consist of several
lots with similar development and aesthetic characteristics.
(B) Permitted Uses. As regulated by Section 205.082(B) (Detached Residential).
(C)Required Conditions. As regulated by Section 205.082(D) (Detached Residential),
with the following exceptions, unless less restrictive than another section of City
Code (e.g., the Shoreland Ordinance), then the most restrictive Code shall prevail.
(1) Lot Area. Except as provided in this section, the minimum lot area shall be
determined by the City Council at the time of rezoningbut shall be limited to the
following alternatives: 20,000 square feet; 40,000 square feet; 60,000 square
feet; or 80,000 square feet. Minimum lot area requirements shall be designated
on the zoning map in each RE District Title, e.g., RE(20) would indicate a
minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet.
(a) The City Council shall base their decision on the character of the developed
lots within an existing neighborhood or on the desired character of lots in an
undeveloped or underdeveloped area. Once established, any request to
change a district's minimum lot area requirement shall be processed as a
request for rezoning.
(b) When a subdivision is proposed for property zoned RE(20), the average area
of the lots, less any land dedicated for public street, shall not be less than
20,000 square feet. To qualify to use an average lot area, the smallest lot(s)
shall have at least 15,000 square feet of area. When such lot(s) will exceed
20,000 square feet of area, only up to 25,000 square feet of such lot shall be
counted for purposes of calculating the average lot area.
(2) Lot Width-Interior Lots.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
42
Section 205. Development Districts
District Title Minimum Lot Width*
RE (20) 80
RE (40) 100
RE (60) 100
RE (80) 120
(a) Add 15 feet for the minimum corner lot width requirement.
(3) Setbacks.
Rev. Date
5/20/13
Ord. 907
Rev. Date
4/4/16
Ord. 942
(a) Front Yard. Dwellings and accessory buildings shall have a front yard
setback of at least twenty-five (25) feet but in no event more than forty (40)
feet.
(b) Rear Yard. Dwellings shall have a rear yard setback of at least 30 feet and
accessory buildings shall have a rear yard setback of at least 10 feet,
regardless of lot area requirements.
(c) Side Yard. Side yards adjoining a street right-of-way shall be treated as a
front yard for purposes of setback requirements. Dwellings and accessory
buildings shall maintain minimum side yard setbacks as follows:
District Dwelling Accessory Building
RE (20) 10 5
RE (40) 10 5
RE (60) 15 10
RE (80) 15 10
(d) Lot Coverage. Lot coverage shall be restricted as follows:
District Title Maximum Lot Coverage
RE (20) 30%
RE (40) 20%
RE (60) 15%
RE (80) 15%
(D) Lots of Record. Legal lots of record that existed prior to a rezoning to
a Residential Estate District shall continue to be classified as
buildable lots, provided any new construction complies with the RE
District standards to extent practical, as determined by the Director of
Community Development.
205.082 Detached Residential District (R1)
(A)Purpose. In addition to the purposes defined in Section 205.080
(Residential Overview), the Detached Residential District is
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development
Regulations
43
Section 205. Development Districts
established to reserve appropriately located areas for single-family
living at reasonable population densities consistent with the Land Use
Plan Chapter of the Comprehensive Guide Plan.
(B) Permitted Uses. In addition to the uses defined in Section
205.080 (Residential Overview), the following activities are
permitted in the Detached Residential District:
(1) Single-family structures and accessory structures.
(2) Accessory apartments subject to permit requirements of Section 203.031
(Accessory Apartment Permit).
(3) Manufactured homes.
(4) The keeping of non-domestic animals is permitted on property containing two (2)
or more acres. The City Council may require the owner of non-domestic animals
to apply for a Conditional Use Permit if the Council determines that it is in the
best interest of the public's health, safety or general welfare; except the following:
a.) The raising and keeping of not more than four (4) hen chickens or pullets is
permitted on property less than two (2) acres provided a license is obtained in
accordance with Section 601.020(D).
b.) The raising and keeping of honeybee colonies is permitted on properties less
than two (2) acres provided a license is obtained in accordance with Section
601.020(E).
(5) The keeping of Wild Animals is permitted pursuant to the provisions of Section
601.020(B) and provided a license is obtained in accordance with the
requirements of that Section.
(C) Conditional Uses. Approval of a Conditional Use Permit shall require compliance
with the requirements set forth in Section 203.032(D) (Conditional Use Permits).
(1) Funeral Homes (mortuaries) provided the site adjoins a collector or arterial
roadway. The performance standards set forth in Section 205.043(C) (General
Commercial District (Conditional Uses) shall also be imposed as a condition(s)
of approval.
(2) Accessory Buildings that exceed the maximum allowable permitted with a
conditional use permit provided that the standards in Table 205-A are met.
(a) Performance Standards
Rev. Date
5/24/17
Ord. #953
Rev.Date
5/3/10
Ord. #868
Rev. Date
11/17/08
Ord. 837
Rev. Date
4/4/16
Ord. 942
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
44
Section 205. Development Districts
(1) The accessory buildings shall be located in the rear yard of the
property except as otherwise permitted by this ordinance.
(2) The accessory buildings shall be subordinate to the single-family
residential dwelling unit.
(3) For parcels 1 acre or larger in size, the lot shall have a minimum area of 1
acre above the ordinary high water line of a lake, ponding area or wetland
on the property.
(4) The accessory buildings shall be screened from view of adjacent
properties and public streets through the use of landscaping, berming,
fencing or a combination thereof.
(5) Greater setbacks may be required to mitigate impacts on adjoining
properties.
(D) Required Conditions. In addition to the conditions of Section 205.080(D) (Residential
Overview), the following conditions apply:
(1) Lot Size. A lot of not less than 10,000 square feet with a minimum width
of 75 feet and a minimum depth of 125 feet.
(2) Setback. Dwelling and accessory buildings shall have a front yard setback
of at least twenty-five (25) feet but in no event more than forty (40) feet.
The side yard setback shall be a minimum often (10) feet except that side
yards adjoining a street right-of-way shall be treated as a front yard for
purposes of setback requirements. The rear yard setback shall be a
minimum of thirty (30) feet. Zero lot line developments are permitted if
consistent with adjacent land uses.
(3) Height. 35-feet maximum.
(4) Lot Coverage. Maximum of 40%.
(5) Accessory Buildings are subject to the maximum size and setback
standards of Table 205-A below.
Rev. Date
5/20/13
Ord. # 907
Rev. Date
4/4/16
Ord. #942
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
45
Section 205. Development Districts
Table 205-A
Lot
Area
Type of Accessory
Building
Maximum Area Minimum
Side Setback
Minimum
Rear Setback
Less than ½ acre
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
46
Section 205. Development Districts
Lot
Area
Type of Accessory
Building
Maximum Area Minimum Side
Setback
Minimum
Rear Setback
1 acre to less than 2 acres
Attached
Detached
(with no attached or
less than 2-car
attached)
Detached Accessory
Building (with 2-car
or larger attached
garage)
Combined –
Attached and
Detached
1,000 square feet or 80% of the
dwelling unit foundation area,
whichever is more restrictive
750 square feet or 75% of the
dwelling unit foundation area,
whichever is more restrictive
Up to 200 square feet
CUP – 200 square feet to 288
square feet
1,200 square feet or 90% of the
dwelling unit foundation area
5 ft.
5 ft.
5 ft.
10 ft.
10 ft.
10 ft.
10 ft.
10 ft.
Detached
(with no attached or
less than 2-car
attached)
Up to 288 square feet
CUP – Up to 440 square feet
5 ft. - under
200 square ft.
10 ft.
10 ft.
10 ft.
Detached Accessory
Building (with 2-car
or more attached
garage)
½ acre to less than 1 acre
Attached
Combined –
Attached and
Detached
1,000 square feet or 80% of the
dwelling unit foundation area,
whichever is more restrictive
1,000 square feet or 80% of the
dwelling unit foundation area,
whichever is more restrictive
1,200 square feet or 90% of the
dwelling unit foundation area
5 ft.
5 ft.
10 ft.
10 ft.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
47
Section 205. Development Districts
Attached 1,000 square feet or 80% of the
dwelling unit foundation area
whichever is more restrictive
5 ft. 10 ft.
Detached (with no
attached or less
than 2 car
attached)
1,000 square feet or 80% of the
dwelling unit foundation area
whichever is more restrictive
5 ft. 10 ft.
Detached Accessory
Building
(with 2-car or more
attached garage)
Up to 440 square feet 5 ft. – under 200
sq ft.
10 ft. – 200 sq ft.
and above
10 ft.
CUP – Larger than 440 sq. ft. 10 ft. 10 ft.
Combined –
Attached and
Detached
1,500 square feet or 100% of the
dwelling unit foundation area
2 acres or more
Attached 1,000 square feet or 80% of the
dwelling unit foundation area
whichever is more restrictive
5 ft. 10 ft.
Detached (with no
attached or less
than 2 car
attached)
1,000 square feet or 80% of the
dwelling unit foundation area
whichever is more restrictive
5 ft. 10 ft.
Detached Accessory
Building
(with 2-car or more
attached garage)
Up to 440 square feet 5 ft. – under 200
sq ft.
10 ft. – 200 sq ft.
and above
10 ft.
CUP – Larger than 440 sq. ft. 10 ft. 10 ft.
Combined –
Attached and
Detached
125% of the dwelling unit
foundation area
i. Alleys:
a. 20 feet if a garage overhead door faces the alley.
b. 10 feet if a garage overhead door is side loaded and does not
face the alley.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
48
Section 205. Development Districts
c. Location of the accessory buildings shall not interfere with
vehicle visibility or traffic movement in the alleyway.
ii. Accessory buildings on corner lots shall be setback the same distance
as the principal structure from the street right-of-way except as
permitted in 205.080(D)(1).
iii. No accessory buildings shall be located in the front yard of any lot,
except for a riparian lot which shall comply with the provisions of
Section 203.039 (Riparian Lot-Detached Accessory Structure Permit).
iv. Buildings housing non-domestic animals: 100 feet from all property
lines except as permitted by the City’s licensing provisions.
(b) Height – Detached Accessory Buildings
i. Height of sidewalls cannot exceed 10 feet.
ii. Maximum height: 18 feet as measured from the highest roof peak to the
lowest finished grade; however, in no case shall the height of the
accessory building exceed the height of the dwelling unit
iii. Storage areas are permitted above the main floor provided they do not
exceed an interior height of 6 feet.
(c) Maximum Number of Detached Accessory Buildings: 2
(d) Exterior Design and Construction
(i) The exterior design and materials shall be compatible with the dwelling
unit and be similar in appearance from an aesthetic, building material
and architectural standpoint.
(ii) Unfinished metal building exteriors, including corrugated metal siding,
untreated non-decay resistant wood, concrete block, cloth, plastic
sheeting and other materials that are not compatible with residential
neighborhoods are prohibited.
(iii) All accessory buildings shall maintain a high standard of architectural
and aesthetic compatibility with surrounding properties to ensure that
they will not adversely impact the surrounding properties and
neighborhood.
(iv) All accessory buildings shall have a finished flooring system, with the
exception of boathouses.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
49
Section 205. Development Districts
(v) No accessory buildings shall be constructed prior to the construction of a
principal structure.
(e) Use: Accessory buildings are to be used for personal use only and no
commercial use or commercial related storage is permitted.
(f) Escrow: A cash escrow may be required to insure the removal of any
accessory buildings on the property if said structure must be removed to
comply with this Ordinance.
(g) Evaluation of Impact. The proposed design, scale, massing, height and other
aspects related to the accessory building of any permit requested herein shall
be evaluated by the City Manager with respect to the structures and properties
in the surrounding area. A building permit may be issued upon the finding
that the appearance of the structure is compatible with the structures and
properties in the surrounding area and does not reasonably detract from the
appearance of the area or city as a whole. Conditions may be attached to the
approval of any building permit to ensure that the proposed structure does not
have a negative impact on the surrounding areas.
205.083 Attached Residential District (R2)
(A)Purpose. In addition to the purposes defined in Section 205.080(A) (Residential
Overview), the Attached Residential District is established to:
(1) Provide for all income levels an opportunity to enjoy a medium density
environment.
(2) Reserve appropriately located areas for family living in a variety of types of
dwellings at a reasonable range of population densities consistent with the Land
Use Chapter of the Comprehensive Guide Plan.
(3) Provide special requirements for common facilities, parking and other conditions
created by an increased population density.
(B) Permitted Uses. In addition to the uses defined in Section 205.080(B) (Residential
Overview), buildings with 2-6 residential units are permitted in the Attached
Residential District.
(C) Required Conditions. In addition to the conditions of Section 205.080(D)
(Residential Overview), the following conditions apply for the Attached Residential
District:
(1) Lot size. Minimum zoned area of 5 acres unless being rezoned from Urban
Underdeveloped; minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet per building plus 1,000
square feet per unit and a width of not less than 80 feet per building.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
50
Section 205. Development Districts
(2) Setback. A front yard of 30 feet, a side yard of 10 feet except that side yards
adjoining a street right-of-way shall be treated as a front yard for purposes of
setback requirements. Zero lot line developments shall be permitted.
(3) Height. 35-feet maximum.
(4) Lot Coverage. A maximum of 55%. Maximum lot coverage may be increased to
60% if best management practice measures are taken to minimize negative effects
on the environment as documented in the current editions of Minnesota
Construction Site Erosion and Sediment Control Planning Handbook (MBWSR)
and Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas (MPCA).
(5) Accessory Structures.
(a) No accessory structures, other than attached or detached garages approved in
conjunction with the building plans, shall be permitted.
(b) Approved accessory structures shall have a rear yard setback often (10) feet
and side yard setback of five (5) feet, except that accessory structures on
corner lots shall set back the same distance as the principal structure.
205.084 Multiple Dwelling Residential District (R3)
(A)Purpose. In addition to the purposes defined in Section 205.080(A) (Residential
Overview), the Multiple Dwelling Residential District is established to:
(1) Provide special requirements for common facilities, parking and other conditions
created by an increased population density.
(2) Provide space for semi-public facilities needed to complement urban residential
areas and space for institutions that require a residential environment.
(3) Reserve appropriately located areas for higher density family living in a variety
of types of dwellings at a reasonable range of population densities consistent
with the Land Use Chapter of the Comprehensive Guide Plan.
(B) Permitted Uses. In addition to the uses defined in Section 205.080(B) (Residential
Overview), buildings with more than 6 residential units are permitted in the Multiple
Dwelling Residential District.
(C) Required Conditions. In addition to the conditions of Section 205.080(D)
(Residential Overview), the following specifications apply for the Multiple Dwelling
Residential District:
(1) Lot size. Minimum zoned area of 5 acres unless being rezoned from Urban
Underdeveloped; minimum lot size of 25,000 square feet per building, and a
minimum width of 175 feet.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
51
Section 205. Development Districts
(2)Setback. Front, side and rear yards of 30 feet. Zero lot line developments shall
be permitted.
(3)Height. 35 feet; this may be exceeded if for every additional foot of height there
is an additional foot of setback on all sides.
(4)Lot coverage. A maximum of 65%. Maximum lot coverage may be increased to
70% if best management practice measures are taken to minimize negative effects
on the environment as documented in the current editions of Minnesota
Construction Site Erosion and Sediment Control Planning Handbook (MBWSR)
and Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas (MPCA).
(5)Accessory Structures. No accessory structures, other than attached or detached
garages approved in conjunction with the building plans, shall be permitted.
205.085 Mobile Home Residential District (R4)
(A)Purpose. In addition to the purposes defined in Section 205.080(A) (Residential
Overview), the Mobile Home Residential District is established to provide for the
special characteristics of mobile homes constructed prior to June 15, 1976, which do
not have HUD certification, considering their locational needs, site layout and
design, the demand upon community services and their relationship to, and effect
upon, surrounding uses of land.
(B) Permitted Uses. In addition to the uses defined in Section 205.080(B) (Residential
Overview), the following activities are permitted in the Mobile Home Residential
District:
(1)Mobile homes and/or manufactured homes and uses necessarily incidental to a
mobile home park but excluding mobile home sales lots.
(2)Because of their unique characteristics, mobile homes are permitted only in
mobile home parks.
(3)Licensed day care facilities.
(C) Required Conditions. The following specifications apply for the Mobile Home
Residential District:
(1)Lot size. Minimum zoned area of 40 acres, with a minimum lot size of 4,350
square feet.
(2)Setbacks.
(a) Front, rear, and side yard on main entry side of the mobile home: 15 feet.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
52
Section 205. Development Districts
(b) Side yard on the opposite of the main entry side: 5 feet or 15 feet if on a
corner lot.
(c) Mobile homes shall not be closer together than 15 feet at side yards.
(3) Height. Maximum of 20 feet.
(4) Lot coverage. 60% of individual lots.
(5) Density. As permitted by Land Use Chapter of the Comprehensive Guide Plan.
(6) Location. The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting upon a
collector street as defined by the City's Comprehensive Guide Plan.
(7) Tie Downs. Tie downs are required that comply with the requirements of
Minnesota regulation MOH 450.
(8) Accessory Structures. No accessory structures shall be permitted unless
approved in an overall development plan.
(9) Community Building. A community building shall be provided with space for an
office, storm shelter, toilets and laundry facilities. In no case shall the building be
less than 2,500 square feet and the storm shelter shall provide at least 9 square
feet of floor area per mobile home.
(10)Landscaping. Mobile home parks shall provide a dense combination of plant
materials and earth mound along the periphery of the site to form a buffer to
adjoining property and streets.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
53
Section 205. Development Districts
205.090 Special Districts Overview. The Floodplain Management Districts, Open Space, Planned
Unit Development, Urban Underdeveloped and Telecommunications Overlay Districts are established
to meet the particular needs of Shoreview in the following ways:
(A)To allow greater flexibility and consistency in reviewing development proposals.
(B) To encourage more efficient and creative development patterns.
(C) To provide techniques which address the difficult conditions which exist in much of the
undeveloped portion of the City.
205.091 Flood Plain Management Ordinance.
(A) Statutory Authorization. The legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in Minnesota
Statutes, Chapter 103F and 462 delegated the responsibility to local government units to
adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council of
Shoreview, Minnesota does ordain as follows:
(1) Findings of Fact.
(a) Flood hazard areas in Shoreview, Minnesota, are subject to periodic inundation
which results in potential loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures or flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of
which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(b) Methods Used to Analyze Flood Hazards. This Ordinance is based upon a
reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the
standards established by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
(c) National Flood Insurance Program Compliance. This Ordinance is adopted to
comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program
codified as 44 Code of Federal Regulations Parts 59 -78, as amended, so as to
maintain the community’s eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.
(d) Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this Ordinance to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize those losses described by
provisions contained herein.
(B) General Provisions.
(1) Lands to Which Ordinance Applies. This ordinance shall apply to all lands within the
jurisdiction of the City of Shoreview lying within the boundaries of the Floodway,
Flood Fringe, or general Flood Plain Districts, as depicted on Shoreview's Official
Flood Plain Map as defined in Section 202 (Definitions) of the Shoreview
Development Ordinance.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
54
Section 205. Development Districts
(2) Adoption of Official Flood Plain Management Map. The maps that comprise the
Official Flood Plain Management Map, as defined in Section 202 (Definitions), are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of the City of Shoreview's
Development Ordinance.
(3) Interpretation.
(a) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be
held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the
City Council and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers
granted by State Statutes.
(b) The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by scaling distances
on the Flood Plain Maps. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location
of the boundaries of the district as shown on the Official Flood Plain Map, for
example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions and there is a formal appeal of the decision of the City
Manager, the Planning Commission shall make the necessary interpretation. All
decisions shall be based on elevations on the regional (100-year) flood profile,
the ground elevations that existed on the site at the time the Community adopted
its initial floodplain ordinance or on the date of the first National Flood
Insurance Program map showing the area within the 100-year floodplain if
earlier, and other available technical data. Persons contesting the location of the
district boundaries shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case
to the Planning Commission and to submit technical evidence.
(c) Definitions. Terms used in Section 205.091, Flood Plain Management, shall be
interpreted as defined in Chapter 202 – Definitions, unless otherwise defined
below. Terms not defined shall be interpreted so as to give them the same
meaning as they have in common usage and so to give this Flood Plain
Management Ordinance its most reasonable application.
1. Accessory Use or Structure- a use or structure on the same lot with, and of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.
2. Basement, Floodplain - means any area of a structure, including crawl
spaces, having its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four
sides, regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level.
3. Equal Degree of Encroachment- a method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that flood plain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
4. Flood - a temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage
of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
5. Flood Frequency - the frequency for which it is expected that a specific
flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
55
Section 205. Development Districts
6. Flood Fringe - that portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway. Flood
fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in the Flood
Insurance Study for Ramsey County Minnesota, effective June 4, 2010.
7. Flood Plain - the beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional
flood.
8. Flood Proofing - a combination of structural provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages.
9. Floodway - the bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are reasonably required to
carry or store the regional flood discharge.
10. Lowest Floor– the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor.
11. Manufactured Home (Floodplain)– a structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term “manufactured home (Flood Plain)” does not include the term
“recreational vehicle (Floodplain).”
12. Obstruction - any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building,
wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or
projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood plain which
may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in
itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water.
13. Principal Use or Structure- means all uses or structures that are not
accessory uses or structures.
14. Reach - a hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction. In an urban
area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge
crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
15. Recreational Vehicle (Floodplain)– a vehicle that is built on a single
chassis, is 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck, and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use. For the purposes of this Flood Plain Management Ordinance, the term
recreational vehicle (Floodplain) shall be synonymous with the term travel
trailer/travel vehicle.
16. Regional Flood - a flood which is representative of large floods known to
have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what
can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the
100-year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term
"base flood" used in a flood insurance study.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
56
Section 205. Development Districts
17. Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation- The regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of
the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by
encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a floodway.
18. Structure - anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to
the ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings,
factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, Manufactured Homes
(Floodplain), Recreational Vehicles Floodplain) not meeting the exemption
criteria specified in Section 205.091(J)(4) other similar items.
19. Substantial Damage – means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure where the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
20. Substantial Improvement– within any consecutive 365-day period, any
reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair),
repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before
the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures
which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(a) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
(b) Any alteration of an “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an “historic
structure.” For the purpose of this Ordinance, “historic structure” shall be
as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 59.1.
(4) Annexations: The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by reference in
Chapter 205.091(B)(2) above may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the
municipal boundaries of the City of Shoreview at the time of adoption of this
ordinance. If any of these floodplain land areas are annexed into the City of
Shoreview after the date of adoption of this ordinance, the newly annexed
floodplain lands shall be subject to the provisions of this ordinance immediately
upon the date of annexation into the City of Shoreview.
(C) Establishment of Zoning Districts.
(1) Floodway District (FW). The Floodway District shall include those areas
designated as floodway on the Official Flood Plain Map adopted in Section
205.091(B)(2). For lakes, wetlands and other basins, the Floodway District shall
include those areas designated as Zone AE (that do not have a floodway
designated) and Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted in
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
57
Section 205. Development Districts
Section 205.091(B)(2) that are below the ordinary high water level as defined in
Minnesota Statutes, Section 103G.005, subdivision 14.
(2) Flood Fringe District (FF). The Flood Fringe District shall include those areas
designated as floodway fringe on the Official Flood Plain Map adopted in Section
205.091(B)(2), as being within Zone AE but being located outside of the floodway.
For lakes, wetlands and other basins, the Flood Fringe District shall include those
areas designated as Zone AE (that do not have a floodway designated) and Zone A
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted in Section 205.091(B)(2) that are
below the 1% annual chance flood elevation (100-year flood elevation) but above
the ordinary high water level as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 103G.005,
subdivision 14.
(3) General Flood Plain District (GF). The General Flood Plain District shall include
those areas designated as Zone A and Zone AE (without a floodway) on the Official
Flood Plain Map adopted in Section 205.091(B)(2), which are not subject to Sec.
205.091(C)(1) and (2).
(D) Compliance. No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full
compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations which
apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this ordinance. Within the Floodway (FW),
Flood Fringe (FF) and General Flood Plain (GF) Districts, all uses not listed as
permitted uses or conditional uses in Sections 205.091(E), (F), and (G) that follow,
respectively, shall be prohibited. In addition, a caution is provided here that:
(1) New Manufactured Homes (Floodplain) and replacement of Manufactured Homes
(Floodplain) are subject to the general provisions of this ordinance and specifically
Section 205.091(J).
(2) Modifications, additions, structural alterations, normal maintenance repair, or repair
after damage to existing nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses of
structures or land are regulated by the general provisions of this ordinance and
specifically Section 205.091(K)(4).
(3) As-built elevations for elevated or flood-proofed structures must be certified by
ground surveys and flood proofing techniques must be designed and certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect as specified in the general provisions of
this ordinance and specifically as stated in Section 205.090(K)(1) of this ordinance.
(E) Floodway District (FW).
(1) Permitted Uses.
(a) Outdoor plant nurseries and horticulture.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
58
Section 205. Development Districts
(b) Industrial-commercial loading areas and parking areas.
(c) Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges,
picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and
nature preserves, and single or multiple purpose recreational trails.
(d) Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
(e) Seasonal docks for single dwellings.
(2) Standards for Floodway Permitted Uses.
(a) The use shall have a low flood damage potential.
(b) The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district.
(c) The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations and shall not
involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or storage of materials or
equipment.
(3) Conditional Uses:
(a) Structures accessory to the uses listed in Section 205.091(E)(1).
(b) Extraction or storage of sand, gravel, and other materials in excess of ten cubic
yards.
(c) Marinas, boat rentals, docks except as permitted in Section 205.091(E)(1)(e),
piers, and water control structures.
(d) Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and pipelines, installed
after July 24, 1991 the effective date of Ordinance No. 561.
(e) Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials.
(f) Placement of fill or construction of fences.
(g) Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes and floodwalls
constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual structures.
(4) Standards for Floodway Conditional Uses.
(a) All Uses. No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including fill for roads
and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or equipment, or other
uses may be allowed as a Conditional Use that will cause any increase in the
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
59
Section 205. Development Districts
stage of the 100-year or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages in
the reach or reaches affected.
(b) All floodway Conditional Uses shall be subject to the procedures and standards
contained in Section 203.033 of the Shoreview Development Ordinance.
(c) The Conditional Use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district.
(d) Fill.
(1) Fill, dredge spoil and all other similar materials deposited or stored in the
flood plain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover, mulching,
riprap or other acceptable method.
(2) Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be allowed in the
floodway unless a long-term site development plan is submitted which
includes an erosion and sediment control plan consistent with the
requirements of Chapter 209.040, and subject to applicable permitting
requirements of the City.
(3) As an alternative, and consistent with Subsection (2) above, dredge spoil
disposal and sand and gravel operations may allow temporary, on-site storage
of fill or other materials which would have caused an increase to the stage of
the 100-year or regional flood but only after the City Manager has received
an appropriate plan which assures the removal of the materials from the
floodway based upon the flood warning time available. The Conditional Use
Permit must be title registered with the property in the Office of the County
Recorder.
(e) Accessory Structures.
(1) Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation.
(2) Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of flood
waters:
(a) Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal
axis parallel to the direction of flood flow, and,
(b) So far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on the
same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
3) Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally dry flood proofed
in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing classifications in the
State Building Code. As an alternative, an accessory structure may be
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
60
Section 205. Development Districts
flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 flood proofing classification in the State
Building Code provided the accessory structure constitutes a minimal
investment, does not exceed 500 square feet in size at its largest projection,
and for a detached garage, the detached garage must be used solely for
parking of vehicles and limited storage. All flood proofed accessory
structures must meet the following additional standards:
(a) The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement of the structure and shall be designed to equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls;
(b) Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be elevated to
or above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation or properly flood
proofed.
(c) To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must be a
minimum of two “automatic” openings in the outside walls of the
structure having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. There must be
openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all
openings must be no higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent
grade to the structure. Using human intervention to open a garage door
prior to flooding will not satisfy this requirement for automatic
openings.
(f) Storage of Materials and Equipment.
(1) The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding,
flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life
is prohibited.
(2) Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily removable
from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in
accordance with a plan approved by the City Council.
(g) Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current or cross
section of protected wetlands or public waters shall be subject to the provisions
of Minnesota Statute, Chapter 103G. Community-wide structural works for flood
control intended to remove areas from the regulatory flood plain shall not be
allowed in the floodway.
(h) A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway shall not cause an
increase to the 100-year or regional flood and the technical analysis must
assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream.
(F) Flood Fringe District (FF).
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
61
Section 205. Development Districts
(1) Permitted Uses. Those uses of land or structures listed as Permitted Uses in the
underlying zoning use district(s). All Permitted Uses shall comply with the
standards for Flood Fringe "Permitted Uses listed in Section 205.091(F)(2) and the
"Standards for all Flood Fringe Uses" listed in Section 205.091(F)(5).
(2) Standards for Flood Fringe Permitted Uses.
(a) All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on fill so that the
lowest floor including Floodplain, Basement floor is at or above the Regulatory
Flood Protection Elevation. The finished fill elevation for structures shall be no
lower than one (1) foot below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation and the
fill shall extend at such elevation at least fifteen (15) feet beyond the outside
limits of the structure erected thereon.
(b) As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory structures that constitute a
minimal investment and that do not exceed 500 square feet of area at its largest
projection may be internally flood proofed in accordance with Section
205.091(E)(4)(e)(3).
(c) The cumulative placement of fill where at any one time in excess of onethousand
(1,000) cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel shall be allowable
only as a Conditional Use, unless said fill is specifically intended to elevate a
structure in accordance with Section 205.091(F)(2)(a) of this ordinance.
(d) The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on fill to the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
(e) The provisions of Section 205.091(F)(5) of this ordinance shall apply.
(3) Conditional Uses. Any structure that is not elevated on fill or flood proofed in
accordance with Section 205.091(F)(2)(a)-(b) or any use of land that does not comply
with the standards in Section 205.091(F)(2)(c)-(d) shall only be allowable as a
Conditional Use. An application for a Conditional Use shall be subject to the
procedures and review criteria specified in Section 203.033(E) of City Code.
(4) Standards for Flood Fringe Conditional Uses.
Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be utilized to elevate a
structure's lowest floor above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. These
alternative methods may include the use of stilts, pilings, parallel walls, etc., or
above-grade, enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages. The
above-noted alternative elevation methods are subject to the following additional
standards:
(1) The base or floor of an enclosed area shall be considered above-grade and not a
structure's Floodplain, Basement or lowest floor if:
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
62
Section 205. Development Districts
(i) The enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side of the structure;
(ii) It is designed to internally flood and is constructed with flood resistant
materials;
(iii) It is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage.
(2) Design and Certification- The structure's design and as-built condition must be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as being in
compliance with the general design standards of the State Building Code and,
specifically, that all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities must be at or above the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation or be designed to prevent flood water
from entering or accumulating within these components during times of
flooding.
(3) Specific Standards for Above-grade, Enclosed Areas- Above-grade, fully
enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages must be designed to
internally flood and the design plans must stipulate:
(a) A minimum area of “automatic” openings in the walls where internal
flooding is to be used as a flood proofing technique. There shall be a
minimum of two openings on at least two sides of the structure and the
bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one-foot above grade. The
automatic openings shall have a minimum net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding unless
a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that a smaller net
area would suffice. The automatic openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of flood waters without any form of human
intervention; and
(b) That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant materials in
accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in the State Building
Code and shall be used solely for building access, parking of vehicles or
storage.
(4) Basements, Floodplain, as defined in Section 205.091(B)(3)(c)(2), shall be
subject to the following:
(a) Residential Basement, Floodplain construction shall not be allowed below
the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
(b) Non-residential Basements, Floodplain may be allowed below the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation provided the Basement, Floodplain
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
63
Section 205. Development Districts
is structurally dry flood proofed in accordance with Section 205.091(F)(4)
of this ordinance.
(c) All areas of non-residential structures including Basements, Floodplain to
be placed below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation shall be flood
proofed in accordance with the structurally dry flood proofing
classifications in the State Building Code. Structurally dry flood proofing
must meet the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing classification in the State
Building Code and this shall require making the structure watertight with
the walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. Structures flood proofed
to the FP-3 or FP-4 classification shall not be permitted.
(d) When, at any one time, more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or other similar
material is to be located on a parcel for such activities as on-site storage,
landscaping, sand and gravel operations, landfills, roads, dredge spoil
disposal or construction of flood control works, an erosion and sediment
control plan must be submitted for approval by the City Manager. This plan
must clearly specify the methods to be used to stabilize the fill on site for a
flood event at a minimum of the 100-year event. The plan must be prepared
and certified by a registered professional engineer or other qualified
individual acceptable to the City Manager. The plan may incorporate
alternative procedures for removal of the material from the flood plain if
adequate flood warning time exists.
(e) Storage of Materials and Equipment: As regulated by Section
205.091(E)(4)(f) of this ordinance.
(f) The provisions of Section 205.091(F)(5) of this ordinance shall also apply.
(5) Standards for All Flood Fringe Uses:
(a) All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above an
elevation not more than two (2) feet below the Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the Planning
Commission must specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of
the structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate
flood warning time and local flood emergency response procedures exist.
(b) Commercial Uses - accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad tracks, and
parking lots may be at elevations lower than the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation. However, a permit for such facilities to be used by the
employees or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of a
flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area
would be inundated to a depth and velocity such that when multiplying the
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
64
Section 205. Development Districts
depth (in feet) times velocity (in feet per second) the product number
exceeds four (4) upon occurrence of the regional flood.
(c) Manufacturing and Industrial Uses - measures shall be taken to minimize
interference with normal plant operations especially along streams having
protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses such as yards and
parking lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements set out in
Section 205.091(F)(5)(b), above. In considering permit applications, due
consideration shall be given to needs of an industry whose business
requires that it be located in flood plain areas.
(d) Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly protected
by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method. If a
change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested, the
applicant shall document to the City Manager how they intend to comply
with the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) criteria for
removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures
when properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation prior to
initiating any site work. (FEMA's requirements incorporate specific fill
compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multilot
developments.)
(e) Flood plain developments shall not adversely affect the hydraulic capacity
of the channel and adjoining flood plain of any tributary watercourse or
drainage system where a floodway or other encroachment limit has not
been specified on the Official Flood Plain Map.
(f) All Manufactured Homes (Floodplain) must be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces.
(G) General Flood Plain District.
(1) Permissible Uses. The uses listed in Section 205.091(E)(1) of this ordinance shall
be permitted uses. These uses shall be subject to the provisions set forth in Section
205.091(E) if the proposed use is in the Floodway District or to the provisions set
forth in Section 205.091(F) if the proposed use is in the Flood Fringe District.
(2) Conditional Uses. All uses not classified as permitted in Subsection (F) (1), above,
if permitted by the underlying zoning district, subject to the floodway/flood fringe
evaluation criteria pursuant to Section 205.091(G)(3), below. The provisions set
forth in Section 205.091(E) shall also apply if the proposed use is in the Floodway
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
65
Section 205. Development Districts
District and the provisions of Section 205.091(F) shall apply if the proposed use is
in the Flood Fringe District.
(3) Procedures for Floodway and Flood Fringe Determinations Within
the General Flood Plain District.
(a) Along with any application for a Conditional Use Permit or other approval for a
use within the General Flood Plain District, the applicant shall furnish any of the
following information deemed necessary by the City Manager for the
determination of the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation and a determination
whether the proposed use is located within a Floodway or Flood Fringe District.
(1) Typical valley cross-section(s) showing the channel of the stream, elevation
of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-sectional areas to be
occupied by the proposed development, and high water information.
(2) Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent
structure, fill, or storage elevations; size, location, and spatial arrangement of
all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of
streets;
(3) Photographs showing existing land uses and vegetation upstream and
downstream; and soil type.
(4) Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the
stream for at least 500 feet in either direction from the proposed
development.
(b) If the City Manager finds consultant assistance to be necessary, the applicant
shall submit a copy of the above information to a designated engineer or other
expert person or agency for technical assistance to determine whether the
proposed use is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District and to determine the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. Any costs incurred for this consultation
shall be paid by the applicant. Procedures consistent with Minnesota
Regulations 1983, Parts 6120.5000 - 6120.6200 and 44 Code of Federal
Regulations Part 65 shall be followed in this expert evaluation. The designated
engineer or expert shall discuss the proposed technical evaluation methodology
with the Department of Natural Resources prior to commencing the analysis.
The designated engineer or expert shall:
(1) Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood.
(2) Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based upon a
hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
66
Section 205. Development Districts
(3) Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional flood
without increasing flood stages more than 0.5 foot. A lesser stage increase
than 0.5 foot shall be required if, as a result of the additional stage increase,
increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of encroachment on
both sides of the stream within the reach shall be assumed in computing
floodway boundaries.
(c) The findings of the technical evaluation shall be presented to the City Council.
The City Council must either accept the technical evaluation and the
recommended Floodway and/or Flood Fringe District boundary or deny the
permit application. Prior to official action, the City Council may submit the
application and all supporting data and analyses to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, the Department of Natural Resources and/or the City
Planning Commission for review and comment. Once the Floodway and Flood
Fringe Boundaries have been determined, the City Council shall refer the matter
back to the City Manager who shall process the Conditional Use Permit
application consistent with the applicable provisions of Section 203 of the City
Code.
(4) Procedures for determining 1% annual chance flood elevations (100-YR flood
elevations) for lakes located in Zone A:
(a) Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other approval within a Zone A,
the City Manager will use the 1% annual chance flood elevation for that basin
that has previously been determined in accordance with approved FEMA
methods, if available. If the 1% annual chance flood elevation has not been
previously determined, the applicant shall be required to furnish all necessary
information as deemed necessary by the City Manager for the determination for
the 1% annual chance flood elevation in accordance with approved FEMA
methods.
(b)The applicant shall be responsible to submit one copy of the above information
to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for technical assistance
in determining whether the proposed use is in the FW or FF District and to
determine the 1% annual chance flood elevation (100-year flood elevation).
Procedures consistent with Minnesota Regulations 1983, Parts 6120.5000 -
6120.6200 and 44 Code of Federal Regulations Part 65 shall be followed in this
expert evaluation. The designated engineer or expert is strongly encouraged to
discuss the proposed technical evaluation methodology with the respective
Department of Natural Resources' Area Hydrologist prior to commencing the
analysis.
(c) Once the 1% annual chance flood elevation (100-year flood elevation) has been
determined, the City Manager shall process the permit application consistent with
the applicable provisions of Section 205.091(E) and (F).
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
67
Section 205. Development Districts
(H) Subdivisions.
(1) Floodway/Flood Fringe Determinations in the General Flood Plain District. In the
General Flood Plain District, applicants shall provide the information required in
Section 205.091(G)(3) of this ordinance to determine the 100-year flood elevation,
the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries and the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation for the subdivision site.
(2) Removal of Special Flood Hazard Designation. The Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing a special flood
hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill above the
100-year flood elevation. If a change in a special flood hazard area designation will
be requested, the applicant shall demonstrate how FEMA's criteria will be satisfied
before preliminary plat approval is granted. FEMA's requirements incorporate
specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or
multi-lot developments.
(I) Public Utilities and Transportation Facilities.
(1) Public Utilities. All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer, and
water supply systems to be located in the flood plain shall be flood proofed in
accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to above the regulatory flood
protection elevation.
(2) Transportation Facilities. Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located within
the flood plain shall comply with Sections 205.091(E) and (F) of this ordinance.
Elevation to the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation shall be provided where
failure or interruption of these transportation facilities would result in danger to the
public health or safety or where such facilities are essential to the orderly
functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at
a lower elevation where failure or interruption of transportation services would not
endanger the public health or safety.
(J) Manufactured Homes (Floodplain), Recreational Vehicles (Floodplain), and
Manufactured Home Parks.
(1) New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured home
parks shall be subject to the provisions for subdivisions specified in Section
205.091(H) and Section 205.085 (Mobile Home Residential Zoning District).
(2) The placement of new or replacement Manufactured Homes (Floodplain) in existing
manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are located in flood
plain districts will be treated as a new structure and may be placed only if elevated in
compliance with Section 205.091(F) of this ordinance. If vehicular road access for
an existing manufactured home park is not provided in accordance with Section
205.091(F)(5)(a), then replacement Manufactured Homes (Floodplain) will not be
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
68
Section 205. Development Districts
allowed until the property owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan
acceptable to the City Council.
(a) All Manufactured Homes (Floodplain) must be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(3)Recreational Vehicles (Floodplain) shall not be used as a permanent or temporary
residence within a floodplain district.
(4)Any Recreational Vehicle (Floodplain) parked or stored in the FW, FF or GF
Districts, as specified in Section 205.091, shall be permitted only on an individual
lot of record or within an existing condominium association, and shall:
i. Have current licenses required for highway use.
ii. Are highway ready meaning on wheels or the internal jacking system, are
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities commonly used in
campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks and the Recreational Vehicle
(Floodplain) has no permanent structural type additions attached to it.
(K) Administration.
(1) Approval Requirements for Property/Land Use Subject to the Requirements of the
Flood Plain Management Ordinance.
(a) Approval Required. Approval shall be obtained from the City Manager to
confirm that a proposed land use conforms with the provisions of this Section
205.091o prior to the applicant seeking approval of a building permit to erect,
add on to, modify, rehabilitate (including normal maintenance and repair) or
alter any building, structure, or portion thereof; prior to the use or change of use
of a building, structure, or land; prior to the construction of a dam, fence, or onsite
septic system; prior to seeking approval to change or extend a
nonconforming use; prior to the repair of a structure that has been damaged by
flood, fire, tornado, or any other source; and prior to seeking a mining or
grading permit to place fill, excavate materials, or store materials or equipment
within the flood plain.
(b) Application for Approval Subject to This Section. Application shall be made to
the City Manager on forms furnished by the City and shall include, where
applicable: plans drawn to a scale acceptable to the City that show the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevations of the lot; existing and proposed structures,
fill, or storage of materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation to the
stream channel.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
69
Section 205. Development Districts
(c) State and Federal Permits. Prior to the City granting approval of a Conditional
Use Permit or Variance, a determination shall be made by the City Manager that
the applicant has obtained all necessary State and Federal Permits.
(d) Construction and Use to be as defined on Applications, Plans, Permits, and
Variances. Building Permits, Conditional Use Permits, or other approvals issued
on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use,
arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications.
Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be
deemed a violation of this Ordinance, and punishable as provided by Section
205.091(L) of this ordinance.
(e) Certification. The applicant shall submit certification by a registered professional
engineer, registered architect, or registered land surveyor that the finished fill
and building elevations have been accomplished in compliance with the
provisions of this ordinance. Any flood-proofing measures shall also be certified
by a registered professional engineer or registered architect.
(f) Record of First Floor Elevation. The City Manager shall maintain a record of
the elevation of the lowest floor (including Basement, Floodplain) of all new
structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the flood plain.
The City Manager shall also maintain a record of the elevation to which
structures or alterations and additions to structures are flood-proofed.
(g) Notifications for Watercourse Alterations. The City Manager shall notify, in
riverine situations, adjacent communities and the Commissioner ofthe
Department of Natural Resources prior to the community authorizing any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse. If the applicant has applied for a
permit to work in the beds of public waters pursuant to Minnesota Statute,
Chapter 103G, this shall suffice as adequate notice to the Commissioner of
Natural Resources. A copy of said notification shall also be submitted to the
Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA).
(h) Notification to FEMA When Physical Changes Increase or Decrease the 100-
year Flood Elevation. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six (6) months
after the date such supporting information becomes available, the City Manager
shall notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes by submitting
a copy of said technical or scientific data.
(2) Variances. Variance from the terms of this ordinance may be approved, as specified
by the procedures set forth in Section 203.070 of the Shoreview Municipal Code.
(a) Flood Insurance Notice and Record Keeping. The City Manager shall notify the
applicant for a variance that:
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
70
Section 205. Development Districts
i. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood
level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage and
ii. Such construction below the 100-year or regional flood level increases
risks to life and property.
(b) Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. The
City Manager shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including
justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its annual or
biennial report submitted to the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance
Program.
(3) Conditional Uses. Applications shall be submitted to the City Manager who shall
process said application pursuant to Section 203.033 of City Code.
(4) Nonconforming Uses. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was
lawful before the passage in August 1983 or subsequent amendment of the
Floodplain Management Ordinance but which is not currently in conformity with
the provisions of said Ordinance may be continued subject to the requirements in
Section 207.050 and the following conditions.
(d)Any structural alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure or
nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood damage potential of
that structure or use shall be protected to the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation
in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or flood proofing techniques (i.e.,
FP-1 thru FP-4 floodproofing classifications) allowable in the State Building Code,
except as further restricted in (b), (c) and (d) below.
(b)The cost of all structural alterations or additions to any nonconforming
structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50 percent of the market
value of the structure unless the conditions of this Section are satisfied. The
cost of all structural alterations and additions must include all costs such as
construction materials and a reasonable cost placed on all manpower or labor.
If the cost of all previous and proposed alterations and additions exceeds 50
percent of the market value of the structure, then the structure must meet the
standards of Section 205.091 (E) or (F) for new structures depending upon
whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively.
(c)If any nonconforming use or structure is substantially damaged, as defined in
Section 205.091(B)(3)(c)(19), it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity
with the provisions of this Ordinance. The applicable provisions for establishing
new uses or new structures in Section 205.091 (E), (F) or (G) will apply
depending upon whether the use or structure is in the Floodway, Flood Fringe or
General Flood Plain District, respectively.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
71
Section 205. Development Districts
(d) If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in Section 205.091(B)(3)(c)(20),
from any combination of a building addition to the outside dimensions of the
existing building or a rehabilitation, reconstruction, alteration, or other
improvement to the inside dimensions of an existing nonconforming building,
then the building addition and the existing nonconforming building must meet
the requirements of Section 205.091 (E) or (F) for new structures, depending
upon whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District,
respectively.
(L) Penalties for Violation.
(1) Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with grants of Variances or Conditional Uses) shall constitute a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law. If the City Manager is
made aware of or finds a violation of the provisions of this ordinance, he/she shall
notify the person responsible for such violation in accordance with the procedures
outlined below.
(2) Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Shoreview from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. Such actions may
include, but are not limited to:
(a) The City may utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it,
including but not limited to, prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact
permits, orders for corrective measures or a request to the National Flood
Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance availability to the guilty party.
Failure of the City to act in good faith to enforce these official controls or to
correct ordinance violations to the extent possible may jeopardize the City's
eligibility to participate in the National Flood Insurance Program.
(b) When an ordinance violation is either discovered by or brought to the attention
of the City Manager, the City Manager shall immediately investigate the
situation and document the nature and extent of the violation of the official
control. As soon as is reasonably possible, this information will be submitted to
the appropriate Department of Natural Resources' and Federal Emergency
Management Agency Regional Office along with the Community's plan of action
to correct the violation to the degree possible.
(c) The City Manager shall notify the suspected party of the requirements of this
ordinance and all other official controls and the nature and extent of the
suspected violation of these controls. If the structure and/or use is under
construction or development, the City may order the construction or
development immediately halted until a proper permit or approval is granted by
the Community. If the construction or development is already completed, then
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
72
Section 205. Development Districts
the City may either (1) issue an order identifying the corrective actions that must
be made within a specified time period to bring the use or structure into
compliance with the official controls, or (2) notify the responsible party to apply
for an after-the-fact permit/development approval within a specified period of
time not to exceed 30 days.
(d) If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the City within the
specified period of time, each additional day that lapses shall constitute an
additional violation of this ordinance and shall be prosecuted accordingly. The
City shall also, upon the lapse of the specified response period, notify the
landowner to restore the land to the condition which existed prior to the
violation of this ordinance.
(M) Amendments.
(1) The flood plain designation on the Official Flood Plain Map shall not be removed
from the designated flood plain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is
in error or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the regional flood
and is contiguous to lands outside the flood plain. Special exceptions to this rule may
be permitted by the Commissioner of Natural Resources if he determines that,
through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use.
(2) Any proposed amendment to the Development Ordinance text that pertains to the
Floodplain Management Ordinance, including the Official Flood Plain Map element
of the Official Zoning Map, must be submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of Natural Resources prior to adoption. Such changes in the Official
Zoning Map must also meet the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA)
Technical Conditions and Criteria and must receive prior FEMA approval before
adoption. The Commissioner of Natural Resources must be given 10-days written
notice of all hearings to consider an amendment to this Ordinance pursuant to this
Section and said notice shall include a draft of the Ordinance amendment or
technical study under consideration.
(N)Abrogation and Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal,
abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However,
where this Ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the
extent of the inconsistency only.
(O)Warning and Disclaimer of Liability: This Ordinance does not imply that areas outside
the flood plain districts or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the
City of Shoreview or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
73
Section 205. Development Districts
(P) Severability: If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this Ordinance is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this
Ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
205.092 Open Space District (OS)
(A)Purpose. The Open Space District is established to identify those properties under the
jurisdiction of the Board of Ramsey County Commissioners, who have enacted
ordinances to govern the conduct of members of the public during their use and
enjoyment of the Ramsey County Open Space System so as to further the safety, health,
welfare and enjoyment of all persons in the use thereof, and to protect public property
and resources for posterity.
(B) Permitted Uses.
(1) Public and quasi-public facilities subject to Planning Commission review and a City
Council finding that the use(s) will not impede or otherwise conflict with the
planned use of adjoining property. The City Council may attach conditions to its site
plan approval to insure that the use will not interfere with the planned use of
adjoining property.
(2) Utilities.
205.093 Planned Unit Development Zoning District (PUD)
(A) Purpose. In the establishment of the PUD District, the City recognizes that the
objectives of the Development Ordinance have been adopted to insure uniformity in the
treatment of land use, density, bulk and open space and further recognizes that such
uniform treatment is based on the concept of one building on one lot. The City hereby
recognizes that there have been important changes in methods of subdivision layout,
the design and use of land, and placement of buildings thereon and further recognizes
that the methods for preservation of public health, safety, morals, and general welfare
must be altered from time to time to meet advances in technology, and changes in
social thought as they occur and present the demand. Therefore, this district is
established to facilitate:
(1) Innovations in residential development to the end that the growing demands for
housing at all economic levels may be met by recognizing greater variety in tenure,
type, design and siting of dwellings and by the conservation and more efficient use
of land in such development.
(2) Higher standards for site and building design.
(3) An incentive to redevelop obsolete or substandard land uses where present
development standards cannot be met.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
74
Section 205. Development Districts
(4) The preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics such as natural
topography and geologic features and the prevention of soil erosion.
(5) The creative use of land and related physical development.
(6) A more efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets
thereby lowering housing costs and public investments.
(7) A more desirable environment than would be possible through the strict application
of zoning and subdivision regulations of the City.
(8) A process which gives the land owner and developer reasonable assurance of
ultimate approval before expending complete design monies while providing
officials with assurances that the project will be consistent with community
objectives.
(9) A technique which responds to a flexible manner to the land use categories defined
on the Land Use Chapter of the Comprehensive Guide Plan.
(B) Permitted Uses.
(1) The uses permitted in the district shall reflect the needs identified through the
Comprehensive Guide Plan as well as those which the developer may prove to be
consistent and compatible as reflected by the approved final development plan.
Densities shall be in compliance with the Land Use Chapter of the Comprehensive
Guide Plan.
(2) Public and quasi-public facilities subject to Planning Commission review and a City
Council finding that the use(s) will not impede or otherwise conflict with the
planned use of adjoining property. The City Council may attach conditions to its site
plan approval to insure that the use will not interfere with the planned use of
adjoining property.
(3) Utilities.
(4) Towers and antennas permitted by the underlying zoning district associated with the
Planned Unit Development unless otherwise restricted by the conditions of the PUD
approval.
(5) Commercial antennas when located on publicly-owned water tower and subject to
lease negotiated with the City.
(C) Required Conditions.
(1) In no case shall Planned Unit Development be construed to permit a variation in the
sanitary sewer, group usable open space, maximum lot coverage, screening and
landscaping or performance standards as set forth in this ordinance.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
75
Section 205. Development Districts
(2) No alteration, improvement or development of the property shall be permitted until
City Council approval of the Development Stage PUD Plan.
(3) A Comprehensive Sign Plan shall be submitted as part of the Planned Unit
Development review process. All signs shall be compatible in character, materials,
and color with each other and the surrounding land uses.
205.170 Urban Underdeveloped District (UND)
(A)Purpose. The Urban Underdeveloped District is used to identify vacant lands on which
the City has not approved a development proposal or lands which are currently being
utilized but remain substantially underdeveloped.
(B) Permitted Uses.
(1) Public and quasi-public facilities subject to Planning Commission review and a City
Council finding that the use(s) will not impede or otherwise conflict with the
planned use of adjoining property. The City Council may attach conditions to its site
plan approval to insure that the use will not interfere with the planned use of
adjoining property.
(2) Utilities.
(3) New uses or changes in existing uses, except those uses listed in subdivisions 1 and 2
above, shall not be permitted without a rezoning.
(4) New uses or changes in existing uses shall conform to the Land Use Chapter of the
Comprehensive Guide Plan.
205.180 Telecommunications Overlay District
(A)Purpose. To protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public while allowing
development of the competitive wireless telecommunications market in the City.
Specifically, the purposes of this Section are:
(1) To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts from
commercial telecommunications facilities and towers.
(2) To minimize the adverse visual impact of commercial telecommunications facilities
and towers through careful siting and design.
(3) To protect public health and safety by ensuring appropriate design, construction, and
maintenance of commercial telecommunications facilities and towers.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
76
Section 205. Development Districts
(4) To ensure that commercial telecommunications facilities and towers are compatible
with surrounding land uses.
(5) To facilitate provision of telecommunications services to residents and businesses in
the City.
(6) To identify sites in the City where commercial telecommunications facilities and
towers may be located.
(B) Applicability. The requirements of this district shall apply to all sites identified on the
map “Telecommunications Overlay District” adopted July 5, 2011 as may be amended
by the City Council in accordance with the procedure set forth in Section 203.052, and
which illustrates Telecommunications Overlay District 1 (TOD-1), Telecommunications
Overlay District 2 (TOD-2) and Telecommunications Overlay District 3 (TOD-3).
(C) Permitted Uses.
(1) In the TOD-1 district, construction of commercial telecommunications facilities and
towers up to 60 feet in height and the installation, operation, and maintenance of
wireless telecommunications facilities (WTFs).
(2) In the TOD-2 district, construction of commercial telecommunications facilities,
including towers up to 75 feet in height and the installation, operation, and
maintenance of WTFs.
(3) In the TOD-3 district, installation, operation and maintenance of WTFs only on
existing buildings. New towers are not permitted in this district.
(4) All permitted, conditional, and accessory uses allowed in the underlying zoning
district are permitted in the Telecommunications Overlay District.
(D) Required Conditions.
(1) Only one free-standing telecommunications tower shall be permitted per property
unless the Planning Commission recommends and the City Council approves
additional tower(s) based on the size, topography, setting, and/or other feature of the
property.
(2) All commercial telecommunications towers or wireless telecommunication facilities
shall comply with the standards in Section 207.040(B).
(E) Priority for Use. Priority for use of the installation, maintenance, and operation of
facilities within the Telecommunications Overlay District will be given to the following
entities in descending order:
(1) City of Shoreview.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
77
Section 205. Development Districts
(2) Public safety agencies including law enforcement, fire, and ambulance services and
private entities with a public safety agreement with the City of Shoreview.
(3) Other government agencies, for uses not related to public safety.
(4) Commercial entities marketing services to the general public.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 206. Other Development Standards 206- 1
206 Site Development and Architectural Design Standards
206.010 Landscaping and Screening.
(A) Fencing. Fences in the Business Districts and Industrial District are a
permissible means of land screening and are regulated by Section 205.040
(Business District Overview) and 205.050 (Industrial District).
(B) Traffic. On any corner lot, no wall, fence or other structures shall be erected
or altered, and no hedge, tree, shrub or growth shall be maintained which may
cause danger to traffic on a street or public road by obscuring the view. No
such structure, planting or grade elevation interfering with traffic visibility
shall be permitted within 15 feet of any intersecting street right of way lines.
(C) Screening. Screening shall consist of earth mounds, walls, fences and plant
materials. Such things as loading docks, parking areas, drive-up facilities, and
outdoor storage shall be screened to a height and depth consistent with the
size and extent of the visual degradation.
(D) Planting Strips. Planting strips shall be placed along highways and railroad
lines to screen the view and to reduce noise levels in residential areas.
(E) Alteration of Land. No land shall be graded, landscaped or developed that
results in water run-off causing flooding, erosion, or deposit of minerals on
adjacent properties. Such run-off shall be properly channeled into a storm
drain, water course, ponding area, or other such facility.
(F) Minimum Landscaping. Landscaping will be required for all new
development, and shall meet the following requirements:
(1) When trees are removed, the developer shall restore the density of trees
using nursery stock or a size generally accepted as suitable for the
purpose.
(2) Trees used in reforestation or landscaping must be compatible with the
local landscape and conditions, and not presently under disease epidemic.
(3) In all Office, Commercial, Industrial and Multiple Family Housing
Districts, all developed uses shall provide a landscaped yard along all
streets. This yard shall be kept clear of all structures, storage, and offstreet
parking. Except for driveways, the yard shall extend along the
entire frontage of the lot, and along both streets in the case of a corner lot.
Such yard shall have a depth of at least 20 feet.
(G) Landscaping Plans. In all Office, Commercial, Industrial and Multiple Family
Housing Districts, plan unit developments and developments which have
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 206. Other Development Standards 206- 2
residential structures containing 3 or more units per building, shall submit a
landscaping plan at the time of building plan review.
(H) Minimum Open Space. In any event, all developed uses shall provide not less
than 15% of the lot as open space. The City Council may require additional
landscaping as necessary.
(I) Abutting Districts. Where non-residential districts abut residential districts,
the former shall provide a 20 foot landscaped area on the abutting side.
(J) Landscape Materials. Landscape materials to be planted as part of a required
landscaping plan shall comply with the following minimum standards:
(1) All trees, shrubs, and ground covers to be transported to the site shall be
nursery grown.
(2) Deciduous shade trees shall be balled and burlapped and have a trunk
diameter of at least 2 1/2 inches measured one foot above the ground when
planted.
(3) Coniferous trees must be balled and burlapped and be at least six feet tall
when planted.
(4) Deciduous ornamental trees shall be balled and burlapped and have a
trunk diameter of at least 1 3/4 inches measured one foot above the ground
when planted.
(5) Shrubbery shall be at least 2 1/2 feet tall when planted, unless numerous
shrubs are proposed in a planting bed, in which case, the average plant
height shall be at least 1 1/2 feet.
(6) Areas proposed for grass shall be sodded, except disturbed areas located
adjacent to wetlands or areas that are part of future development phases
may be seeded.
(7) Raingardens, or other methods to increase infiltration of stormwater, are
strongly encouraged.
(8) The City encourages use of native plant species to reduce irrigation
requirements and to increase the stormwater infiltration potential of
planting beds.
(K) Shoreland Management District. Landscaping within the shoreland impact
zone is permitted in accordance with Section 209.080(H).
Rev. Date
5/4/09
Ord. #850
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 206. Other Development Standards 206- 3
206.020 Parking. The City requires off-street parking facilities to meet the parking needs
of residents and businesses since City streets are designed to accommodate traffic
movement. Parking regulations are intended to balance the need for off-street
parking with regulations that address the aesthetic and environmental impacts of
the resulting areas of impervious surface. Property owners and developers are
encouraged to identify realistic parking needs for their property, install parking
areas to meet anticipated demand, and show proof of parking to comply with City
minimum parking requirements.
(A) Design and Maintenance.
(1) Landscaping. Parking and driveway areas that accommodate more than 5
cars shall be landscaped along the perimeter and within the interior of the
lot. A minimum area equal to twenty percent (20%) of the parking and
driveway surface area shall be designed with landscaping islands.
(a) The landscape islands shall not be less than 324 square feet in area and
be sized and designed to support plant health. It is strongly
encouraged to use these areas for infiltration purposes.
(b) The area designed with landscape islands may be proportionately
reduced to not less than 10% when the development includes:
i. Stormwater management principally designed for stormwater
infiltration;
ii. Sustainable building design elements and practices, per Section
205.060(C);
iii. Shared parking, as described in Section 206.020(C)(3),
provided the property owners enter into and execute a joint
parking agreement and a maintenance agreement;
iv. Transportation demand management, as described in Section
206.020(C)(2);
v. Site landscaping that is designed to reduce the visual impact of
the developed portions of the site, especially the building and
parking area.
(c) Shade trees shall be used for the perimeter of the parking area and
island landscaping at a minimum rate of one shade tree per 10 parking
stalls. Shade trees shall be setback a minimum of 8 feet from curbs
and/or pavement.
Rev. Date
5/4/09
Ord. #850
Rev. Date
5/4/09
Ord. #850
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 206. Other Development Standards 206- 4
(d) Modifications from the requirements of this Section 206.020(A)(1)
may be permitted through the Site and Building Plan review process.
(2) Setbacks. The minimum setback from a property line for a parking lot,
including driveways shall be as follows:
(a) From interior side and rear property lines: Five (5) feet. This setback
may be reduced to zero feet if the parking and driveway area is shared
providing access to uses on two or more parcels.
(b) From any street right-of-way, front property line, and when a
landscaped buffer is required per Section 206.010(I) for property
planned for residential use: Twenty (20) feet, except as otherwise
provided.
(3) Surfaces. Those parking areas designed to meet the minimum parking
ratio requirement shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete or other material
as approved by the City Manager and graded to dispose of all surface
water. Concrete curbing and gutters are required in Commercial and
Industrial Districts unless another form is permitted for stormwater
management and infiltration purposes through the Site and Building Plan
Review process.
(a) In the RE, R-1 and R-2 Districts:
i. Driveways shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete, or brick pavers
rated for vehicular loads, except as otherwise permitted.
ii. Pervious concrete or asphalt materials may be approved, subject to
the property owner entering into a Maintenance Agreement with
the City.
iii. When the principal structure is setback more than 75 feet from the
front lot line, alternate surface materials may be allowed, subject to
approval by the Public Works Director. In such instances, concrete
or asphalt surface materials shall be used from the street and
extending into the property a minimum of 20-feet from the front
property line.
(b) In all other Districts, the use of pervious pavement materials for
parking areas is encouraged. If pervious pavement is used:
i. The pervious pavement design and soil conditions will be used to
determine the area that will be included in impervious surface
coverage calculations. However, in no event will the open
landscaped area be less than 15% of lot area.
Rev. Date
4/18/05
Ord. #774
Rev. Date
7/17/06
Ord. #801
Rev. Date
5/4/09
Ord. #850
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 206. Other Development Standards 206- 5
ii. The property owner and developer shall enter into a Maintenance
Agreement with the City.
(4) Parking Location. Off-street parking shall be on the same site as the
structure it is intended to serve unless otherwise permitted and shall not
occupy the required 20 feet front yard landscaped area.
(5) Aisles. Aisles shall be a minimum of 14 feet wide for 45 degree parking,
18 feet wide for 60 degree parking and 24 feet wide for 90 degree parking.
(6) Spaces. Each space shall be a minimum of 9 feet wide, 18 feet long and
so designed to allow the exit of the car therein without first moving
another car. Subcompact parking spaces may account for up to 20% of the
total parking area required. They shall be 8 feet wide and 18 feet long,
and must be grouped and signed appropriately.
(7) Drive-up Facilities. Commercial uses containing drive-in or drive-up
facilities shall provide a stacking area for vehicles on the site. A minimum
of six spaces per lane for stacking is required in addition to the number of
required parking spaces. The stacking lane shall be a minimum of twelve
(12) feet wide. The vehicle stacking area shall not exceed beyond the
street right-of-way line and shall be delineated so that the vehicles waiting
in line will not interfere with the primary driving and parking facilities on
site. Any pedestrian walkway that is adjacent to or crosses the stacking
lane must be marked and clearly indicated with signage or painted
crosswalk.
(8) Structured Parking. Parking ramps shall meet the minimum structure
setback requirements of the zoning district in which they are located.
(9) Shared Driveways. Shared driveways connecting two or more uses on
separate properties are permitted provided the property owners enter into
and execute a joint parking agreement and maintenance agreement.
(B) Minimum Parking Requirements. The following is a summary of the
minimum parking requirements in addition to the standards listed for each
zoning district. When a parking requirement is listed by use as well as by
district, the use requirement shall apply. Parking uses not specifically noted
shall be as approved by the City Council, following review by the Planning
Commission.
(1) Zoning Districts.
(a) Commercial Districts (C-1, C-1A and C-2). Parking spaces shall be
provided at a ratio of 5.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of net floor area
Rev. Date
5/4/09
Ord. #850
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 206. Other Development Standards 206- 6
or as required by Section 206.020(B2) (Parking). In addition, parking
spaces shall be provided on the property for the storage of vehicles
necessary to the operation of the principal use. Said spaces shall be
adequately screened and lighted.
(b) Office District. Parking space requirements shall be as required by
Section 206.020(B2) (Parking) or at a ratio of 5 spaces per 1,000
square feet of net floor area.
(c) Business Park District. Parking space requirements shall be as
required by Section 206.020(B2) (Parking) or:
(i) 1 space per 2,000 square feet of gross floor area for warehousing;
(ii) 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for office areas;
(iii)3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area of manufacturing,
research, testing and laboratories;
(d) Industrial District (I). Parking space requirements shall be as required
by Section 206.020(B2) (Parking) or as follows. In addition, parking
spaces shall be provided on the property for the storage of vehicles
necessary to the operation of the principal use. Parking spaces shall be
adequately lighted.
(i) 1 space per 2,000 square feet of gross floor area for warehouse
uses.
(ii) 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for production
uses.
(iii)5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of net floor area for office uses.
(e) RE and R1 Districts. Two parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be
required for off-street parking, or as required by Section 206.020(B2).
(i) Community based residential facilities and licensed day care
facilities shall provide one off-street parking space per staff
member.
(ii) Parking shall be prohibited in any portion of the front yard except
designated driveways leading directly into a garage or one open,
surfaced space located on the side of the driveway, away from the
principal use, except as otherwise permitted. Such hard surface
space shall not be located in front of the dwelling and shall
conform to the minimum required setbacks specified in Section
206.020(A)(2).
(iii)Landscaping approved by the City shall be required when more
than five vehicles are accommodated in the driveway, including
Rev. Date
7/17/06
Ord. #801
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 206. Other Development Standards 206- 7
trailers and/or RVs, stored or parked in compliance with Section
211.010.
(iv) Driveway and parking areas shall not exceed 40% of the area
within the minimum required front yard setback.
(v) Property located on an arterial or collector street may construct a
turnaround to prevent backing onto the street. The turnaround
shall be setback a minimum of 5 feet from any property line and
shall not be located in front of the dwelling. If adequate setback
from the side lot line is not otherwise available, the City Manager
may approve an alternate location. No parking shall be permitted
in any turnaround unless landscape screening is provided.
(vi) Non-conforming driveways and parking areas shall only be
replaced in conformance with these regulations.
(f) R2 District.
(i) Two parking spaces per unit shall be required for off-street
parking; one must be completely enclosed.
(ii) Additional off-street guest parking spaces shall be provided at a
ratio of .5 spaces per unit.
(iii)As required by Section 206.020(B2) (Parking).
(g) R3 District.
(i) Two parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be required for offstreet
parking; one must be completely enclosed.
(ii) Additional guest parking spaces shall be provided at a ratio of .5
spaces per unit.
(iii)As required by Section 206.020(B2).
(h) R4 District
(i) A ratio of one and one-half parking spaces per unit shall be
required for off-street parking.
(ii) Additional guest parking spaces shall be provided at a ratio of .5
spaces per unit.
(iii)As required by Section 206.020(B2) (Parking).
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 206. Other Development Standards 206- 8
(i) In all Residential Districts, commercial vehicles shall comply with
Section 211.010 (Parking and Storage of Vehicles and Equipment).
(2) Use Requirements.
(a) Churches.1/3 seats based on max. design capacity
(b) Hotel/Motel. 1/unit + 1/employee
(c) Schools, Elem./Jr. High.1.5/classroom
(d) Schools, Sr. High/College. .2/student + 1/staff
(e) Indoor Theater. 1/3 seats based on max. design capacity
(f) Restaurant.1/3 seats based on max. design capacity
(g) Hospital.1.2/bed
(h) Fuel Stations. 4 plus 1/150 sq. ft. floor space devoted to retail sales
(i) Auto Service Station. 1/employee + 5/service stall
(j) Vehicle & Equipment Sales and Rental. 8 + 1/800 sq. ft. floor area
over 1,000
(k) Truck & Car Washes. 5 stacking spaces/bay + 1/employee
(l) Drive-up Facilities. Stacking spaces are required as per Section
206.020(A)(7).
i. Restaurants. 15 spaces or 1/15 sq. ft. of floor area, whichever is
greater
ii. Bank Windows. 6 stacking spaces/customer service window
iii. Other. 1/employee + 1/25 sq. ft. of floor area
(m) Commercial Recreation. 10 + 1/300 sq. ft. of floor area
(n) Bowling Alleys. 5/lane
(o) Rest Home/Nursing Home/Institution. 1/4 beds + 1/employee
Rev. Date
5/4/09
Ord. #850
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 206. Other Development Standards 206- 9
(C) Exceptions to the Minimum Parking Requirements. The number of parking
stalls constructed may be reduced to a number less than the minimum
requirement if one of the following parking management techniques is
implemented. The site shall be designed, however, with proof of parking to
accommodate the minimum number of stalls required by this ordinance.
(1) Transit. Developments that are pedestrian-oriented or transit oriented
and/or have access to frequent transit service.
(2) Transportation Demand Management. Developments that incorporate
transportation demand management techniques such as preferential
parking for carpools, vanpools, shuttle-service, flex-hours and
telecommuting.
(3) Shared Parking. Development incorporates shared parking with adjacent
land uses provided peak-parking demand occurs at different times.
(4) Parking Demand. Less than the minimum required is encouraged,
provided it is based on a demonstration that the proposed use/s have
parking demand and need less than the minimum number of stalls
required by this ordinance. The site shall be designed, however, with
proof of parking to accommodate the minimum number of stalls required
by this ordinance.
(D) Maximum Parking. Parking in excess of the minimum required may be
permitted through the Site and Building Plan Review process based on the
demand and need for the additional parking spaces. A pervious parking
surface for these areas will be required.
(E) Minimum Off-Street Loading Requirements.
(1) No loading facility shall be located on a street frontage (loading facility
includes dock, berth, maneuvering area).
(2) All loading docks shall be located within the perimeter of the structure
housing the principal or accessory use and shall be completely enclosed.
(3) Loading areas, aisles and access drives shall be surfaced with a durable
all-weather material and shall be so graded to immediately dispose of
surface water. Concrete curbing shall be required.
(4) All berths shall be screened from view from the property's street frontage
by plant materials, walls, earth berms, or fences.
(5) Truck loading areas including berth and access aprons shall have a
minimum length of 90 feet.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 206. Other Development Standards 206-10
(F) Handicapped Requirements.
(1) Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided and marked in accordance
with Minnesota Rules Chapter 1341, Minnesota Accessibility Code.
206.030 Lighting Standards.
(A) Lighting Standards. All parking lot lighting adjoining a property planned for
residential use shall be designed and installed to minimize trespass lighting
and to illuminate the parking lot to the extent practicable in accordance with
the following standards:
(1) Glare. In all districts, any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking
area, sign or other structure, shall be arranged as to reflect light away from
any adjoining residential zone or from the public streets. Direct or skyreflected
glare, whether from floodlights or from high-temperature
processes, such as combustion or welding, shall not be directed into any
adjoining property. The source of lights shall be hooded or controlled in
some manner so as not to light adjacent property. Base incandescent light
bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent property or public rightof-
way. The use of pedestrian style light poles, with a maximum 18 foot
height, is encouraged.
(2) Foot Candle Limit. No light or combination of lights which cast light
upon a public street shall exceed 1 foot candle meter reading as measured
from the centerline of the street nor shall any light or combination of lights
cast light upon residentially zoned property exceeding 0.4 foot candle
meter reading as measured at the receiving residential lot line.
206.040 Height.
(A) Buildings. In no case are buildings to exceed the firefighting capabilities of
the City.
(B) Maximum Height. Refer to the standards set forth in each zoning district.
206.050 Architectural and Site Design Standards. The intent of these regulations is to
promote community values by requiring reasonable standards for aesthetically
appealing buildings and grounds that complements surrounding land uses and
contributes to the viability of the overall community, and promotes sustainability.
(A) Architectural and site design elements of development proposals will be
reviewed based on the following criteria:
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 206. Other Development Standards 206-11
(1) Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan; the Surface Water
Management Plan; and the Municipal Code.
(2) Use of appropriate exterior materials, lighting, textures, colors, and
architectural and landscape forms to create a unified, high-quality design
concept for the site that is compatible with adjacent and neighboring
structures and functions.
(3) A unified sign design that provides a desirable environment for site users
and the community as a whole. A unified site design considers all site
elements including: the relationship of buildings to surrounding natural
features; day light and solar access; grading; architectural design; building,
parking and loading dock orientation; building height, use of manmade
materials, including paving; site furnishings (lighting, outdoor seating,
signage, etc.); landscaping (retention of natural vegetation, plant selection
and placement, retention and incorporation of water features, etc.); and
other visible outdoor site elements.
(4) Creation of a suitable balance between the amount and arrangement of
open space, landscaping, and view protection with the design and function
of man-made features. Achieving this balance shall take into account
screening, buffering, size and orientation of open spaces.
(5) Provision of safe and adequate access to and from sites giving ample
consideration to the location and number of access points from public
streets, the safety and convenience of merging and turning movements,
and traffic management and mitigation.
(6) Provision of on-site vehicular, bicycling, and pedestrian circulation by
way of interior drives, parking areas, bicycle parking racks, pathways, and
walkways adequate to handle anticipated needs and to safely buffer
pedestrian and cyclists from motor vehicles.
(B) Architectural Design. Building materials shall be selected for their ability to
present a visual statement of a building or structure’s strength, attractiveness
and permanence. The building materials used shall be harmonious with the
surrounding area.
(1) Building Elevations.
(a) All building elevations are subject to public view, and so high quality
design and materials shall be used for all building elevations.
(b) Avoid expanses of wall by using windows, jogs, projections, pilasters,
architectural detailing, changes in surface materials, colors, textures,
and variation of rooflines. Blank, uninterrupted walls that do not
Rev. Date
5/4/09
Ord. #850
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 206. Other Development Standards 206-12
include windows, entries, recesses or projections, and other
architectural elements, shall not exceed the less of (25-40) feet in
length or 50% of the building wall.
(c) The main entry shall face the primary street, with secondary entrances
on the side or rear. The main entry shall be designed with a canopy,
portico, arch, display windows, ornamental molding, enhanced
landscape or other details to announce the primary focus of the
building.
(d) All rooftop or ground mounted mechanical equipment and exterior
trash and recycling storage areas shall be enclosed with materials
compatible with the principal structure. Low profile, self-contained
mechanical units, including solar energy panels and rooftop rainwater
collection systems, which blend in with the building architecture are
exempt from the screening requirement.
(e) When development is located adjacent to residential or natural areas, a
residential scale and appearance is appropriate, including a pitched
roof. Alternate designs may be approved through the Site and
Building Plan Review process.
(f) Signature Architecture, as defined in Section 208.020, shall be
consistent with City standards or revised to comply.
(2) Exterior Finish Materials.
(a) Exterior wall finish materials shall include face brick, natural or cut
stone, stucco or EIFS, and equivalent materials. Other materials that
provide a similar high quality exterior may be approved through the
Site and Building Plan Review process.
(b) Prestressed concrete panels, concrete block and unfinished metal shall
not be permitted as exterior materials for principal structures and for
any accessory buildings. Architecturally enhanced block or concrete
panels may be approved through the Site and Building Plan Review
process.
(c) Not less than fifteen percent (15%) of any wall elevation surface shall
be designed with combinations of accent materials to provide visual
interest and architectural detail. Glass, wood, and metal finish
materials are suitable for these accents and window finishes.
(d) Use of wood the principal exterior finish material is discouraged
except when adjacent to residential or natural areas where a residential
appearance provides a suitable visual transition.
Rev. Date
5/4/09
Ord. #850
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 206. Other Development Standards 206-13
(e) Roofs, except flat roofs, must be constructed with commercial grade
asphalt shingles, wood shingles, standing seam metal, slate, tile,
copper, or similar high quality material. Green roofs may be approved
through the Site and Building Plan Review process.
(C) Sustainable Design. The City encourages development that uses a wholesystem
approach, applying concepts of building and site design to preserve
local and national resources. Effective use of resources may reduce operating
costs for the developer, while reducing environmental and public health
impacts. LEED, MnGreenStar, EnergyStar and other certifications are based
on:
(1) Energy efficiency. Includes design elements of the building envelope,
lighting, appliances and heating and cooling systems that contribute to
environmental goals. Alternate energy sources, including solar and
geothermal can provide renewable energy generation.
(2) Resource efficiency (including durability). Choosing durable building
materials that balance impacts from manufacturing with transportation and
end-of-life considerations.
(3) Indoor environmental quality. Indoor comfort not only ensures proper
ventilation, heating and cooling, but considers emissions from materials
used inside a building.
(4) Water conservation. Low-flow plumbing fixtures, rainwater collection
and infiltration, and drought tolerant landscapes help to conserve water.
206.060 Redevelopment. Redevelopment of properties zoned for non-single family
residential uses shall comply with the standards of the zoning district in which the
property is located. Flexibility to these standards may be permitted in accordance
with the following:
(A) Lot Coverage. If the existing impervious surface coverage on a parcel
exceeds the allowable impervious surface coverage for the zoning district in
which it is located, existing impervious surface coverage may remain but shall
not be increased provided best management practice measures are taken to
minimize negative effects on the environment as documented in the current
editions of Minnesota Construction Site Erosion and Sediment Control
Planning Handbook (MBWSR) and Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas
(MPCA). Existing impervious surface coverage is the impervious surface
coverage legally present on or before March 20, 2000 or approved thereafter
by the City.
Rev. Date
5/4/09
Ord. #850
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 206. Other Development Standards 206-14
(B) Architectural and Site Design Standards. Minor improvements, building
additions, and other modifications to the site will be subject to application of
these architectural and site design standards, considering the existing building
design and scope of the proposed alteration. Alternately, a face-lift of a
building’s exterior is expected to fully conform to the architectural standards.
The City may waive specific standards based on the scale of the project while
conducting the Site and Building Plan Review.
Rev. Date
5/4/09
Ord. #850
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 207. Use Standards 207-1
207 Use Standards
207.010 Accessory Apartments. Accessory apartments must comply with the following
standards:
(A)The accessory apartment shall be clearly a subordinate part of the singlefamily
dwelling. In no case shall it be more than thirty (30) percent of the
building's total floor area nor greater than eight hundred (800) square feet nor
have more than two (2) bedrooms.
(B) The principal unit shall have at least 850 square feet of living space remaining
after creation of the accessory apartment exclusive of garage area. Accessory
apartments shall have at least 500 square feet of living space. Living space
square footage for the accessory apartment shall be exclusive of utility rooms,
common hallways, entryways or garages. Living space for the accessory
apartment shall include a kitchen or cooking facilities, a bathroom and a living
room.
(C)No front entrances shall be added to the house as a result of the accessory
apartment permit.
(D)The house must be owner-occupied.
(E) A minimum of three off-street parking spaces must be provided, two of which
must be enclosed.
(F) The accessory apartment and principal unit must meet the applicable standards
and requirements of the Shoreview's Development Code, Building Code,
Ramsey County Health Codes and Fire Codes.
(G)The building and property shall remain in single ownership and title and shall
only have one mailing address.
(H)Only one accessory apartment permit may be issued per detached single
family home.
207.020 Home Occupations. Home occupations must comply with the following
standards:
(A)No signs shall be permitted on or off the premises.
(B)No outdoor storage or display of materials shall be permitted.
(C)No home occupation shall have an adverse affect on adjacent properties due to
excessive traffic or offensive noise, light, odor, dust or other noxious
substances. If the home occupation will require a delivery service, such as
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 207. Use Standards 207-2
UPS, no more than six delivery/pickup trips per week shall be permitted.
Delivery vehicles shall not be larger than a typical step van. Customer
visitation to the premises of the home occupation shall be by appointment
only.
(D)Adequate off-street parking must be provided for customers and for those who
reside on the premises. All required parking spaces shall be located on an
asphalt or bituminous surface, which is in character with the surrounding
residential neighborhood.
(E) Employment shall be restricted to persons who reside on the premises.
(F) If customers will visit the premises, the areas accessible to customers shall
comply with all applicable life safety codes.
(G)The home occupation must be clearly accessory to the principal use of the
structure as a dwelling unit.
(H)There shall be no exterior evidence of the presence of the home occupation on
the premises.
(I) The home occupation shall not occupy more than 20% of the dwelling unit's
floor area.
207.030 Temporary Sales or Events. Temporary sales or events must comply with the
following standards:
(A) Health, Safety, and Welfare. The proposed sale or event shall not cause a
public nuisance because of noise, air pollution, traffic congestion, or failure to
properly maintain the site. Any proposed temporary sale or event shall
comply with all relevant building, fire, and safety codes.
(B) Location. Temporary sales or events may be located on land associated with
commercial, public, or quasi-public uses. Seasonal residential sales may only
be permitted within residential districts.
(C) Duration. Temporary sales by temporary vendors or established merchants
may be permitted for up to seven (7) consecutive days. Seasonal residential
sales are permitted for up to four (4) consecutive days. Seasonal sales of
seasonal merchandise or sales are permitted for up to sixty (60) days.
Carnivals or fairs may be permitted for up to seven (7) consecutive days.
These durations should be considered maximums and permits issued may be
approved for shorter durations if necessary to protect public health, safety, and
welfare. These durations may be extended by action of the City Council after
review by the Planning Commission.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 207. Use Standards 207-3
(D) Hours of Operation. Hours of operation for temporary sales and events must
be between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(E) Parking and Traffic. Ample parking must be provided on site to
accommodate expected visitors. The sale or event shall not cause a traffic
hazard.
(F) Signage. A maximum of one sign is permitted per temporary event. This sign
shall be located on private property (not in the public right-of-way). The sign
shall not exceed 32 square feet in area or 6 feet in height. The sign location
shall not interfere with intersection sight distances or cause a traffic hazard.
(G) Site Maintenance and Restoration. The applicant shall be responsible for
maintaining and cleaning the site utilized for the temporary sale or event and
restoring it to its original condition. If the City Manager determines that it is
necessary, the applicant may be required to post a financial security to ensure
site maintenance and/or restoration.
207.040 Towers and Antennas.
(A) Private Antennas.
(1) Permit Requirements. A private antenna/tower permit is required for:
(a) Any antennas more than 10 feet in height attached to an existing
structure except those antennas exempted from local zoning authority
by federal regulations.
(b) Any antenna attached to a free-standing tower of any height.
(c) Any dish antenna greater than one meter in diameter that does not
meet the standards in the following Section 207.040(A)(2).
(2) Standards.
(a) All antennas or other devices used for transmitting or receiving signals
must comply with Federal Communication Commission procedures to
resolve any complaints relating to interference allegedly caused by a
private antenna/tower.
(b) Antennas, except antennas used for amateur or citizen band radio
communication:
(i) The height is no greater than 10 feet above the roof or more than
40 feet above mean ground level.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 207. Use Standards 207-4
(ii) A building permit is obtained prior to installation to verify
compliance with applicable building, fire, and safety codes.
(iii)The ground-level view of the device is screened from contiguous
properties and adjacent streets.
(c) For amateur and citizen band radio facilities.
(i) Height. The maximum height for amateur or citizen band radio
antennas and/or towers shall not exceed 75 feet. In addition, that
portion of any antenna or tower over 55 feet must be retractable to
a height no greater than 55 feet.
(ii) Lowering Device. All amateur radio facilities capable of a
maximum extended height of more than 55 feet shall be equipped
with a mechanical device capable of lowering the facility to the
maximum permitted height when not in operation.
(iii)Number Permitted. One amateur radio facility is permitted per
property.
(iv) Siting/Setbacks. All amateur radio facilities shall be located in a
manner that minimizes the visibility of the facility from nearby
properties and adjacent streets. No portion of facility shall be
located within a required principal structure setback or in a yard
abutting a public right-of-way. In addition, any free-standing
tower must be set back at least one foot from adjacent residential
units for each foot in height or provide documentation acceptable
to the City Planner that all adjacent residential units are outside the
tower’s fall zone.
(v) Color/Screening. The color of the amateur radio facilities shall
blend with the surrounding environment and must be screened with
trees and landscaping to the extent possible.
(vi) Deviation from Standards. Deviation from the height and setback
standards may be allowed if the applicant can demonstrate that
compliance with these standards would unreasonably limit or
prevent reception or transmission of signals and a conditional use
permit is obtained in addition to the private antenna/tower permit.
(B) Commercial Antennas and Towers.
(1) Permit Requirements.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 207. Use Standards 207-5
(a) If the proposed antenna/tower is to be used for wireless
telecommunications, a wireless telecommunications facility permit
must be obtained in accordance with Section 203.044.
(b) A building permit is required for any installation, expansion, or
modification of a wireless telecommunications facility and for any
commercial tower. A building permit is required for commercial
antennas other than wireless telecommunication antennas if required
by the Building Code.
(c) A conditional use permit may be required for certain commercial
antennas or towers as required by the zoning district.
(2) Commercial Antenna Standards.
(a) The antennas must be located on or attached to an existing structure.
(b) The height shall not exceed 6 feet above the roof.
(c) The antennas, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures,
screening, and landscaping to blend in with the surrounding natural
setting and built environment.
(d) Wireless telecommunication antennas shall also comply with the
standards in Section 207.040(B)(3).
(3) Wireless Telecommunication Facility Standards (WTFs).
(a) Siting. New WTFs shall only be located on parcels that fall within the
Telecommunications Overlay District.
(b) Color, Camouflage and Architecture. All WTFs shall be camouflaged
and use architectural design, materials, colors, textures, screening, and
landscaping to blend in with the surrounding natural setting and built
environment. If a WTF is proposed on any part of a building or
structure, it must blend with the building or structure’s design,
architecture and color, including exterior finish. All WTFs shall
utilize color, architecture and camouflage to minimize the visual
impact and, in the sole discretion of the City Council, so appear
compatible with the surroundings:
(i) Color. The WTF shall use colors to minimize the visual impact
when viewed from adjacent public streets and nearby property,
except in instances where the color is dictated by federal or state
authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration.
Rev. Date
4/18/05
Ord. #774
Rev. Date
4/18/05
Ord. #774
Rev. Date
8/30/17
Ord. #956
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 207. Use Standards 207-6
(ii) Camouflage. The WTF shall, to the extent practicable, simulate
objects that typically occur in landscapes similar to the proposed
location, except for billboards, electrical transmission facilities or
telecommunications towers, and similar constructions. Examples
of camouflage designs include flagpoles, sport field lighting
poles, trees, monuments, and on buildings, steeples, parapets and
rooftop penthouses.
a. Utility cabinets shall be placed in underground vaults or
integrated within existing structures, unless the City
determines an above-grade installation is appropriate for the
site.
b. Freestanding, above grade equipment cabinets shall be
heavily screened from view with landscape materials.
(iii) Architecture. The WTF shall be designed to blend in with the
surrounding natural setting and build environment.
a. Towers shall use antennas, antenna mounts, equipment
enclosures and monopoles that provide minimal visual profile
and silhouette, in order to reduce visual clutter. For example,
underground cable routing is less visually intrusive than using
overhead cables with metal bridging for ice-fall protection;
cylindrical unicell antenna arrays are preferred over davit
arms or other types of mounting brackets extending out from
the monopole; platform mounted antennas are generally
discouraged.
b. Building mounted wireless telecommunications facilities shall
be screened from view or camouflaged in a manner to
generally comply with the Architectural and Site Design
Standards specified in Chapter 206.050.
(c) Landscaping. Except in the TOD-3, WTFs shall be landscaped with a
buffer of plant materials as determined appropriate for the site by the
City. Existing mature trees and other vegetation at the site shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible.
(d) Signs. The use of any portion of a WTF for signs or advertising other
than warning or small equipment and emergency contact information
signs is prohibited.
(e) Lighting. Wireless telecommunication antennas or towers shall not be
illuminated by artificial means and shall not display lights unless such
lighting is specifically required by the Federal Aviation Administration
or other federal or state authority. When incorporated into the
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 207. Use Standards 207-7
approved design of the WTF, light fixtures used to illuminate sport
fields, parking lots or similar areas may be attached to the tower.
(f) Monopole. New wireless telecommunication towers shall be of a
monopole design unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the City Council that an alternative design would better blend into
the surrounding environment.
(g) Tower Setbacks. Wireless telecommunications towers shall comply
with the principal structure setbacks of the underlying zoning district
and the following additional standards:
(i) The tower is set back from all residential dwellings units at least
one foot for each foot in height.
(ii) Tower shall not co-occupy any easements unless permission is
obtained from the underlying property owner and holder of the
easement.
(iii)Tower shall not be located between a principal structure and a
public street.
(iv) The required tower setbacks may be reduced or the location in
relation to a public street modified, at the sole discretion of the
City, when the WTF is integrated into an existing or proposed
structure such as a building, light or utility pole.
(h) Height.
(i) The height of any commercial telecommunications tower shall not
exceed 60 feet in the TOD-1 district and 75 feet in the TOD-2
district.
(ii) Antennas located in the TOD-1 and TOD-2 on an existing structure
which exceeds the maximum telecommunications tower height for
the District in which the existing structure is located may extend
up to 5 feet above the height of the structure.
(iii)In the event substantial obstacles to RF signal propagation are
present within 1000 feet of the proposed WTF, the
telecommunications tower height may be increased an additional
20% above the maximum height permitted in the TOD. No such
increase in height will be permitted unless the applicant’s proposed
design utilizes color, architecture and camouflage to minimize the
visual impact and, in the sole discretion of the City Council, so
appear in context on the landscape.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 207. Use Standards 207-8
(iv)WTFs mounted on an existing building in the TOD-3 shall:
a. Roof mounted WTF are preferred near the center of the
building in a location that minimizes visibility from the
surrounding area.
b. Roof mounted WTF shall extend a maximum of 10 feet above
the height of the building to which they are attached, and be
setback from the building façade a minimum of 2 feet for each
foot of height the WTF extends above the building roof, with a
minimum setback of 5 feet.
c. Wall mounted WTF shall not extend above the building
parapet, and shall be incorporated into design elements of the
building to maintain architectural integrity.
d. Deviations from the height and façade setback requirements
may be approved when, in the sole discretion of the City
Council, the WTF is fully concealed in an aesthetically
integrated building component, for example a steeple, parapet
extension, chimney, penthouse or similar architectural feature.
e. Roof mounted WTFs shall be exempt from the building height
regulations for the underlying zoning district, subject to the
approval of the Lake Johanna Fire Department.
(i) Safety/Environmental Standards.
(i) Unauthorized Climbing. WTFs shall be designed to prevent
unauthorized climbing or entry.
(ii) Noise. If the proposed WTF includes a back-up generator or
otherwise results in significant increased sound levels, sound
buffers may be required including, but not limited to, baffling,
barriers, enclosures, walls, and plantings, so that the WTF is
operated in compliance with the requirements specified in Section
209.020, Noise.
(iii)Radio Frequency (RF) Emissions and Interference. WTFs shall
comply with Federal Communication Commission standards for
RF emissions and interference. WTFs shall be tested for
compliance with FCC RF emissions standards after the WTF has
been installed.
Rev. Date
7/5/11
Ord. #879
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 207. Use Standards 207-9
(v) Maintenance. All commercial towers or WTFs shall at all times be
kept and maintained in good condition, appearance, order, and
repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or
property of any person.
(vi)Occupational Safety. WTFs shall comply with applicable State of
Minnesota and Federal regulations for occupational exposure to
non-ionizing radiation.
(j) Location and Collocation Requirements. Except as herein and after
provided, WTFs within the City shall comply with the following
collocation requirements:
(i) Locations are preferred by the City in the following priority:
a. Collocation on existing wireless telecommunications towers;
b. Location on City property in the TOD-1 and TOD-2;
c. Location on existing buildings in the TOD-3;
d. Location on other property in the TOD-1 and TOD-2.
(ii) All proposed WTFs must be located on an existing structure 55
feet or greater in height located within ½ mile of the site being
considered by the applicant.
(iii)All wireless telecommunication providers shall cooperate with
each other in collocating WTFs and shall exercise good faith in
collocating with other licensed carriers and in the sharing of sites,
including the sharing of technical information to evaluate the cost
and feasibility of collocation. In the event that a dispute arises as
to a collocation issue, the City may require a third-party technical
study to evaluate the feasibility or cost of collocating at the
expense of either or both wireless telecommunication providers.
(iv) All new and replacement wireless telecommunications towers and
any pre-existing towers owned by a wireless telecommunication
provider shall be made available for use by the owner or initial
user thereof, together with as many other licensed carriers as can
be technically located thereon.
(v) All new or replacement wireless telecommunication towers shall
be designed, structurally, electrically, and in all other respects, to
accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and comparable
antennas for at least one additional user, except when the applicant
demonstrates that a monopole with conforming height is
technologically unsuitable for the facilities of a second provider.
Rev. Date
7/5/11
Ord. #879
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 207. Use Standards 207-10
(k) Exceptions to Location Requirements. The City may waive any or all
of the collocation requirements if it is determined that:
(i) The planned WTF would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing or approved structure, as documented by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved
structure cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment.
(ii) The planned WTF would cause interference materially impacting
the usability of other existing or planned WTFs at the structure as
documented by a qualified radio frequency engineer selected by
the City and the interference cannot be prevented.
(iii)Existing structures within the applicant’s search radius cannot or
will not accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary
to function reasonably as documented by a qualified radio
frequency engineer selected by the City.
(4) Equipment Enclosures. Equipment enclosures accessory to a commercial
antenna or WTF shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Equipment enclosures shall be of the smallest size necessary.
(b) In the TOD-1 and TOD-2:
(i) Equipment enclosures shall be located in underground vaults,
integrated within existing nearby structures, or where existing
trees, structures, and/or other site features screen them from view.
(ii) All equipment enclosures shall be screened from view by suitable
vegetation, except where non-vegetative screening (e.g., a
decorative wall) better reflects and complements the character of
the neighborhood.
(c) In the TOD-3, building mounted WTF equipment enclosures shall be
integrated with the building architecture as specified in Section
207.040(B)(3)(b).
(5) Installation Requirements on City Water Towers. Installation of
commercial antennas or WTFs on City water towers will be permitted
when the City is fully satisfied that the following requirements are met:
(a) The commercial antenna or WTF or maintenance thereof will not
increase the risks of contamination to the City’s water supply, or risk
to the water tower facilities.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 207. Use Standards 207-11
(b) There is sufficient room on the structure and/or grounds to
accommodate the proposed commercial antenna or WTF.
(c) The presence of the commercial antenna or WTF will not increase the
water tower maintenance or operational costs to the City.
(d) The presence of the commercial antenna or WTF will not be harmful
to the health of workers maintaining the water tower.
(e) All state and federal regulations pertaining to non-ionizing radiation
and other health hazards has been satisfied.
207.050 Nonconformities.
(A) Purpose. The purposes for the City's Nonconforming Use Regulations are:
(1) To recognize the existence of uses, structures and lots which were lawfully
established but which do not currently comply with the City's
Development Regulations.
(2) To prohibit the enlargement, expansion or extension of nonconforming
principal uses and structures.
(3) To regulate nonconforming uses and structures that are located in flood
hazard areas in a manner consistent with State and Federal regulations in
order to preserve the public health, safety and welfare.
(B) Nonconforming Use Restrictions.
(1) A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or extended to occupy a
greater area of land or a larger portion of a structure, but may continue at
the size, intensity and in the manner of operation existing upon the date on
which the use became nonconforming.
(2) A nonconforming use may be changed to lessen the nonconformity of the
use.
(3) When a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use, it shall
thereafter comply with the City's Development Ordinance.
(4) A nonconforming use shall not be re-established if discontinued for a
continuous twelve-month period.
(5) Any nonconforming use located in a flood hazard zone is also subject to
the regulations of Section 205.091(K)(4).
Rev.
4/19/10
Ord. #864
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 207. Use Standards 207-12
(C) Nonconforming Lot Restrictions. The following requirements shall apply to
all substandard non-riparian lots that do not satisfy the minimum dimension
standards set forth in Development Ordinance. Substandard riparian lots shall
comply with the requirements set forth in Section 209.080(L).
(1) Lot Standards:
(a) Residential design review approval, in accordance with Section
203.034, must be obtained prior to improvement of any
nonconforming lot of record for use as a separate home site if the lot
was not in separate ownership on August 1, 1983, or any time
thereafter.
(b) No structures shall be expanded or constructed on a substandard lot of
record unless Residential design review approval is first obtained from
the City in accordance with Section 203.034, unless otherwise in
conformance with Section 207.050(F).
(c) Reconstruction of a structure is defined to mean replacement of three
or more of the structure’s six structural components (roof, floor, and
four walls). Determination as to the extent of structural component
replacement shall be made by the Building Official.
(d) A dwelling shall not be constructed on a nonconforming lot of record
unless the lot meets or exceeds 80% of the minimum required lot
width, area and depth standards.
(e) No lot of record shall be used or reused as a separate home site unless
it abuts an improved public right-of-way or, if the lot was legally
accessed via a private way prior to December 10, 1992, said access
may continue to be utilized provided:
(i) There is no practical way to extend a public street to the property;
(ii) The private access is protected by a permanent easement recorded
to run with the title of the property; and
(iii)The private way complies with the fire apparatus requirements set
forth in the Uniform Fire Code.
(D) Design Standards. Any structures constructed, reconstructed or expanded on a
nonconforming lot shall comply with the following site and building design
requirements:
(1) Impervious Surface Coverage. Lot coverage shall not exceed 30%.
Rev. Date
4/17/06
Ord. #794
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 207. Use Standards 207-13
(2) Building Height. The height of the proposed dwelling shall not exceed 28
feet from roof peak to grade (as defined by the Uniform Building Code)
on the street side of the dwelling, and the dwelling shall not exceed two
stories as viewed from the street.
(3) Foundation Area. The foundation area of all structures, including
dwellings and attached accessory structures, cantilevered areas, detached
accessory structures greater than 150 square feet, and covered porches,
covered decks, and covered patios shall be limited to 18 percent of the lot
area or 1,600 square feet, whichever is greater. If the existing foundation
area exceeds the allowed foundation area, the foundation area percentage
may be maintained but not increased. Existing foundation area is the
foundation area legally present on the property on or before April 17, 2006
or approved thereafter by the City.
(4) Minimum Setback from the Property Front Line: Twenty-five (25) feet.
However, in those cases where the existing setbacks for the two adjacent
dwellings exceed this requirement, the setback of the new dwelling or any
new addition shall be equal to the average setback of the two adjacent
dwellings, plus or minus 10 feet. If one of the immediately adjacent
dwellings is located on a lakeshore lot, the front yard setback of such
dwelling shall not be utilized. In those cases where there is only one
existing adjacent structure which has a setback greater than twenty-five
(25) feet, then the setback for the new dwelling or addition shall be equal
to the average of twenty-five (25) feet and the setback of the existing
adjacent structure, plus or minus 10 feet.
(5) Architectural Mass. The architectural design and mass of the structure is
determined by the City to be compatible with the existing neighborhood
character.
(a) When determining compliance with the existing character of a
neighborhood, the City Council may require revisions that include, but
shall not be limited to the alteration of: dwelling style (2-story
walkout, rambler, etc.); roof design; garage width, height, and depth;
garage style (attached versus detached); location and amount of
driveway/parking/ sidewalk area; and/or the location and design of
doors, windows, decks and porches. The City may also restrict deck
enclosures; prohibit accessory structures except for a garage; and
require greater than standard setbacks.
(6) Legally established nonconforming structures may continue but shall not
be expanded or moved to a different location on a parcel, except as
provided for in Section 207.050(F).
Rev. Date
4/17/06
Ord. #794
Rev. Date
5/20/13
Ord. #907
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 207. Use Standards 207-14
(E) Residential Design Review Conditions. The City may impose any or all of the
following requirements as a condition of approval in order to construct or
reconstruct a single family dwelling on a nonconforming lot of record:
(1) If the nonconforming lot adjoins a lot in the same ownership that exceeds
minimum dimension standards, the adjoining lot may be required to be
subdivided, to the extent practical, to increase the size of the
nonconforming lot in order to reduce the amount of the non-conformity.
(2) Any other conditions that the City deems necessary in order to satisfy the
intent of the Development Ordinance.
(F) Nonconforming Structure Restrictions.
(1) A structure which is nonconforming due to dimensions or setbacks from
property lines may remain at its current size and location and/or may be
structurally altered, including an area expansion, provided that the
alteration complies with the City's current development regulations and
procedures.
(2) A structure which is nonconforming due to setbacks from property lines,
where such nonconformity is the result of a government taking for the
construction or improvement of streets, drainage areas, storm water
ponding areas, public recreational areas, or public utilities, may be
structurally altered so long as the alteration is in compliance with the
setback standards.
(3) A nonconforming structure which is destroyed by fire or other peril to the
extent of greater than 50% of its estimated market value as indicated in the
records of the county assessor at the time of damage, may be continued
through repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance or improvement
provided a building permit has been applied for within 180 days of the
date of damage. In this case, the City may impose reasonable conditions
upon a zoning or building permit in order to mitigate any newly created
impact on adjacent property or water body. When a non-conforming
structure in the Shoreland District with less than 50% of the required
setback from the ordinary high water is destroyed by fire or other peril to
greater than 50% of its estimated market value as indicated in the records
of the county assessor at the time of damage, the structure setback may be
increased if practicable and reasonable conditions are placed upon a
zoning or building permit to mitigate created impacts on the adjacent
property or water body.
(4) Normal repairs and maintenance necessary to keep a nonconforming
structure in sound condition shall be permitted.
Rev. Date
4/17/06
Ord. #794
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 207. Use Standards 207-15
(5) If a nonconforming accessory use terminates, the nonconforming
accessory structure which it utilizes shall be removed unless such structure
can be adapted to conform with the use regulations of its particular zone.
(6) Any nonconforming structure located in a flood hazard district is also
subject to Section 205.091(K)(4).
(7) The provisions of Section 207.050(F) apply to all structures, including
signs.
(G)Illegal Uses. Owners of illegal uses or structures shall terminate such use
and/or remove such structure or otherwise adapt such structure to a
permissible use.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-1
208 Signs
208.010 Purpose and Findings.
(A)This sign ordinance is intended to establish a comprehensive and balanced
system of sign control that accommodates the need for a well-maintained,
safe, and attractive community, and to accommodate the business
community's need for effective communication and identification. It is not the
purpose or intent of these regulations to favor commercial messages or speech
over non-commercial messages or speech or to discriminate between types of
non-commercial speech or the viewpoints represented therein. It is the intent
of this ordinance to promote the health, safety, general welfare, and desirable
community image through the regulation of signs with the following
objectives in mind:
(1) Signs shall demonstrate a high standard of aesthetic character and
encourage the use of monument and individual letter-style signs;
(2) Permit large enough copy/graphic area to effectively convey the intended
message but not so large as to unduly distract the reader and insist on
lettering large enough to be easily read to encourage simple, uncluttered
messages;
(3) Signs shall be proportioned to the size of, and architecturally compatible
with, the structures and other signs on the premises;
(4) Permanent signs shall only advertise on-premise businesses, services,
facilities, etc;
(5) Allow temporary business signs for grand openings and occasional sales
events without creating continuous visual clutter or traffic hazards along
streets or at intersections; and
(6) Signs shall be properly maintained.
(7) Signs that distract drivers, cyclists and pedestrians shall not be permitted.
Studies conducted by public and private agencies have identified that
dynamic signs, including multi-vision signs, electronic signs and video
displays can be highly distracting to drivers, pedestrians, and cyclists and
that distraction is a significant underlying cause of traffic accidents. With
respect to electronic signs, including video display signs, the City finds
that they are highly visible from long distances and at very wide viewing
angles both day and night and are designed to catch the eye of persons in
their vicinity and hold it for extended periods of time. If left uncontrolled,
electronic signs, including video display signs, constitute a serious traffic
safety threat. Studies conducted by the Federal Highway Administration
Rev. Date
2/4/08
Ord. #824
Rev. Date
2/4/08
Ord. #824
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-2
(FHWA), Research Review of Potential Safety Effects of Electronic
Billboards on Driver Attention and Distraction, Sept. 11, 2001, and The
Role of Driver Inattention in Crashes: New Statistics from 1995; the
University of North Carolina Highway Safety Research Center,
Distractions in Everyday Driving, May 2003 and The Role of Driver
Distraction in Traffic Crashes, May 2001; the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation, Synthesis Report of Electronic Billboards and Highway
Safety, June 10, 2003; the Municipal Research and Services Center of
Washington, Sign Control Provisions, Jan. 2006; the Veridan Group,
Video Signs in Seattle, Gerald Wachtel, May 2001, reveal that electronic
signs are highly distracting to drivers and that driver distraction continues
to be a significant underlying cause of traffic accidents.
(B) Findings. The City of Shoreview hereby finds that regulation of the
construction type, location, size, and maintenance of signs is necessary to
accomplish the above referenced objectives, because:
(1) The presence of permanent and temporary signage affects the image of the
community;
(2) Properly regulated signage can create an atmosphere of prosperity,
stimulate commercial activity, and consequently, lead to increased
employment and a healthier tax base;
(3) The safety of motorists, cyclists, and pedestrians can be threatened by
signage that interferes with necessary sight-distances and/or unduly diverts
the attention of such persons.
(4) Signs that are too bright, overly illuminated, flash, blink, scroll, twirl,
change messages or color, or imitate movement, including video displays,
can distract drivers, cyclists and pedestrians and impact traffic safety.
208.020 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in the City of Shoreview
Code of Ordinances shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as
they have in common usage and so as to give subject code its most reasonable
application.
Sign. Any letter, word or symbol, device, poster, picture, statue, reading matter or
representation in the nature of an advertisement, announcement, message, or
visual communication, whether painted, posted, printed, affixed or
constructed, which is displayed for informational or communicative purposes
and is visible to the general public.
Rev. Date
2/4/08
Ord. #824
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-3
Sign, Banners (or Pennants). A sign constructed of lightweight material designed
as an attention-getting device which resembles a flag or similar type of
advertisement.
Sign, Base. The supporting structure upon which a sign face is affixed and which
must be architecturally compatible with the exterior of the principal structure
in the associated development, in terms of color, form, and exposed material
type(s).
Sign, Canopy or Awning. Any sign that is part of or attached to an awning,
canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door,
entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy.
Sign, Cabinet or Canister-Style. A sign that consists of a translucent sign face(s)
to which the lettering/graphic message is painted onto and/or molded into.
Such sign differs from a canopy sign in that the edges of the face(s) are
enclosed by a ridge frame to form a cabinet.
Sign, Changeable Copy or Readerboard. A sign which is changed manually and
not controlled by means of electronic devices, except as otherwise permitted
for Gas Price Display signs.
Sign, Dynamic Display Billboard. A dynamic display sign is defined as an offpremise
advertising sign used for outdoor advertisement which is capable of
displaying a video signal, including, but not limited to, cathode-ray tubes
(CRT), light-emitting diode (LED) displays, plasma displays, liquid-crystal
displays (LCD), or other technologies used in commercially available
televisions or computer monitors.
Sign, Flashing. An illuminated sign which contains flashing lights or exhibits
noticeable changes in color or light intensity.
Sign, Freestanding. Any sign structure that is self supporting, placed in the
ground, and not affixed to a building.
Sign, Gas Price Display. That portion of a sign that announces fuel prices and
consists of changeable copy, manual or electronic. A Gas Price Display must
be integrated into a freestanding sign.
Sign, Ground. A free standing sign whose face is mounted upon a base that is 40
to 75 percent of the width of the face and the height of the top of the sign
above the ground does not exceed 6 feet. A ground sign may be externally or
internally lighted or unlighted. The face may be individual-letter or cabinet
style.
Rev. Date
2/4/08
Ord. #824
Rev. Date
12/28/05
Ord. #786
Rev. Date
8/15/11
Ord. #883
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-4
Sign, Incidental Business. A small sign, emblem or decal, not to exceed 2 square
feet, displayed outside on a premises or displayed in a window or door visible
outside of the structure. These signs are distinguished from Traffic
Directional Signs.
Sign, Individual Letter-Style. A sign with a sign face(s) that is opaque to which
the letters/graphics are affixed, cut-out of, cut into, or resemble such. In the
case of wall signs, the building elevation constitutes the sign face. The color
of the sign face is also the same behind each tenant name, where multiple
names appear. If lighted from within, only the lettering/graphic area is
recognizable as being lighted.
Sign, Logo. An identifying graphic which may or may not be a registered
trademark but which is the official graphic identifier for a business or
organization.
Sign, Major Tenant. A business or organization that occupies at least 50 percent
of a building's floor area or contains at least 5,000 square feet of floor area
within a development.
Sign, Marquee. Any sign attached, or affixed in any manner, or made a part of a
marquee.
Sign, Message Center. An on-premise sign capable of displaying words, symbols,
figures or images that can be electronically or mechanically changed by
remote or automatic means. Gas Price Display signs and Dynamic Display
Billboards shall be defined and regulated as separate sign types from Message
Center signs.
Sign, Monument. A freestanding sign whose face is mounted upon a base that is
at least 75 percent of the width of the face. A monument sign may be
externally or internally lighted or unlighted.
Sign, Multi-vision. A sign composed in whole or in part of a series of vertical or
horizontal slats or cylinders that are capable of being rotated at intervals so
that partial rotation of the group of slats or cylinders produces a different
image and when properly functioning allows on a single sign structure the
display at any given time one of two or more images.
Sign, Off-Premises Advertising. A freestanding sign with a commercial message
which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment not
related to the premises where such a sign is located (i.e., outdoor advertising),
including Dynamic Display Billboards.
Sign, Political/Opinion. A sign with a non-commercial message, attracting
attention to political candidates or issues or that expresses an opinion or point
of view that does not advertise any product, service or business.
Rev. Date
8/19/13
Ord. #911
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-5
Sign, Portable. A sign structure with or without copy and/or graphics so designed
as to be movable from one location to another and which is not permanently
attached to the ground or any structure. Sandwich board signs are not
considered portable signs for the purpose of this definition.
Examples of portable signs are illustrated and described below:
Signs designed to be transported by trailer or on wheels;
Mounted on a vehicle for advertising purposes, when the vehicle is parked
and visible from public right of way, except signs identifying a
business when the vehicles is being used in the normal day-to-day
operations of that business.
A sign may be a portable sign even if it has wheels removed, was designed
without wheels, or is attached to the ground, a structure, or other sign.
Sign, Projecting. A sign which is affixed to a building and which extends
perpendicularly from the building wall more than twelve (12) inches.
Sign, Pylon. Any permanent, freestanding sign whose sign face which is mounted
upon a sign base that is less than 40 percent of the width of the face and height
in excess of six feet.
Sign, Roof. Any sign which is erected, constructed or attached wholly or in part
upon or over the roof of a building, unless attached to a parapet or mansard
structure that is an architectural component of the building.
Sign, Rotating. A sign or a portion of a sign which moves in a rotating,
oscillating, or similar manner.
Sign, Sandwich Board. A type of moveable pedestrian oriented sign constructed
of two (2) independent faces that are attached so its side view resembles a
triangle or “T”.
Sign, Shimmering. A Sign which reflects an oscillating sometimes distorted
visual image.
Rev. Date
8/19/13
Ord. #911
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-6
Sign Structure. A term used in conjunction with freestanding signs, meaning the
sign face together with the sign base.
Sign, Temporary. Any sign which is erected or displayed on a non-permanent
basis for a limited period of time.
Sign, Transit Amenity. A sign which is affixed to or painted on a transit amenity,
such as a transit bench or shelter.
Sign, Video Display. A sign that changes its message or background in a manner
or method of display characterized by motion or pictorial imagery, which may
or may not include text and depicts action or a special effect to imitate
movement, the presentation of pictorials or graphics displayed in a
progression of frames which give the illusion of motion, including but not
limited to the illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or bands of light, or
expanding or contracting shapes, not including electronic changeable copy
signs. Video display signs include projected images or messages with these
characteristics onto buildings or other objects but do not include Message
Center Signs or Dynamic Display Billboards.
Sign, Wall. A single-faced sign which is affixed to the exterior wall of a building
and which is parallel to the building wall and which does not project more
than twelve (12) inches from the wall surface to which it is attached, nor
extend beyond the top of a building elevation or parapet wall, whichever is
higher.
Sign, Window. A sign affixed to or inside of a window in view of the general
public. Merchandise on display is not considered window signage.
Signature Architecture. Use of design elements, colors and material to identify a
structure’s use or affiliation (e.g., a commercial brand or business).
208.030 General Standards. The following regulations apply to signs throughout the
City:
(A)Location:
(1) Unless stated otherwise in this ordinance, permanent signs shall be setback
at least five (5) feet from all property lines. The City may require a
greater setback because of public safety reasons that may include, but not
be limited to, the following concerns: vehicle sight-distances, distance
from an intersection, or function of the adjoining right-of-way.
(2) Signs shall not be permitted within public right-of-way or road easements,
except for: 1) public traffic control signs, 2) traffic directional signs and 3)
Rev. Date
2/4/08
Ord. #824
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-7
temporary (not to exceed 30 days) banners and signs for authorized civic
events, 4) other signs as permitted by this ordinance.
(3) Traffic directional signs are permitted, provided: 1) all such signs have a
uniform design on a site, 2) if located within a right-of-way, the sign shall
comply with all applicable roadway authority rules for height, location,
and size; 3) the sign(s) is as small and low to the ground as practical to
convey the intended information; 4) the minimum number of such signs
necessary for the purposes intended are utilized.
(B) Construction and Lighting:
(1) All signs shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with
applicable provisions of the Minnesota State Building and Electrical
Codes. Permanent freestanding signs shall have self-supporting structures
erected on and permanently attached to concrete foundations. Walls that
are meant to support wall signs shall be designed and constructed with
sufficient strength to support the proposed sign.
(2) Lettering on permanent wall and freestanding signs shall be a minimum of
four inches tall or at least one inch tall for every fifty feet of distance from
which the lettering is intended to be read, whichever is greater. Larger
lettering may be required when the sign is intended to be read by motorists
traveling at speeds greater than 30 miles per hour. Lettering for a center
name shall not be smaller than tenant names listed on the same sign or on
the same building elevation.
(3) The light cast by any illuminated sign located within fifty feet of a street
right-of-way or property planned for residential, park, or open space use
shall illuminate only the sign and not the adjoining property or air space
above the property.
(4) Holiday lights and decorations shall be permitted provided no commercial
message is displayed.
(5) Where multiple tenant names are displayed on the same building elevation
or same face of a freestanding sign, all must be lighted if one is lighted,
and the lighting type (internal or external) shall be uniform.
(6) Signs may be internally or externally lighted or be unlighted, unless
otherwise stated herein. Signs which are not internally illuminated shall
have their light fixtures and light sources screened from view.
(7) No sign may be brighter than is necessary for clear and adequate visibility.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-8
(8) No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance as to impair the vision of
motor vehicle driver with average eyesight or to otherwise interfere with
the driver’s operation of a motor vehicle.
(9) No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance that it interferes with the
effectiveness of an official traffic sign, device or signal.
(10)All signs that have illumination by a means other than natural light must
be equipped with a mechanism that automatically adjusts the brightness in
response to ambient conditions. These signs must also be equipped with a
means to immediately turn off the display or lighting if it malfunctions,
and the sign owner or operator must immediately turn off the sign or
lighting when notified by the city that it is not complying with the
standards in this section.
(C) Maintenance and Repair:
(1) All sign components shall be kept in a sound structural and attractive
condition, which shall constitute, but not limited to: replacement of
defective, missing, or broken parts, including lighting; periodic cleaning;
maintenance of the display surface to keep it neatly painted or posted at all
times, including the timely removal of obsolete messages; and
maintenance by the owner of the landscaping near the sign to keep it free
and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds.
(2) All legal nonconforming signs are subject to all requirements of this
ordinance regarding safety, maintenance, and repair. Repair of a legal
non-conforming sign is subject to the provisions of Section 208.080.
(D)Area: Except as otherwise provided, the area of a sign shall be calculated by
means of the smallest rectangle that will encompass the extreme limits of the
writing, representation, emblem or other display, together with any material or
color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed,
but not including any supporting framework, base, bracing or decorative fence
or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets the regulations of this
Ordinance and is clearly incidental to the display itself. (See Table 1)
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-9
Table 1
(1) For a single wall on a single-occupant building, all copy and graphics on
that wall shall be measured as though part of one sign, encompassed
within one rectangle, which may not exceed the maximum permitted sign
area.
(2) Where the faces of a double-faced sign are parallel or the interior angle
formed by the faces is 45 degrees or less, only one display face shall be
measured in computing sign area. If the two sides of a double-faced sign
are of unequal size, the area of the sign shall be the area of the larger face.
(3) In all other cases, the areas of all faces of a multi-faced sign shall be added
together to compute the area of the sign.
(D)Sign Height - Freestanding Signs. The vertical distance between the highest
part of the sign structure and the average ground level adjacent to and within
ten feet of the sign base or the grade of the adjoining street, whichever is less.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-10
208.040 Permitted Signs and Sign Standards:
(A) Signs are permitted, subject to area, height and location requirements of this
Ordinance. Provisions of a Comprehensive Sign Plan may deviate from these
requirements.
(1) Signs in PUD Districts shall by regulated by the underlying District
regulations.
(2) Signs for individual residential buildings are limited to Address, Flag,
Political/Opinion, Temporary Real Estate and Seasonal Residential Sales
signs, except as otherwise permitted by this ordinance or as part of an
approved Comprehensive Sign Plan.
(B) Standards, by Sign Type
(1) Address - A sign that displays the numerical street address authorized by
the City for a particular property.
(a) A street address shall be clearly visible (contrasting
number/background colors or reflectorized numbers) from the
adjoining street for each principal structure that has been assigned an
address by the City.
(b) Address signs shall not reduce the permitted sign area for a given
structure/use but must be compatible in size to the building elevation
to which affixed but in no case larger than 10 square feet for
nonresidential or 2 square feet for residential uses.
(2) Business, Temporary
(a) For single tenant buildings less than 50,000 square feet in area and
multi-tenant buildings, such signs may consist of a banner affixed to a
principal structure on the premises not to exceed 32 square feet of
area. For single-tenant buildings 50,000 square feet or greater, such
sign may consist of a banner affixed to the principal structure on the
premises not to exceed 64 square feet.
(b) No more than four temporary business signs shall be allowed per
calendar year, per tenant, and permits for the display of such signs
shall be valid for up to 14 days. All such signs shall be removed from
the premises no more than one working day following the expiration
of the permit.
(c) A minimum period of seven (7) days shall be required between
temporary sign permits issued for a tenant.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-11
(d) No temporary business signs shall be allowed for business located on
property that has a changeable copy sign or message center sign.
(e) All temporary sign messages must relate to a product(s) or service(s)
available on the premises, unless the message is noncommercial.
(f) Any banner sign must be affixed to the principal structure in which the
associated business is located, except as permitted in Section
208.030(A)(2).
(g) No more than 2 temporary signs per tenant shall be displayed at any
one time, unless said sign is associated with a Grand Opening.
(h) Window signage visible outside of the building is permitted only for
commercially zoned property, provided:
(i) It does not exceed 10 percent of the total glass area of the
individual window or door in which displayed.
(ii) Illuminated business signs shall not exceed 5 percent of the total
glass area of the individual window or door area in which
displayed. Said sign area shall be included in the maximum area
permitted as identified in item (i) above.
(i) Help Wanted Signs. Temporary display of help wanted signs is
permitted as following:
(i) The sign is displayed for a period not to exceed 3 months with a
period of one month between signs.
(ii) Only one temporary help wanted sign is permitted per property.
(iii)The temporary help wanted sign shall be set back the greater of 5
feet from all property lines or not less than the setback of the
principal freestanding sign.
(iv) The sign area shall not exceed 32 square feet unless greater area is
approved by the City Manager.
(v) The sign shall not be used for advertising or commercial messages
outside the purposes of employee recruitment.
(j) Sandwich Board Signs. Sandwich Board signs are permitted provided:
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-12
(i) The sign shall not exceed two (2) feet in width and three (3) feet in
height.
(ii) Said sign may have two sign faces.
(iii)Only one sandwich board is allowed per business.
(iv)Said sign shall be located in front of, and within twelve (12) feet of
the main entrance of the business it advertises.
(v) The placement of the sandwich board sign must be such that there
is a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches of unobstructed sidewalk
clearance between it and any other building or obstruction.
(vi)Said sign must be removed from the sidewalk before the close of
business.
(vii) Said sign shall not interfere with pedestrian or traffic safety.
(3) Changeable Copy or Readerboard – Changeable Copy signs are
permitted only when integrated into a freestanding sign. The changeable
copy portion of the sign must be accompanied by the name of the building
or facility displayed in an individual-letter format in letters that dominate
all other names and graphics on said sign. Commercial messages must
advertise only goods and services available on the premises.
(a) In Business Districts, Changeable Copy signs are permitted, provided:
(i) The maximum area of the changeable copy shall not exceed 40-
square-feet of area in a C2, General Commercial, C1, Retail
Service District, and not more than 30-square-feet of area in a
C1A, Limited Retail Service District.
1. Fuel stations may integrate a Gas Price Display sign into a
changeable copy sign, provided:
a. Copy height shall not exceed 16 inches;
b. The Gas Price Display shall not exceed 6 square feet;
c. Electronic copy is limited to numeric characters only;
d. Electronic copy shall be a static display using a single color
and shall not scroll, flash or blink or include animated copy
or graphics.
e. The level of illumination is controlled and limited as
specified in Section 208.040(8)(g).
Rev. Date
2/4/08
Ord. #824
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-13
(ii) Changeable Copy signs shall not be used to display a listing of
tenant names.
(b) In Residential Districts, Changeable Copy signs are permitted only to
display non-commercial or public service announcements when
displayed on the site of an approved public or quasi-public land use,
provided the changeable copy sign does not exceed 30 square feet of
area, unless it faces an arterial roadway, in which case up to 40 square
feet of changeable copy sign area may be permitted.
(4) Civic Event Signs.
(a) The area for such signs shall not exceed 8 square feet when located on
property used for residential purposes and not more than 32 square feet
for any other land use.
(b) Only one such sign is permitted per property unless the site abuts two
or more arterial roadways, than a sign may be displayed adjacent to
each such roadway.
(c) Such signs shall not be posted prior to 30 days in advance of the event
and shall be removed within 2 days following the special occasion.
(5) Construction. A temporary sign placed at a construction site identifying
the project and may include any of the following items of information: the
name(s) of the architect, engineer, contractor, financier, or other involved
parties. Leasing information may be integrated into the sign text.
(a) The face area of such signs shall not exceed 12 square feet for
residential developments and 64 square feet for non-residential uses
and such signs shall extend no higher than twelve feet above the
ground surface.
(b) Only one such sign is permitted per property unless said property
adjoins two or more collector or arterial roadways in which case
identical signs may be displayed along each such roadway.
(c) Such signs shall be removed within seven days of the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for any building on the site or within 2 years
of the date of issuance of the first building permit, whichever is
sooner.
(d) Such signs shall not be posted prior to the development/project
receiving at least preliminary approval from the City Council. Such
signs shall also be removed within one year of installation if a building
permit has not been issued or upon the erection of a leasing sign.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-14
(6) Flag. On-site display of flags is regulated as follows:
(a) All flagpoles shall be setback at least 20 feet from all property lines.
Flagpoles shall not exceed 35 feet in height, unless associated with
structure at least 30 feet in height, in which case flagpoles up to 50 feet
tall may be permitted.
(b) Display of up to three political jurisdiction flags and one flag
representing an authorized on-premises business or organization is
permissible, except in residential districts where one additional flag is
permitted.
(c) Any other display of flags shall require approval of a Comprehensive
Sign Plan.
(7) Incidental. Incidental business signs located outside on a premise shall
comply with the following requirements:
(a) Not to exceed a total of 3 square feet of area, unless integral to and
permanently included within the architectural perimeter of an
approved wall or freestanding sign(s), in which case up to 6 square
feet is permissible.
(b) Signs that give notice of the presence of a property security system are
permissible in all zoning districts, provided the sign face does not
exceed one square foot of area.
(c) Incidental business sign area shall count towards the total amount of
permitted wall signage area.
(8) Message Center. Message Center Signs shall be integrated into a freestanding
sign that is a monument or ground style sign, except as otherwise
permitted for Gas Price Display and Incidental Signs. The non message
center portion of the sign shall include the name of the building or facility.
The name shall be displayed in an individual-letter format in letters that
dominate all other names and graphics on said sign.
(a) General Provisions
(i) Display. The sign message shall be displayed to allow passing
motorists to read the entire copy with minimal distraction. The
minimum display period for any message shall be 8 seconds.
(ii) Audio or pyrotechnics. Audio speakers or any form of
pyrotechnics are prohibited.
Rev. Date
8/19/13
Ord. 911
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-15
(iii) Brightness.
i. Lighting. Lighting shall be set at a minimum level which the
billboard is intended to be read and shielded to minimize glare.
ii. The light level shall not exceed .3 foot candles above ambient
light as measured from a pre-set distance depending on sign
size. Measuring distance shall be determined using the
following equation: the square root of the message center sign
area multiplied by 100. Example: 12 square foot sign
v(12x100) = 34.6 feet measuring distance.
iii.Dimmer control. The sign must have an automatic dimmer
control that automatically adjusts the sign’s brightness in direct
correlation to ambient light conditions. Said sign shall be
equipped with a photo cell designed to measure the ambient
lighting conditions and adjust the sign brightness as needed so
as to be in compliance with this ordinance.
iv.No portion of the message may flash, scroll, twirl, fade in or
out in any manner to imitate movement.
v. Display of messages shall be limited to those services offered
on the property and time/temperature display.
(iv) Message center signs may be permitted as part of an incidental
business sign in accordance with Section 208.040(B)(7).
(v) Only one message center sign, not including those as part of an
incidental business sign, is permitted for each principal structure.
(b) Commercial, Business and Industrial Zoning Districts
(i) Maximum Area. The area of the message center sign shall be
included in the maximum sign area permitted for the sign type.
Message center signs are permitted provided the maximum area
does not exceed the following:
i. C1, Retail Service District, C2, General Commercial District,
OFC, Office District, BPK, Business Park District or the I,
Industrial District: 50% of the total sign area on which it is
displayed or 50 square feet whichever is less.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-16
ii. C1A, Limited Retail Service District: 35% of the total sign
area of the sign on which it is displayed or 30 square feet
whichever is less.
iii.The maximum sign area may be exceeded to comply with the
minimum sign area required.
(ii) Minimum Area. 20 square feet.
(iii) Adjacency to Residential land uses. A Comprehensive Sign Plan
is required for the installation of a message center sign when said
property abuts or is adjacent to property that is established with
residential land uses.
(iv) Location and Orientation. The location and orientation of the sign
shall be placed on the property in a manner that minimizes the
visual impact on adjoining residential properties.
(v) Hours of display. When the sign is located on a parcel adjacent to
a residential land use, said sign shall be turned off and shall not
display messages between the hours of 11:00 pm and 6:00 am.
(c) Residential Zoning Districts
(i) Message Center signs are permitted when displayed on the site of
an approved public or quasi-public land use, with a
Comprehensive Sign Plan.
(ii) Maximum Area. The area of the message center sign shall be
included in the maximum sign area permitted. The area of the
message center shall not exceed 35% of the total sign area for the
sign on which it is displayed or 30 square feet whichever is less.
The maximum sign area may be exceeded to comply with the
minimum sign area required.
(iii) Minimum Area. 20 square feet.
(iv) Location and Orientation. The location and orientation of the sign
shall be placed on the property in a manner that minimizes the
visual impact on adjoining residential properties.
(v) Hours of display. The sign shall be turned off and shall not
display messages between the hours of 11:00 pm and 6:00 am.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-17
(vi) Color. Full color displays are permitted upon the finding that said
display will not have an adverse impact on the adjoining
residential land uses.
(9) Off-Premise Advertising Signs
(a) Residential home sales and seasonal residential sales in accordance
with the standards of Section 208.040(B)(13)(b) and 108.040(B)(14).
(b) Off-premise advertising signs are permitted along high volume
interstate corridors where the City has land use control on each side of
the interstate road right-of-way. As such, said signs may only be
placed along the Interstate 694 Highway Corridor. The intent is to
minimize the impact said signs may have on adjoining communities.
(i) General Standards.
(a) Zoning. Off-premise advertising signs may be permitted on
property zoned I, Industrial, or PUD, Planned Unit
Development with an underlying zone of C2, General
Commercial, provided the standards identified in this ordinance
are met.
(b) Location and setback requirements.
i. Off-premise advertising signs are permitted within onehundred
fifty (150) feet of Interstate 694 right-of-way and
must be oriented to be read from the Interstate Highway.
ii. The minimum lineal distance between Off-premise
advertising signs located on the same side of the Interstate
Highway shall be five-thousand two hundred fifty (5,250)
feet.
iii. The sign structure shall maintain a minimum setback of ten
(10) feet from any property line.
iv. The minimum lineal distance for the sign structure from
any road intersection with the Interstate Highway shall be
one-thousand three-hundred (1,300) feet as measured from
the centerline of the road right-of-way.
v. The minimum setback for the sign structure from any
residential use is five-hundred (500) feet.
Rev. Date
7/15/19
Ord. # 973
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-18
vi. Prior to the issuance of a sign permit, a visual impact
analysis may be required if the City Manager determines
the proposed dynamic display billboard could have a
detrimental visual impact on a residence, residential
neighborhood or obstruct the views of City Park or County
Open Space from properties developed with a residential
use.
(c) Use. Off-premise advertising signs are permitted only on
properties that are vacant and not occupied by another building
or structure.
(d) Size.
i. The maximum gross surface area for each face of an Offpremise
advertising sign shall be seven-hundred (700)
square feet.
ii. Signs may be single or double-faced.
iii.The maximum height of the Off-premise advertising sign
structure shall not exceed fifty (50) feet above the grade
elevation of the Interstate Highway Road surface from
which the sign is to be read, however, said height may be
increased if the sign’s visibility is obstructed by vegetation,
a structure or other objects. In situations where obstructions
are present, the sign height may be increased to thirty (30)
feet above the height of the obstruction. In no case shall the
sign height exceed seventy (70) feet above the grade
elevation unless approved by the City Manager. If
obstructions are present that require a greater sign height, an
increase in sign height may be permitted provided the City
Manager determines said height is needed to view the sign
and practical difficulties are present.
(e) Design Requirements.
i. All visible sign support columns shall be concealed with an
approved architectural treatment primarily consisting of
natural stone, brick, approved masonry panels, stucco or
architectural metal.
ii. Ground equipment and facilities shall be screened from
view using landscape materials.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-19
iii. Dynamic Display Billboards. In addition to the general
standards, Dynamic Display Billboards must comply with
the following:
(a) Message Standards.
i. The images and messages must be static, and the
transition from one static display to another must be
direct and immediate without special effects. Each
image and message displayed must be complete in
itself, and may not continue into a subsequent image
or message. Each image and message shall be
displayed with minimum time duration of eight (8)
seconds before changing to the next image and
message.
ii. Messages shall not be animated, moving, flashing or
scrolling, fade in or out or imitate motion in any
manner.
(b) Brightness.
i. Lighting shall be set at a minimum level necessary to
provide clear viewing from the roadway in which the
billboard is intended to be read and shielded to
minimize glare.
ii. Said sign shall be equipped with a dimmer control
and photo cell designed to measure the ambient
lighting conditions and adjust the sign brightness as
needed.
iii. The light level shall not exceed .3 foot-candles above
the ambient light conditions as measured a horizontal
distance two-hundred fifty (250) feet from the sign
face.
(c) Agreement.
i. If the City approves a permit to install a Dynamic
Display Billboard, the permit holder, property owner
and City shall enter into an agreement that identifies
the terms including but not limited to:
a. Said sign shall display public service
announcements allowing the City the ability, if
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-20
the City chooses to participate, at no cost to the
City, to provide public service messages.
b. Said sign shall be part of the State of
Minnesota’s public safety alert system if said
system is operable and incorporates dynamic
display billboards.
(10) Parks and Open Space.
(a) Freestanding signs:
(i) One unlighted, individual letter-style sign is permitted near each
street access to a park or open space facility. A lighted sign may
be permitted for recreation facilities that frequently have evening
or night time uses, such as the ice arena, provided the property
located in the vicinity of entrance is not designated for residential
use in the City's Land Use Plan.
(ii) Freestanding signs at park/open space entrances shall be limited to
the following items of information: official logo; park/open space
name or sub-area name; type of park, if not evident from the name
(i.e., county, regional, nature interpretative area, etc.); property
address; and, name of the management authority.
(iii)The sign area shall not exceed 15 square feet and the top of the
sign shall not be more than six feet above grade.
(iv) Regional or County park or open space facilities may have one
additional individual letter-style sign located along Interstate
Highway right-of-way, provided it is located on the park or open
space property; it is unlighted; the sign face is an earth-tone color,
such as the brown used by MN/DOT, and does not exceed 32-
square-feet of area; and, the top of the sign is not more than ten
feet off the ground.
(v) Signs located on the interior of the site used to identify various use
areas, facility boundaries, on-site traffic direction, trail use
information, the hours and rules for use of the grounds, etc. are
excluded from regulation.
(b) Athletic Field Fence Panels: Fence panels that contain advertising are
prohibited.
(c) Scoreboards:
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-21
(i) One scoreboard, not to exceed 40 square feet of area, is permitted
per playing field.
(ii) One sponsor panel, not to exceed 12 square feet of area, may be
affixed to the bottom edge of each scoreboard
(11) Political/Opinion Signs. Are permitted, subject to the following:
(a) An unlimited number of political signs may be displayed forty-six (46)
days preceding the election until 10 days after the election.
(b) In accordance with Minnesota State Statute 160.27, no sign is
permitted within the right-of-way of any public street. The signs shall
be located on private property with permission of the owner.
(c) To preserve public safety, a setback of at least six feet from the edge
of any roadway or back of curb is permitted for a sign whose face is
not more than 6 square feet in area or four feet above the ground.
Signs exceeding 4 feet in height or 6 square feet in area shall be
setback at least fourteen feet from edge of a roadway. All signs shall
be setback a minimum of 2 feet from a sidewalk or trail. Signs shall
not interfere with visibility and signs placed on corner lots shall
comply with Section 206.010(B).
(d) Such signs shall not exceed 6 square feet in area, except where such
sign is erected in place of another type of sign permitted at that
location, then it shall be subject to the conditions of that sign type.
(e) Where such signs refer to an election or other specific event, they shall
be removed within ten (10) days after the election or specific event.
(12) Principal Signs, Freestanding.
(a) Each principal structure, excluding individual residential buildings, is
entitled to one freestanding sign, unless stated otherwise in this
Section. Sites that adjoin two or more arterial roadways may have two
freestanding signs.
(b) At least 75 feet of separation shall exist between all freestanding signs.
(c) Freestanding signs shall be located outside of street, drainage,
trail/sidewalk or utility easements and be placed at least five (5) feet
from any property line.
(d) The maximum area of a freestanding sign shall be a function of: 1) the
gross floor area of the principal structure(s) located in the development
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-22
and 2) the style of the sign, according to the Table 2: Freestanding
Sign Dimension Requirements, unless otherwise specified in this
section.
(e) All freestanding signs associated with approved Public/Quasi-Public
uses and residential developments shall be ground or monument-style.
If a sign for such a facility will face property planned for residential
use, the sign area shall not exceed forty (40) square feet and the height
of the sign face shall not exceed six feet.
(f) Freestanding signs may be single or double-faced. If single-faced, and
the backside will be visible, the backside must be constructed of a
material and/or painted to be a neutral color that is compatible with the
principal structure.
(g) If wall signage is not to be installed, the area for any allowable
freestanding sign area may be increased by 25 percent and vice versa
by approval of a Comprehensive Sign Plan.
(h) Advertisement on a freestanding sign for a single or multi-tenant
building shall be limited to the following items of information: the
building/center name, address of the property, and tenant names.
Tenant names may be listed on freestanding business sign for a multitenant
center/development, provided an individual letter-style sign is
used. The building or project name shall be the dominant display on
all freestanding signs.
(i) A maximum of 25% of the sign area may be used for leasing
information, provided the sign copy, graphics, and structure shall be
architecturally designed to accommodate a leasing message within its
perimeter.
(13) Project Identification - identifies the name of a neighborhood or
residential subdivision consisting of at least 20 dwelling units; or a
multiple-family dwelling with 5 or more units; or a commercial, office,
high tech, industrial, or public/quasi-public development consisting of two
(2) or more principal structures. Project Identification signs shall be
limited to the following items of information: development name, site
address, and major tenant names/graphics. The development name must
be dominantly displayed on all project identification signs.
(a) One project identification sign is permitted per development site,
unless the site adjoins two or more arterial roadways. In such instance,
a second project identification sign may be permitted by
Comprehensive Sign Plan approval.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-23
(b) Where permitted, project identification signs shall be limited to the
following items of information: development name, site address, and
major tenant names/graphics. The development name must be
displayed on all project identification signs. If any tenant name(s) is to
be displayed, an individual letter-style sign shall be used.
(c) The area and height of a primary project identification sign shall be
limited as shown in Table 2, except residential developments of 20 or
more units, as below.
(i) Public or Quasi-Public Development: As required in Section
208.040(C)(9)(e).
(ii) Commercial, Office, High Tech, and Industrial Development: As
permitted for monument signs listed in Section 208.040(C)(9).
Gross floor area shall be for the development site.
(iii) Residential developments of 20 or more units shall have a
maximum height of 12 feet and area not to exceed 32 square feet.
(d) Approval of a Comprehensive Sign Plan is required to construct a
project identification sign if there will be any other freestanding signs
on the site, including a second project identification sign. If another
freestanding sign(s) is proposed for a development, it shall be
monument-style and be no larger than 50 percent of the area of the
primary sign and not taller than 10 feet and comply with the sign
dimension requirements as stated in Table 2, Freestanding Sign
Dimension Requirements.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-24
TABLE 2. FREESTANDING SIGN DIMENSION REQUIREMENTS
Individual Letter Style Signs
Gross Floor Area of
Principal Structure
Height (feet) Sign Area (sf)
Monument Pylon Sign Monument Pylon Sign or
Ground Sign
Greater than 100,000 sf 20 Not allowed 150 Not allowed
100,000 to 50,001 sf 20 25 100 60
50,000 to 20,000 sf 16 20 80 50
Less than 20,000 sf 12 20 60 40
TABLE 2. FREESTANDING SIGN DIMENSION REQUIREMENTS
Cabinet Style Signs
Gross Floor Area of
Principal Structure
Height (feet) Sign Area (sf)
Monument Pylon Sign Monument Pylon Sign or
Ground Sign
Greater than 100,000 sf Not allowed Not allowed Not allowed Not allowed
100,000 to 50,001 sf Not allowed Not allowed Not allowed Not allowed
50,000 to 20,000 sf 12 20 60 40
Less than 20,000 sf 10 20 50 30
NOTES:
1) Except for the "greater than 100,000-square-foot" category, the sign area for highwaycommercial
development sites (fuel stations, motels, restaurants) that abut I-694 or I-
35W may be increased up to 2 times and the sign height may be increased up to 50
percent through approval of a Conditional Use Permit or Planned Unit Development.
2) The stated sign heights and areas are maximums for the three largest categories.
Dependent upon the architectural characteristics of a particular development, the City
may require less than maximum permissible area or height.
3) The sign structure shall not exceed 75% of the permitted maximum sign area.
(14) Real Estate signs pertain to the sale, lease, or rental of land and/or
buildings.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-25
(a) Permanent leasing messages may be incorporated into an approved
freestanding sign.
(i) Multiple Dwelling Developments. A leasing message may be
displayed without time limit if incorporated into an authorized
permanent ground or monument sign, provided:
(aa) The sign copy, graphics, and sign structure shall be
architecturally designed to accommodate a leasing message
within its perimeter.
(ab) The area for the leasing message may comprise an area of up
to 25 percent of that allowable for the sign.
(ii) Nonresidential Developments. A leasing message may be
displayed without time limit if incorporated into the permanent
freestanding sign for the particular development, provided:
(aa) The principal freestanding sign (monument, ground, or
pylon) shall be architecturally designed to accommodate a
leasing message within its perimeter.
(ab) The area for the leasing message may comprise an area of
up to 25 percent of that allowable for the sign.
(ac) The area of the leasing message shall proportionately range
between 15 square feet for principal structures with less than
20,000 square feet of floor area and up to 25 square feet for
principal structures with over 100,000 square feet of floor
area.
(b) Real Estate Signs, Temporary. Signs for the lease or sale of property
or building space shall comply with the following rules:
(i) Only one such sign is permitted per property unless the property is
a corner lot abutting a collector or arterial roadway, in which case
a sign may be displayed along each roadway. Said sign(s) shall be
setback at least 3 feet from the edge of any roadway or back of
curb and at least 2 feet from the edge of a sidewalk or trail,
whichever is the greater. Signs shall not be erected between the
pavement or curb and any sidewalk or trail.
(ii) To preserve public safety, on any corner lot, no sign shall be
erected which may cause danger to traffic by obscuring the view,
as required by Section 206.010(B).
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-26
(iii)"For Sale" signs shall be removed within 7 days following the
lease or real estate closing.
(iv) A freestanding or wall sign is permissible provided that the face
area does not exceed 6 square feet for residential property or 32
square feet for non-residential property. In the case of nonresidential
property, the sign face area shall be proportionate to the
principal structure but shall not be required to be less than 15
square feet. Banner-style wall signs may be permitted for multiple
dwelling residential and nonresidential structures in lieu of a
temporary wall sign.
(v) Up to three sign riders are permitted for residential property. No
single rider shall exceed 1.5 square feet in area, nor shall the total
area of all the riders exceed 4.5 square feet.
(vi) Off-site directional signs, other than for an open house, are
prohibited.
(vii)Off-site real estate directional sales signs for an open house are
permissible only when associated with the sale or lease of
individual single, double, and townhouse-style units, provided:
(aa) The sign face area does not exceed 18" x 24" (3 sq. ft.);
(ab) The sign height does not exceed 4 feet in height above the
ground surface;
(ac) Not more than one such sign may be located at any
intersection, except two signs may be located at an
intersection with a collector or arterial street. They may only
be displayed from one hour before until one hour after the
scheduled; and
(ad) They are located at least 2 feet from the edge of any roadway
or back of curb and at least 2 feet from the edge of a sidewalk
or trail.
(15) Seasonal Residential Sales (Garage Sales).
(a) Only one such sign, not to exceed six (6) square feet in area, is
permitted on the premises of the sale.
(b) Said sign shall only be displayed between the hours of 7 a.m. and 8
p.m. on the day(s) of the advertised sale.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-27
(c) Additional off-site directional sales signs are permitted provided they
are:
(i) Freestanding;
(ii) The sign area does not exceed 18" x 24" (3 sq. ft.) in area nor four
feet in height;
(iii)Not more than one such sign may be located at any intersection,
except two signs may be located at an intersection with a collector
or arterial streets. They may only be displayed from one hour
before until one hour after the scheduled; and
(iv) They are located at least 2 feet from the edge of any roadway or
back of curb and at least 2 feet from the edge of a sidewalk or trail.
(v) The sign height does not exceed 3 feet in height above the ground
surface; and
(vi) They are displayed only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. on the day(s) of the advertised sale.
(16) Signature Architecture. If the structure itself is used to convey the
intended commercial identification message, as determined by the City,
the structure is considered a sign and is permitted only as part of
concurrent application, review and approval of a Site and Building Plan
Review and a Comprehensive Sign Plan.
(a) Permitted Wall and Freestanding sign areas may be reduced up to 60
per cent of that otherwise permitted at the discretion of the City. Any
reduction will be generally proportional to the use of colors and
materials integrated into the structure design establishing the business
identification or affiliation.
(b) The City reserves the right to attach conditions to approvals for
Signature Architecture identifying design standards, increased
setbacks and landscape screening to mitigate the visual impact of the
structure.
(17) Transit Amenity Signs. Transit amenity signs are permitted, subject to
the licensing provisions of Section 710.
(18) Wall Signs. Walls signs are not permitted for detached residential uses,
except as otherwise permitted in this code. The following rules shall
apply to wall signs in all Business and Industrial zoning districts:
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-28
(a) One wall sign is permitted per principal structure, unless said structure
faces two or more arterial roadways. In such instance, a second wall
sign may be permitted provided the signs face different arterial
roadways.
(b) The length of a wall sign shall not exceed 20 percent of the length of
the building elevation to which affixed.
(c) Wall sign area shall be permitted as shown in Table 3.
(d) Advertisement on a wall sign shall be limited to the following items of
information: the building/center name, address of the property, tenant
names.
(e) Any lighted portion of a mansard, parapet, fascia, building elevation or
similar structure shall count toward the allowable signage area defined
in Section 208.030(D).
(f) Signs may be affixed to fuel island canopies, or canopy supports, with
approval of a Comprehensive Sign Plan, provided:
(i) Their area, together with any other wall and incidental signage on
the accompanying structure(s), does not exceed the permissible
amount of area for a single wall sign.
(ii) The area shall not exceed 10 percent of the canopy fascia area to
which attached. Any lighted area on the canopy fascia shall count
as sign area.
(g) Wall signs may extend above a roofline only when attached to a
parapet wall or similar structure that is an approved architectural
component of the structure.
(h) Comprehensive Sign Plan approval shall be required from the City
Council for all structures proposed to have more than one wall sign or
a sign band.
(i) Signs affixed to marquees, mansards, canopies, awnings, etc., and to
building elevations shall all be considered wall signs for purposes of
the enforcing this section.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-29
TABLE 3. WALL SIGN DIMENSION REQUIREMENTS
NOTES:
(1) The City reserves the right to require a reduction in the maximum permissible
area, but not to less than 40 square feet, dependent upon the architectural
characteristics of the building, site location, and land use type.
(2) The City reserves the right to require a reduction up to 60 per cent in permitted
area when the building is determined to be Signature Architecture.
208.050 Prohibited Signs.
(A) Rotating or otherwise moving signs.
(B) Roof signs.
(C) Projecting signs.
(D) Portable signs.
(E) Signs and/or posters which are tacked on trees, fences, utility poles, sign
supports, or other similar objects.
(F) Signs painted directly on building, walls, or fences except works of art which
do not contain commercial messages.
Zoning District/Use
Allowed Area
R2, R3, and T 20 sf
Public/Quasi-Public 40 sf
C1A, C1, C2, OFC, BPK, I:
Buildings with less than
50,000 sf in area:
Not to exceed 10% of the area
of the building elevation to
which the sign will be affixed
with a minimum of 20 sf.
Buildings with 50,000 sf or
more in area:
Not to exceed 5% of the area
of the building elevation to
which the sign will be affixed
with a minimum of 40 sf and a
maximum of 500 sf.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-30
(G) Flashing, blinking or animated signs, including but not limited to traveling
lights or any other means not providing constant illumination, except
approved Message Center signs.
(H) Obsolete signs.
(I) Pennants, whirling devices, balloons, inflatable devises and/or other apparatus
resembling the same.
(J) Signs that contain telephone numbers, hours of operation, drive-through
facilities, product names, or logos that are not part of the business's official
name, unless part of an approved incidental sign or part of an official public
service announcement.
(K) Signs that obstruct any window, door, fire escape, stairway, or opening
intended to provide light, air, ingress or egress for any structure.
(L) Signs placed on vehicles or trailers which are parked or located for the
primary purpose of displaying said sign, except such signs attached to buses,
taxis or other vehicles operating during the normal course of business.
(M) Signs which constitute a public nuisance shall not be erected, installed or
otherwise displayed. Such signs shall include, but not be limited to, signs that
contain any indecent or offensive picture or written material or permissible
temporary off-site signs erected without the permission of the property owner.
(N) No sign may be erected or otherwise displayed that by reason of its location,
shape, movement, color, or any other manner interferes with the proper
functioning of a traffic sign or signal, obstructs the vision of pedestrians,
cyclists, or motorists traveling on or entering public streets, or otherwise
constitutes a traffic hazard. All signs shall also comply with the traffic
visibility requirements set forth in Section 206.010(B) (Landscaping and
Screening).
(O) No signage is permitted on outdoor telephone booths, other than to identify
the telephone.
(P) Multi-vision signs.
(Q) Shimmering signs.
(R) Video Display signs.
208.060 Comprehensive Sign Plan. A sign plan for a building and its associated
grounds, a multi-building development site or a multi-tenant building indicating
the number, types, locations, dimensions, materials, and colors of signs proposed.
Rev. Date
2/4/08
Ord. #824
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-31
An approved Plan may vary from the design and dimensional standards set forth
in the Sign Code without approval of a formal variance, provided it would result
in attractive signage that is compatible with the premises and with adjoining
development.
(A) Comprehensive Sign Plan Required. A Comprehensive Sign Plan is
required as stated in this Section when deviations are proposed from the
design and dimensional standards set forth in this Section. Sign permits shall
not be issued for multiple signs of a single type until a Comprehensive Sign
Plan has been approved.
(B) Elements: The Comprehensive Sign Plan review shall consider five
elements that shall govern all signs within the development: location,
materials, size, color and illumination. The Comprehensive Sign Plan
application shall include details, specifications, dimensions, and plans
showing the proposed locations of signs and how such signs conform to the
requirements of this Ordinance. It shall also show the computations of the
maximum total sign area permitted for the site as well as any special
computations regarding additional signs proposed.
(C) Allocation of Wall Sign Space The Plan should show the allocation of
permitted wall sign space among tenants and any general building sign(s).
Where such allocation is not specified in the Plan, the City may issue permits
for wall signs for tenants entrances, in accordance with this Ordinance, in
proportion to the frontage such tenant controls on the applicable wall. The
City will cease to issue permits in such cases when all available wall sign
area has been committed through permits.
(D) Project Identification signs Approval of a Comprehensive Sign Plan is
required to construct a project identification sign if there will be any other
freestanding signs on the site, including a second project identification sign.
If another freestanding sign(s) is proposed for a development, it shall be
monument-style and be no larger than 50 percent of the area of the primary
sign and not taller than 10 feet, unless the primary sign is an individual letter,
monument-style, in which case the second sign may have up to the same area
and height as the primary sign.
208.070 Enforcement.
(A) Inspection Authority: All signs for which a permit is required shall be
subject to inspection by a City official who is hereby authorized to enter
upon any property or premise to ascertain whether the provisions of this
ordinance are being obeyed. Such entrance shall be made during business
hours unless an emergency exists.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-32
(B) Removal of Abandoned or Obsolete Signs: Any sign which no longer
advertises a bona fide business, or a product sold, shall be taken down and
removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the
building or structure upon which sign may be found within 30 days after
written notification from the Building Inspector. Upon failure to comply
with such notice within the time specified in such order, the City Council
may declare the sign to be a public nuisance, remove it, and assess the cost of
removal to the property owner.
(C) Removal of Illegal or Nonconforming Temporary Signs: Such signs shall be
removed by the property owner within 3 days of written notification from the
City. Failure to comply with such notice shall be a misdemeanor. Upon
failure to remove within the time specified in such order, the sign is declared
to be a public nuisance and may be removed by the City.
(D) Removal of Signs in Disrepair: The Building Inspector may order the
removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance with the
maintenance provisions of this ordinance. Upon failure to comply with such
notice within the time specified in such order, the City Council may declare
the sign to be a public nuisance, remove it, and assess the cost of removal to
the property owner.
(E) Separate Violations
(1) Each sign installed, erected or maintained in violation of this Ordinance
shall be considered a separate violation.
(2) Each day a sign is installed, erected or maintained in violation of this
Ordinance shall be considered a separate violation.
(F) Impoundment of Signs on Public Property or Within Public Right-of-Way:
The City may, at any time and without notice, order the impoundment of
signs which have been installed on public property, within a public right-ofway
or within a public easement. The sign owner may retrieve an
impounded sign according to the following rules:
(1) Payment of an Impoundment Release fee. Any subsequent
impoundment(s), within one calendar year, for a particular property or
sign owner will require payment of double the initial impoundment
release fee.
(2) Any impounded sign must be retrieved from the impound area within 30
days of the impoundment or the City will dispose of it. Any cost
incurred by the City for disposal of an impounded sign shall be assessed
to the property owner.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 208. Signs 208-33
(3) The City shall have no obligation to notify a property owner that it has
impounded a sign.
(4) The City may not be held liable for any damage to an impounded sign.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-1
209 Environmental Standards
(A) Purposes. Environmental resources are a valuable asset to the community and
contribute to quality of life. The City recognizes that development has an
impact on these resources and should be managed in a manner that promotes
environmental stewardship. This ordinance establishes environmental
protection measures for the following reasons:
(1) To provide for the regulation of development in sensitive areas so as to
minimize the risk of environmental damage.
(2) To protect private homeowners and governmental units from incurring
high maintenance and repair costs resulting from development on poorly
suited soils.
(3) To ensure that the natural drainage system and flood storage areas are
maintained at a scale adequate to serve development conditions.
(4) To protect wetlands from being altered unnecessarily.
(5) To protect steep sloped areas from being exposed to erosion and
associated problems.
(6) To protect forested areas in so far as practical as a community resource.
(7) To protect and enhance the quality of the City's surface waters and
conserve the economic and natural resource values of the shoreland of
protected waters.
(8) To mitigate the impacts of development on the natural environment.
209.010 General Provisions.
(A) Overview. Uses which, because of the nature of their operation, are
accompanied by an excess of noise, vibration, dust, dirt, smoke, odors,
noxious gases, glare or wastes shall not be permitted. These residual features
shall be considered as "excessive" when they either exceed or deviate from the
limitations set forth in these adopted regulations or those of the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency (MPCA).
(B) Air Quality. Solid or liquid particulates shall not be emitted at any point in
concentrations or amounts exceeding limitations established and adopted by
the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-2
(C) Vibration. No development activity or operation shall at any time cause earth
vibrations perceptible beyond the limits of the site on which the operation is
located.
(D) Wastes.
(1) PCA Regulations. All regulations developed for the control of hazardous
wastes by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency shall apply to activities
taking place within the City.
(2) Sewer. Any premises used for human occupancy shall be provided with a
method of sewage disposal acceptable to and maintained in accordance
with City requirements.
(3) Solid Waste. All solid waste material, debris, refuse or garbage shall be
kept within a completely enclosed building or properly stored in a closed
container designed for such purpose and properly screened.
209.020 Noise.
(A) Definitions. Except as provided in Section 202, words or phrases used in this
section and defined in the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Noise
Pollution Control regulations shall have the meaning given in those
regulations.
(B) Prohibited Noise. No person shall make or cause to be made any distinctly and
loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers
the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety or welfare of any person or
precludes his/her enjoyment of property or affects his/her property's value.
This general prohibition is not limited by the specific restrictions of the
following subdivisions.
(1) Motor Vehicles. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in the City in
violation of the motor vehicle noise limits of the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency.
(2) Horns and Audible Signaling Devices. No person shall sound any
signaling device on any vehicle except as a warning of danger.
(3) Engine Exhausts. No person shall discharge the exhaust or permit the
discharge of exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion
engine, motor boat, motor vehicle or snowmobile except through a muffler
or other device that effectively prevents loud or explosive noises
therefrom and complies with all applicable State laws and regulations.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-3
(4) Defective Vehicles or Loads. No person shall use any vehicle so out of
repair or so loaded as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding,
rattling or other noise.
(5) Sound Amplification Devices. No person shall use or operate or permit
the use or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, paging system, machine or other device for the production or
reproduction of sound in a distinctly and loudly audible manner as to
disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of any person nearby. Operation of
any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or other device between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly
audible at the property line of the structure or building in which it is
located, in the hallway or apartment adjacent, or at a distance of 50 feet if
the source is located outside a structure or building shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this section.
(6) Social Gatherings. No person shall participate in any party or other
gathering of people giving rise to noise which disturbs the peace, quiet or
repose of the occupants of adjoining or other property. When a police
officer determines that a gathering is creating such a noise disturbance, the
officer shall order all persons present, other than the owner or tenant of the
premises where the disturbance is occurring, to disperse immediately. No
person shall refuse to leave after being ordered by a police officer to do so.
Every owner or tenants of such premises who has knowledge of the
disturbance shall cooperate with police officers and shall make every
reasonable effort to see that the disturbance is abated.
(7) Loudspeakers. No person shall operate or permit the use or operation of
any loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other device for the production or
reproduction of sound on a street or other public place for the purpose of
commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any
commercial establishment.
(8) Animals. No person shall keep any animal that disturbs the comfort or
repose of persons in the vicinity by its frequent or continued noise.
(9) Schools, Churches and Hospitals. No person shall create any excessive
noise on a street, alley or public grounds adjacent to any school, institution
of learning, church or hospital when the noise unreasonably interferes with
the working of the institution or disturbs or unduly annoys its occupants or
residents and when conspicuous signs indicate the presence of such
institution.
(C) Hourly Restriction of Certain Operations.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-4
(1) Recreational Vehicles. Except for emergency purposes, no person shall
drive or operate any minibike, snowmobile or other recreational vehicle
not licensed for travel on public highways between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m.
(2) Domestic Power Equipment. No person shall operate a power
lawnmower, power hedge clipper, chain saw, mulcher, garden tiller, edger,
power device for bug eradication, drill or other similar domestic power
maintenance equipment except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m. Snow removal equipment is exempt from this provision.
(3) Refuse Hauling. No person shall collect or remove garbage or refuse in
any residential district except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. on Monday through Saturday.
(4) Construction Activities. No person shall engage in or permit construction
activities involving the use of any kind of electric, diesel or gas-powered
machine or other power equipment except between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. on any weekend or holiday.
(5) Consumer Fireworks. No person shall discharge any consumer firework
except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(D) Receiving Land Use Standards.
(1) Maximum Noise Levels by Receiving Land Use Districts. No person shall
operate or cause or permit to be operated any source of noise in such a
manner as to create a noise level exceeding the limit set in Table 1 for the
receiving land use category specified when measured at or within the
property line of the receiving land use. The limits of the most restrictive
district shall apply at the boundaries between different land use categories.
The determination of land use shall be by its zoned designation.
TABLE 1 - Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use Districts
Day Night
(7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m.) (10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m.)
Land Use Districts L10 L50 L10 L50
Residential 65 60 55 50
Commercial 70 65 70 65
Industrial 80 85 80 75
(2) Exemptions. The levels prescribed in Section 209.020(D)(1) do not apply
to noise originating on public streets and alleys but such noise shall be
subject to other applicable sections of this ordinance.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-5
(E) Air Circulation Devices.
(1) No person shall permanently install or place any air circulation device,
except a window air conditioning unit, in any outdoor location until the
City Manager or his/her designee determines that the device in that
location will comply with the noise level standards prescribed in this
section and issues a permit for the installation. Air circulation devices,
except a window air conditioning unit, shall comply with the following
setback and sound buffering requirements:
(a) Air circulation devices shall be located at least 10 feet from all
property lines.
(b) Air circulation devices shall be located at least 30 feet from an
adjoining residence, except a separation of as little as 20 feet may be
permitted if a sound buffer is provided as approved by the City
Manager or his/her designee.
(c) Sound buffers shall consist of evergreen plantings, a retaining wall,
fence, and/or on-site structure such as a garage or a portion of the
dwelling.
(2) The noise produced by any window unit and by any existing air circulation
device shall be attenuated by means deemed appropriate by the City
Manager or his/her designee, including but not limited to, relocation of
such device if the noise results in or contributes to a violation of this
section.
(F) Exception for Emergency Work. Noise created exclusively in the
performance of emergency work to preserve the public health, safety or
welfare, or in the performance of emergency work necessary to restore a
public service or eliminate a public hazard shall be exempt from the
provisions of this ordinance for a period not to exceed 24 hours after the work
is commenced. Persons responsible for such work shall inform the City
Manager or his/her designee of the need to initiate such work or, if the work is
commenced during non-business hours of the City, at the beginning of
business hours of the first business day thereafter. Any person responsible for
such emergency work shall take all reasonable actions to minimize the amount
of noise.
(G) Enforcement.
(1) Testing Procedures. The City Manager or his/her designee shall adopt
guidelines establishing the test procedures and instrumentation to be used
in enforcing the provisions of this section imposing noise standards. A
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-6
copy of such guidelines shall be kept on file in the office of the City
Manager or his/her designee and shall be available to the public for
reference during office hours. Noise shall be measured on any property
line of the tract on which the operation is located.
(2) Studies. The City Manager or his/her designee shall conduct such
research, monitoring and other studies related to sound as are necessary or
useful in enforcing this ordinance and reducing noise in the City. He/she
shall make such investigations and inspections in accordance with law as
required in applying the provisions of this chapter.
(3) Noise Impact Statements. The City Manager or his/her designee may
require any person applying to the City for a change in zoning
classification or a permit or license for any structure, operation, process,
installation, or alteration or project that may be considered a potential
noise source to submit a noise impact statement in a form acceptable to the
Officer. He/she shall evaluate each such statement and make appropriate
recommendations to the City Council or other agency or officer authorized
to take the action or approve the license or permit applied for.
(4) Notice of Certain Violations. When the City Manager or his/her designee
or the City's law enforcement agency determines that a noise exceeds the
maximum sound level permitted under this section, he shall give written
notice of the violation to the owner or occupant of the premises where the
noise originates and shall order such person to correct or remove each
specified violation.
209.030 Energy Use.
(A) Energy Efficiency. Builders and developers have the responsibility of
designing and constructing new buildings which are energy efficient. They
should demonstrate their programs for incorporating active and passive solar
energy systems in new buildings, installing energy-efficient appliances and
lighting systems, and using exterior landscaping to reduce the energy demands
of new construction.
(B) Solar Orientation and Access.
(1) All new subdivisions and planned unit developments are encouraged to be
designed to accommodate the present or future use of passive and active
solar energy systems with special attention given to street, lot, and
building orientations.
(2) All new buildings are encouraged to be designed and fitted to permit the
addition or conversion of the hot water heating system to solar energy.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-7
209.040 Soils, Slopes, Grading, and Erosion and Sediment Control.
(A) Overview. The standards specified herein are intended to be used by all
property owners, contractors and developers who perform land disturbing
activity. All development activity, regardless of if the disturbance is subject
shall conform to the standards of this chapter to provide protection from soil
erosion, pollution, impaired surface water, and degradation of the natural
resources of the City. Plans for all development activity must account for
soil types and slopes. While corrections may be possible to permit
development of land characterized by unsuitable soils or steep slopes, care
must be taken to protect vegetative cover on the site and to insure there are
no adverse impacts to nearly lands.
(B) Definitions of terms used in this Chapter:
(1) Land disturbance activity is any land change that may result in soil erosion
from water or wind and the movement of sediments into or upon waters or
lands within the City, including construction, clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land.
(2) Erosion control refers to methods employed to prevent erosion. Examples
include soil stabilization practices, horizontal slope grading, temporary or
permanent cover, and construction phasing.
(3) Permanent controls are long-term methods employed to prevent erosion
and sedimentation. Examples of such protection are swales, ponds,
sediment basins, turf reinforcement mats, storm sewer systems, and riprap.
(4) Temporary controls are short-term methods employed to prevent erosion
and sedimentation. Examples of such protection are silt fence, temporary
sediment basins, check dams, straw, mulch, erosion control blankets,
wood chips and erosion netting.
(5) Best Management Practices (BMPs) are methods for stormwater
management that minimize the amount of runoff that occurs from a site
and prevents pollution from running off. These represent a combination of
land use, conservation practices and management techniques that result in
an acceptable level of water quality and pollution prevention consistent
with the City’s NPDES and Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
(SWPPP) permits.
(6) The Urban Small Sites Manual is the most current version of the manual,
prepared for the Metropolitan Council by Barr Engineering Company.
(7) Final stabilization means that all soil disturbing activities on the site or
common plan of development have been completed, and that a uniform
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-8
(evenly distributed, e.g., without large bare areas) perennial vegetative
cover with a density of at least 80 percent of the cover for unpaved areas
and areas not covered by permanent structures has been established, or
equivalent permanent stabilization measures have been employed, and that
all temporary erosion control devices are removed, including silt fence,
temporary sedimentation basins, and temporary standpipes. Simply
sowing grass seed and/or mulch is not considered final stabilization. Final
stabilization of a “common plan of development” includes completion of
building or home construction along with final restoration of all yards and
adjacent drainage ways.
(8) Rough grade is the stage at which the grade and elevation approximately
conforms to the approved plan.
(9) Finish grade is the final grade of the site that conforms to the approved
plan within 0.2 feet of the approved elevations.
(C) General Development Standards. The following standards apply to all
development.
(1) That all provisions necessary for management of the flood plain, surface
waters and stormwater, as determined by City ordinances and those of
other agencies having jurisdiction, have been met.
(2) That the principles of Best Management Practices (BMPs), as presented in
the Urban Small Sites Manual, are incorporated into the development and
reflected in the Development contract to insure all soil reclamation
provisions are strictly monitored and enforced by the City.
(3) That a reasonable effort has been made to preserve the natural vegetation
and that appropriate measures are taken to prevent shade tree disease
transmission.
(4) That all temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control BMPs
utilized on the development site meet the objectives of the Urban Small
Sites Manual and have been incorporated into the development contract,
and that slope stabilization is specifically addressed within the review
process.
(D) Soils and Slopes. No development shall be permitted on poorly drained soils,
somewhat poorly drained soils, very shallow soils, soils with high shrinkswell
or frost potential or very steep or steep sloped, as defined by the Soil
Survey of Washington and Ramsey Counties, and in State Statutes and Rules,
unless the applicant provides plans designed by an engineer licensed by the
State of Minnesota demonstrating that the soil stabilization and construction
techniques are consistent with accepted engineering practice, as determined by
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-9
the City Manager. Long term maintenance practices shall be specified in the
engineered plans. These regulations shall not prohibit earth sheltered
construction, as defined in State Statute.
(E) Soil Stabilization.
(1) Minimal Erosion. Development activities shall be conducted and staged
to minimize soil erosion by:
(a) Keeping disturbed areas small.
(b) Stabilizing and protecting disturbed areas as soon as possible.
(c) Keeping storm water rate of runoff no greater than what it was before
development.
(d) Protecting disturbed areas from storm water runoff.
(e) Controlling, reducing or delaying storm water runoff.
(f) Retaining sediment within the site area.
(2) Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. The developer shall prepare an
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, which shall define the temporary and
permanent BMPs that will be implemented and maintained on the
development site to protect surrounding property, and surface waters from
the consequences of soil erosion resulting from grading and site
development. The City Manager shall review the Erosion and Sediment
Control Plan for compliance with the BMPs specified in the Urban Small
Sites Manual.
(a) The storm water pollution prevention plan shall consist of three
components: a temporary erosion and sediment control plan, a
permanent erosion and sediment control plan, and a narrative.
i. A temporary erosion and sediment control plan shall be provided
that indicates the location of perimeter controls, construction fence,
temporary sedimentation basins, inlet protection, areas to be
seeded, areas to be mulched or blanketed and all other required
temporary erosion and sediment control measures. This plan shall
also indicate staging of temporary erosion control measures.
ii. A permanent erosion and sediment control plan shall be provided
that indicates areas to be seeded and sodded, sediment ponds,
storm sewer systems and all other required permanent erosion and
sediment control measures. Permanent storm water pollution
controls including, but not limited to ponds, vegetated buffers, rain
gardens or other infiltration areas, and structural measures shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with standards specified in
the City Code and the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, as well as
the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-10
iii. A narrative shall be provided that describes at a minimum, the
nature of construction activity, person(s) responsible for inspection
and maintenance of site erosion and sediment control including
contact information, project phasing, schedules, along with the
timing, installation and maintenance of erosion and sediment
control measures and specifications necessary to carry out the
project.
(3) New Vegetation. For all development where land disturbance activity
occurs, the permanent new landscaped vegetation must be established
within fourteen (14) days after work is completed from the date of
certificate of occupancy issuance, or upon completion of approved project.
If development is completed during winter (November 15th to April 15th,
permanent vegetation shall be established by May 15th. An extension may
be granted by the City Manager because for weather-related delays. The
City Council may grant an extension if the delay is for any other reason.
Temporary soil stabilization techniques or temporary vegetation shall be
established and maintained on the site per the approved plan until work to
establish the permanent vegetation commences.
(F) Grading Standards. Land disturbance activity shall be controlled in
accordance with the following criteria:
(1) The smallest amount of bare ground shall be exposed for as short a time
as feasible.
(2) Temporary ground cover, shall be as specified in the Erosion and
Sediment Control Plan and permanent vegetative cover, such as sod, shall
be provided. Temporary and permanent vegetation shall be maintained in
compliance with all applicable requirements of the Municipal Code.
(3) Methods to prevent erosion and trap sediment shall be employed.
(4) Fill shall be stabilized to accepted engineering standards.
(5) All fill and grading activity shall comply with all other standards of the
City’s Development Ordinance.
(6) All fill and grading activity shall comply with the performance standards
set forth in Minnesota Statutes 307.08, Private Cemeteries Act.
(7) Slope. The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the
intended use and shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical,
for a short term interim period, unless the owner furnishes appropriate
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-11
soils engineering. Unless specifically approved, permanent slopes shall
be no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
(G) Erosion and Sediment Control Standards.
(1) Generally. All sites with land disturbing activities shall be prepared and
maintained to control against erosion as set forth in this chapter.
(a) Erosion and sediment control. Temporary and permanent erosion
and sediment control measures shall be installed and maintained on
all sites in conformance to the approved plan and as necessary to
prevent erosion and sedimentation from impacting any adjacent
property, rights-of-way, drainage system, lake, pond, wetland,
watercourse, natural resource or other protected area.
(b) Implementation of storm water pollution prevention plan. All
erosion and sediment control measures will be operational prior to
the start of any land disturbing activity as specified in the erosion
and sediment control plan, construction plans and specifications, or
as deemed necessary by the City based on actual site conditions.
(c) Inspection. Inspection of the BMP measures shall be carried out by
the developer as required in the permit approval, but at a minimum
shall be inspected at least once a week and after rainfalls of more
than 0.5-inches in a 24-hour period.
(d) Maintenance. All erosion and sediment control measures will be
maintained throughout the duration of the project. Deficiencies
found through inspection of a site shall be promptly repaired as
necessary to bring the site into conformance with the approved plan
and City requirements. At minimum, BMPs shall be maintained as
follows:
(i) If a perimeter erosion control device is found to have sediment
accumulation in excess of one third of the total device height, the
sediment shall be cleaned and the device repaired within 24
hours of discovery.
(ii) If an erosion control device is found to be nonfunctional, it shall
be repaired or replaced within 24 hours of discovery.
(iii)Temporary sediment basins shall be maintained when sediment
reaches one half the outlet height or one half the storage volume
within 72 hours after discovery.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-12
(iv) Additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be
installed as directed by the City Manager as found necessary to
protect life and limb, the environment, properties or the stability
of a property until final stabilization has been achieved.
(e) Required Record Keeping. The developer shall keep records of
inspection dates, site conditions, rainfall events and maintenance
work performed. Inspection reports shall include, at a minimum,
date and time of inspection, name of person conducting inspection,
findings of inspection including any recommended corrective
actions, corrective actions taken since previous inspection, and the
date and amount of rainfall events of 0.5-inches or greater. The
required records and approved plans shall be open to inspection by
the City during all municipal working hours.
(f) Dewatering and Basin Draining. Dewatering and basin draining
related to construction activity that may have turbid or sediment
laden water must be discharged to a temporary or permanent
sedimentation pond on the project site. All water that leaves the site
must be treated with the appropriate BMPs such that the discharge
water is clear and does not adversely affect the receiving water or
downstream landowners. Turbid or sediment laden discharge water
shall not be discharged into any stormwater conveyance system or
water body.
(g) Construction Site Waste. The site shall be maintained in a clean and
orderly manner. Waste shall be recycled when possible and stored
on the site in appropriate waste and recycling containers, collected
regularly, and disposed of properly, in conformance with the
regulations of the City and requirements of the MPCA.
(i) Solid Waste: Collected sediment, asphalt and concrete millings,
floating debris, paper, plastic, fabric, construction and
demolition debris and other wastes must be stored and disposed
of properly.
(ii) Hazardous Wastes: Oils, gasoline, paint, and any other
hazardous substances must be properly stored to prevent spills,
leaks, or other discharge. Storage and disposal of hazardous
wastes shall comply with MPCA requirements. Truck and
Concrete Washing: When feasible, truck washout should occur
at the concrete plant. When washout is needed on the
construction site a concrete washout area shall be used and
contain the following components:
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-13
1. Signage identifying where concrete washout should be
performed.
2. A rock entrance to prevent sediment tracking.
3. A containment area utilizing appropriate BMPs for
concrete washout facilities, as identified by the MPCA.
BMPs include, but are not limited to, manufactured
watertight washout containers or a plastic-lined
containment area such as a holding pit, bermed basin, rolloff
bin, or portable tank. The plastic liner shall be a
minimum of 10-mil thick and leak free. The containment
area shall be inspected daily to insure the sidewalls are
intact, leaks are absent, and adequate capacity remains.
Washout facilities must be cleaned, or new facilities
constructed and ready to use, once the washout container is
75% full. If stored liquids have not evaporated when 75%
capacity is reached, vacuum and dispose of the liquid in
accordance with MPCA requirements. Hardened solids
shall be disposed of as per the regulations of the MPCA.
(H) Shoreland Management. In addition to the regulations stated in this Section,
development activities on riparian lots having frontage on Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) classified protected waters are
subject to the provisions of 209.080(G) (Shoreland Management).
(I) Enforcement and Penalty. This ordinance shall be administered and
enforced by the City Manager, as specified in Section 203.010(D). Any
person, firm or corporation, who violates or refuses to comply with any of
the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day
that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Violations may result in issuance of a stop work order for the entire project
or any portion thereof, no inspections shall be performed by the City, and
the City will withhold issuance of any and all Certificates of Occupancy
until conditions on the site comply with the provisions of this Code.
209.050 Vegetation & Woodlands.
(A) Preservation. Vegetation shall be left intact to the maximum extent possible
to retard surface run-off and soil erosion, to utilize excess nutrients, and to
conserve nutrients in the soil and to preserve shoreland aesthetics.
(B) Removal. The removal of vegetation shall be controlled in accordance with
the following criteria:
(1) All Properties.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-14
(a) Vegetation shall be restored during and after all construction projects
that require a building permit to retard surface runoff and soil erosion
in accordance with Section 209.040(D), Soil Stabilization.
(b) Development shall be conducted so that the maximum number of
trees, in particular landmark trees, are preserved by the clustering of
structures in existing cleared areas and natural clearings, and the
utilization of other site design techniques. Design of the site and
construction activities shall be conducted in a manner to avoid likely
injury to Landmark Trees.
(c) The developer shall remove seriously damaged, diseased or dead trees.
(2) New Development. All private-sector development proposals that involve
the construction of a public street or private road and for all new nonsingle
dwelling developments:
(a) The Tree Preservation Plan. A tree preservation plan shall be
submitted. This plan shall identify the trees to be preserved on the site
and the methods to be employed to insure that the identified trees are
not damaged during construction. These methods must be acceptable
to the City.
(b) A Tree Replanting Plan, acceptable to the City, shall be submitted.
This plan shall provide for at least a one-for-one replacement, up to a
maximum of 15 trees per acre, for any healthy tree(s) in excess of 4
inches in diameter, except the replacement threshold for boxelder,
cottonwood, and willow trees shall be eight inches of diameter and
except as required elsewhere in this Section for landmark trees. The
replacement trees shall comply with the standards in Section
206.010(J). Trees preserved on the site shall count toward the 15 trees
per acre maximum replacement requirement, except any trees required
to be replaced to compensate for the removal of a landmark tree
[Section 209.050(B)(2)(c)] shall be in addition to the requirements of
this section.
(c) Landmark Trees.
(i) Landmark Trees Not Located Within a Shore or Bluff Impact
Zone. Landmark trees shall not be removed unless authorized by
the City. Such authorization shall not be granted unless:
(aa) A finding is made that the presence of the tree(s) unreasonably
inhibits practical use of a property, the tree(s) is diseased, or it
presents a public safety hazard.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-15
(bb) A responsible party (property owner, developer, or city in the
case of a public improvement, etc.) agrees to plant six (6) trees
of a species and location acceptable to the City for each
healthy landmark tree removed. The size of the new trees
shall comply with the standards set forth in the Section
206.010(J) for new construction. If space is not available on
the development site, the replacement trees shall be planted
elsewhere in the community, as is acceptable to the City
Council.
(ii) Landmark Trees Located Within a Shore or Bluff Impact Zone.
See Section 209.050(B)(4).
(3) Single Family Residential.
(a) Single family residential development. Single family residential
development is defined as any activity that requires a building permit
or land use approval including but not limited to variance, conditional
use permit, subdivision, or rezoning.
(i) Landmark Trees Not Located Within a Shore or Bluff Impact
Zone. Landmark trees shall not be removed unless authorized by
the City. Such authorization shall not be granted unless:
(aa) A finding is made that the presence of the tree(s) unreasonably
inhibits practical use of a property, the tree(s) is diseased, or it
presents a public safety hazard.
(bb) A responsible party (property owner, developer, or city in the
case of a public improvement, etc.) agrees to replace each
healthy landmark tree removed with trees of a species and
location acceptable to the City at the ratio below. The size of
the new trees shall comply with the standards set forth in
Section 206.010(J) for new construction. If space is not
available on the development site, the replacement trees shall
be planted elsewhere in the community, as is acceptable to the
City Council.
Lot Area Replacement Trees
(replacement/landmark)
Less than 20,000 sf 1:1
20,001 to 40,000 sf 2:1
40,001 and more 3:1
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-16
(ii) Landmark Trees Located Within a Shore or Bluff Impact Zone.
See Section 209.050(B)(4).
(aa) Existing Single Family Residential. Lots on which a single
family residential home was constructed prior to the effective
date of this ordinance are not subject to the replacement
requirements for landmark trees unless development as
defined in Section 209.050(B)(3)(a) is occurring.
(4) Shoreland Management. In addition to the regulations stated in this
Section, development activities on riparian lots having frontage on
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources (DNR) classified protected
waters are subject to the provisions of 209.080(h) (Shoreland
Management).
(5) Public Improvement Projects. For public street reconstruction and other
public improvement projects, the following tree replacement standards
shall apply:
(a) A minimum of one-for-one replacement for any tree in excess of 4
inches of diameter that is to be removed as a result of the construction
activity.
(b) The replacement tree species, size, and location shall be negotiated
between the City and the property owner.
(6) Aquatic Vegetation.
(a) Vegetation located at or below the OHW elevation of a protected
water shall not be removed unless a permit is obtained from the
Department of Natural Resources.
(b) Vegetation located at or below the Regional Flood elevation for a
wetland shall not be removed unless permission is granted by the City
Manager or his/her designee.
(7) Public Drainage Easements. No person shall remove, cut, trim, or
otherwise disturb terrestrial vegetation located within a drainage easement
which adjoins a wetland unless authorized by the City Manager or his/her
designee.
(8) Any disagreement regarding the enforcement of the rules set forth in
Section 209.050(B) shall be presented to the Planning Commission for
recommendation and to the City Council for a final decision.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-17
(9) In addition to or in lieu of remedies permitted by state law for the violation
of a Development Ordinance, the City may require a violator of any
requirement in Section 209.050(B) to plant up to eight trees within the
community or pay a fine equivalent to the cost of purchasing up to eight
replacement trees for each violation.
(C) Shade Tree Management.
(1) Declaration of Policy and Intent.
(a) Policy. The City Council has determined that the health of shade trees
within the City is threatened by fatal tree diseases and Plant Pests such
as Dutch Elm and Oak Wilt diseases, the Emerald Ash Borer, and
other invasive species or forest pests. It has further determined that
the loss of shade trees growing upon public and private property would
substantially depreciate the value of property within the City and
impair the safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of the
public. It is declared to be the intention of the City Council to control
and prevent the spread of these diseases and other epidemic diseases or
Plant Pests of shade trees, and this ordinance is enacted for that
purpose.
(b) Intent. It is the intent of the City Council to implement a local pest
control program, a shade tree disease control program, and to
cooperate with the Commissioners of the Department of Natural
Resources and Agriculture in accordance with Minn. Stat. §§ 18G,
89.001, 89.01 and 89.51-.64 as amended. The City Manager shall act
as coordinator between the Commissioner of Agriculture and Natural
Resources and the City Council in the conduct of these programs.
(2) Inspection and Investigation.
(a) Inspection. The City Manager shall inspect public and private yards
which might harbor Plant Pests, as defined in Minnesota Statutes
Section 18G.02, Subd. 24, as hereafter amended, to determine whether
a public nuisance exists thereon. He/she shall investigate all reported
incidents of infection or infestation by the Dutch Elm fungus, elm bark
beetles, Oak Wilt fungus, Emerald Ash Borer, or any other epidemic
plant diseases or Plant Pests of shade trees.
(b) Entry on Public and Private Yards. The City Manager may enter upon
all public and private yards at any reasonable time for the purpose of
carrying out any of the duties assigned herein. The term "private yard"
means yards, as defined herein, and does not include the interior of any
structure.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-18
(c) Diagnosis. The City Manager shall identify diseased trees in a manner
consistent with Minnesota Department of Agriculture and Natural
Resources guidelines, including but not limited to visual inspection,
branch removal, bark shaving, and any other acceptable diagnosis
methods. Laboratory confirmation by the Minnesota Department of
Agriculture or other relevant state agency will be used when it is
deemed necessary by the City Manager.
(3) Shade Tree Nuisance Declared. All trees, firewood, or stumps with or
without bark intact that are infected or infested by a shade tree disease or
Plant Pest on public or private yards.
(4) Transporting Diseased Wood. Loads must be properly secured so that
twigs, branches and other debris are not lost while in route.
(a) The transportation of diseased trees and firewood as defined under this
chapter shall be confined in accordance with the rules, regulations, or
quarantine area(s) defined or identified by the Minnesota Department
of Agriculture and Natural Resources.
(b) Disposal of all ash wood shall be carried out in accordance with the
City’s adopted Emerald Ash Borer Management Plan.
(5) Interference Prohibited. No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with
the City Manager or his/her designee while they are engaged in the
performance of duties set forth in this chapter.
(D) Nutrient Management.
(1) Purpose. The City has conducted studies and has reviewed existing data
to determine the current and projected water quality of various lakes
within its community. The data indicates that lake water quality may be
maintained and improved if the City is able to regulate the amount of lawn
fertilizer and other nutrients entering the lakes as a result of storm water
runoff or other causes. The purpose of this ordinance is to define
regulations which will aid the City in maintaining and improving lake
resources which are enjoyed by its residents and other users.
(2) License Required. No person, firm, corporation or franchisee shall engage
in the business of commercial lawn fertilizer application within the City
unless a license has been obtained from the City Manager as provided in
Section 705.
(3) Regulations for Property Owners.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-19
(a) Random Sampling. Upon the City's request, the property owner shall
provide the City with samples of lawn fertilizer to be applied by
property owners. The quantity of the sample shall be large enough to
permit laboratory testing.
(b) Use of Impervious Surfaces. Property owners shall not deposit leaves
or other vegetative materials on impervious surfaces or within storm
water drainage systems or natural drainage ways.
(c) Unimproved Land Areas. Except for driveways, sidewalks, patios,
areas occupied by structures, or areas which have been improved by
landscaping, all land areas shall be covered by plants or vegetative
growth.
(4) General Regulations.
(a) Time of Application. Lawn fertilizer applications shall not be applied
when the ground is frozen or between November 15 and April 15 of
the succeeding year.
(b) Sample Analysis Cost. The cost of analyzing fertilizer samples taken
from commercial applicators or property owners shall be paid by the
commercial applicators or property owners if the sample analysis
indicates that the phosphorus content exceeds the levels authorized
herein.
(c) Fertilizer Content. No person, firm, corporation or franchise, shall
apply fertilizer within the City of Shoreview which contains
phosphorus.
(d) Impervious Surfaces and Drainage Ways. No person shall apply
fertilizer to impervious surfaces, or to the areas within drainage ditches
or waterways.
(e) Buffer Zone. Fertilizer applications shall not be made within ten feet
of any wetland or water resource.
(f) Waterfowl. No person shall place feed for waterfowl on, in or within
50 feet of a wetland, pond, lake or water resource.
(5) Exemptions.
(a) Newly established turf areas shall not be limited by this ordinance on
the quantity of phosphorus for the first growing season.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-20
(b) The use of phosphorus on golf courses is permitted under the direction
of an applicator certified by an organization approved by the
Commissioner of Agriculture.
(c) These exemptions are subject to the recommended rates established by
the University of Minnesota and the Commissioner of Agriculture.
(E) Warning Signs for Pesticide Application. All commercial or noncommercial
applicators who apply pesticides to turf areas must post or affix warning signs
to the property where the pesticides are applied. The warning signs shall
comply with the following criteria and contain the following information:
(1) The warning signs must project at least 18 inches above the top of the
grass line. The warning signs must be of a material that is rain resistant
for at least a 48-hour period and must remain in place up to 48 hours from
the time of initial application.
(2) The following information must be printed on the warning signs in
contrasting colors and capitalized letters measuring at least 1/2 inch, or in
another format approved by the Minnesota Commissioner of Agriculture.
The signs must provide the following information:
(a) The name of the business, entity, or person applying the pesticide; and
(b) The following language: "This area chemically treated. Keep children
and pets off until (date of safe entry)" or a universally accepted symbol
and text approved by the Minnesota Commissioner of Agriculture as
recognized as having the same meaning or intent. The warning signs
may include the name of the pesticide used.
(3) The warning signs must be posted on a lawn or yard between two feet and
five feet from the sidewalk or street. For parks, golf courses, athletic
fields, playgrounds or other similar recreational property, the warning
signs must be posted immediately adjacent to areas within the property
where pesticides have been applied or at or near the entrances to the
property.
209.060 Storm Water Management. All development within the City shall comply with
the policies set forth in the City's Surface Water Management Plan.
(A) Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide for the health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City through the
regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system,
as required by federal and state law. This Section establishes
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-21
regulations for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) in order to comply
with requirements of the MS4 permit issued to the City of Shoreview
by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) under the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit
process. The objectives of this Section are:
(a) To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by
stormwater discharges by any user.
(b) To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4.
(c) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, and
enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with
this Section.
(2) Compatibility with Other Regulations. This section is not intended to
modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other
provision of law. The requirements of this section are in addition to the
requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other
provision of law, and where any provision of this Section imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule,
regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more
restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or
the environment shall control.
(3) Ultimate Responsibility. The standards set forth herein and
promulgated pursuant to this section are minimum standards; therefore
this section does not intend to imply that compliance by any person
will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or
unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(4) Discharge Prohibitions.
(a) Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall throw, drain,
or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control
to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the MS4 or storm
drainage system any pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants, other than stormwater. The commencement,
conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm
drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
The following discharges are exempt from discharge
prohibitions established by this section:
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-22
(i) Water line flushing, discharges from potable water
sources, foundation drains, air conditioning
condensation, irrigation water, individual residential car
washing, and street wash water, provided such exempt
discharges flow over a vegetated area to allow filtering
of pollutants, evaporation of chemicals, and infiltration
of water consistent with the stormwater requirements of
the City.
(ii) Discharge of swimming pools subject to Section
205.080(6)(f), crawl spaces, sump pumps, footing
drains, and other sources that may be determined to
contain sediment or other forms of pollutants may not
be discharged directly to a gutter or storm sewer.
(iii) Discharges or flow from firefighting and other
discharges specified by the City of Shoreview as being
necessary to protect public health and safety.
(iv) Discharges associated with dye testing, however dye
testing requires a notification to the City prior to the
test.
(v) The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater
discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or
waste discharge order issued to the discharger and
administered under the authority of the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency (MPCA), provided that the
discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of
the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws
and regulations. Written approval of the City is
required for any discharge to the storm drain system or
MS4.
(b) Prohibition of Illicit Connections.
(i) The construction, use, maintenance or continued
existence of illicit connections to the storm drain
system or MS4 is prohibited.
(aa) This prohibition includes all illicit connections
made prior to the adoption of this ordinance
regardless of whether said connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time of connection.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-23
(bb) A person is in violation of Section 209.060 if
the person connects a line conveying sewage to
the storm drain system or the MS4, or allows
such a connection to continue.
(ii) Existing illicit connections must be disconnected and
redirected to an approved onsite wastewater
management system or the sanitary sewer system,
subject to permitting and approval by the City of
Shoreview.
(iii) Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented
in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be
connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located
by the owner or occupant of that property upon written
notice from the City. Such notice shall specify a
reasonable time period for locating to be completed.
As-built locations shall be provided to the City.
(5) Right of Entry. The City shall be permitted to enter and inspect
private systems that connect to the MS4 or storm drainage system as
may be necessary to determine compliance with this section.
(6) Violations. In addition to the penalties established pursuant to Section
101.040 of the Municipal Code, illicit discharge may result in other
penalties, including:
(a) Emergency cease and desist orders. When the City finds that
any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision
of this Section, or any order issued hereunder, or that the
person’s past violations are likely to recur, and that the
person’s violation(s) has (have) caused or contributed to an
actual or threatened discharge to the storm drain system, the
MS4, or waters of the state which reasonably appears to
present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health
or welfare of persons or to the environment, the City may issue
an order to immediately cease and desist all such violations.
(b) Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this Section may have
their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or
reduce an illicit discharge. Such suspension may also be
imposed if it is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents imminent and substantial danger.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-24
(7) Remedies Not Exclusive. The remedies listed in this Section are not
exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal,
state or local law and it is within the discretion of the City to seek
cumulative remedies. The City may recover all attorneys’ fees, court
costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this Section,
including sampling and monitoring expenses.
(B) Private Stormwater Management
(1) All stormwater best management practices shall be designed in a manner
to minimize the need for maintenance and reduce the chances of failure.
(2) Stormwater easements and covenants shall be provided by the property
owner for access for facility inspections and maintenance. Easements
and covenants shall be recorded with Ramsey County prior to the
issuance of a permit.
(3) Maintenance.
(a) All stormwater best management practices shall be maintained
according to the measures outlined in accordance with the City’s
Surface Water Management Plan.
(b) The person(s) or organization(s) responsible for maintenance shall be
designated in the Development Agreement. The property owner(s)
shall be responsible for maintenance if the Development Agreement
does not designate a party.
(c) The financial responsibilities for such maintenance shall be specified
in the Development Agreements and be included in deed restrictions or
other contractual agreements as approved by the City.
(d) Non-routine Maintenance. Non-routine maintenance includes
maintenance activities are those infrequent activities needed to
maintain the ponding areas and/or stormwater infrastructure so that it
functions in accordance with the approved plans and specifications.
Examples of such activities include pond dredging or major repairs to
stormwater structures.
(i) Nonroutine maintenance shall be performed on an as-needed basis
based on information gathered during regular inspections.
(ii) If nonroutine maintenance activities are not completed in a timely
manner or as specified in the approved plan, then the City may
complete the necessary maintenance at the owner’s/operator’s
expense.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-25
(4) Inspections. The person(s) or organization(s) responsible for maintenance
shall inspect stormwater best management practices on a regular basis, as
outlined in the Development Agreement or as required by the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency.
(a) Authorized representatives of the City may enter at reasonable times
to conduct on-site inspections or routine maintenance.
(b) For best management practices maintained by the property owner or
homeowner’s association, inspection and maintenance reports shall be
filed with the City as provided for in the Development Agreement.
(c) Authorized representatives of the City may conduct inspections to
confirm the information in the maintenance reports.
209.065 Surface Water Management. Development shall generally conform to the
guidelines adopted in the current Surface Water Management Plan (SWMP).
(1) Strict compliance with the minimum building elevations (MBE) as specified
in the SWMP for property that is not located in the FF, FW or GF Districts.
(2) Wetland buffers may be required by the City to meet the intent of the SWMP.
A 16.5 foot buffer width is the minimum necessary to protect surface water
wetlands from adverse development impacts. Deviation from this requirement
may be approved during the applicable land use approval, including but not
limited to Site and Building Plan Review, Subdivision, or Planned Unit
Development.
209.070 Wetlands. Utilization of protected wetland areas within the City shall be
governed by Department of Natural Resources regulations. During construction,
wetlands and other water bodies shall not be used as sediment traps.
209.080 Shoreland Management.
(A) Classification. In order to guide the development and utilization of the
shorelands of protected waters for the preservation of water quality, natural
characteristics, economic values and the general health, safety and welfare,
certain protected waters in the City have been given a shoreland management
classification. These protected waters in the City have been classified by the
Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and
shown on the Ramsey County Protected Waters Inventory map as follows:
(1) Natural Environmental Waters:
(a) 62-44 Poplar Lake
Rev.
4/19/10
Ord. #864
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-26
(b) 62-74 Grass Lake
(2) General Development Waters:
(a) 62-21Turtle Lake
(b) 62-82 Wabasso Lake
(c) 62-64 Martha Lake
(d) 62-56 Owasso Lake
(e) 62-75 Island Lake
(f) 62-73 Snail Lake
(g) 62-81 Judy Lake
(h) N/A Rice Creek
(i) 62-80 Emily Lake
(j) Unnamed Stream from Turtle Lake (62-61) to Marsden Lake (62-59)
(B) Purpose. The Shoreland Management Area is a component of the
Environmental Overlay Zoning District as illustrated on the City of
Shoreview's Zoning Map. Shoreland management regulations pertaining to
such items as minimum lot size, structure placement, and alteration of
shoreland area have been adopted to manage the effects of shoreland and
water surface crowding, to prevent pollution of surface and ground waters, to
provide ample space on lots for sewage treatment facilities, to minimize flood
damage, to maintain property value, to maintain the historic value of
significant historic sites, to minimize impairment of views of protected waters
and their shorelines, and to the extent possible maintain the natural character
of shorelands and their adjoining public waters.
(C) Permitted Uses. The uses permitted in the Shoreland Management Areas are
those uses allowed and regulated by the applicable zoning district underlying
the Environmental Overlay District.
(D) General Provisions. Except as hereinafter provided, the following standards
shall apply to all shorelands of the protected waters designated in Section
209.080(A). Where the requirements of the underlying zoning district as
shown on the official Zoning Map are more restrictive than those set forth
herein, the more restrictive standards shall apply:
NATURAL GENERAL
ENVIRONMENT DEVELOPMENT
SHORELAND STANDARDS WATERS WATERS
Minimum Lot Area
Riparian lot 40,000 sq. ft. 15,000 sq. ft.
Other 40,000 sq. ft. 10,000 sq. ft.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-27
Minimum Lot Width
Riparian Lots (at
OHW, Building
Setback From OHW,
and front lot line: 200 feet 100 feet
Nonriparian Lots: 125 feet 75 feet
Structure Setback
from OHW: 150 feet 50 feet
Structure Setback from
top of Bluff: 30 feet 30 feet
(E) Calculation of Minimum Area and Width for Riparian Lots. Only that land
located above the Ordinary High Water (OHW) Level shall be used in the
calculations to determine compliance with minimum lot area requirements.
(F) Exceptions to Structure Setback Requirements.
(1) Principal structure setback from the OHW
(a) New Construction. In those case where there are existing dwelling
units, including attached structures, on adjacent lots which have a
lakeside setback of more than fifty (50) feet, the lakeside setback for a
new dwelling unit, including attached structures, shall be equal to the
average of the lakeside setbacks for the existing dwelling units, plus or
minus 10 feet. In those cases where there is only one existing dwelling
unit, including attached structures, on an adjacent lot, which has a
lakeside setback of more than fifty (50) feet, the lakeside setback for
the new dwelling unit, including attached structures, shall be equal to
the average of 50 feet and the lakeside setback of the existing dwelling
unit, including attached structures, plus or minus 10 feet. In any event,
50 feet shall be the minimum setback.
(b) Additions to the Existing Principal Structures. Where two or more
existing adjacent dwellings, including attached structures, have
lakeside setbacks which exceed the minimum lakeside setback by ten
(10) or more feet, the lakeside setback for an addition to a dwelling
shall not be less than the average of the lakeside setbacks for such
existing adjacent dwellings, including attached structures, minus 10
feet. In any event, 50 feet shall be the minimum setback.
(2) Setback requirements set forth in this section from side property lines and
the OHW level shall not apply to docks, piers, boat lifts, retaining walls,
walks, required safety railings along steps and retaining walls, or
vegetation (trees, shrubs, flowers, etc.). Fences may be permitted
anywhere lakeward of the required structure setback, except within the
Rev. Date
4/18/05
Ord. #774
Rev. Date
4/18/05
Ord. #774
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-28
shore impact zone, provided they are not taller than 3.5 feet above grade.
The City Manager or his/her designee may authorize fences up to 6 feet in
height that extent into the Shore Impact Zone when a property abuts a
walkway, park, or similar facility.
(3) On residential property, only one water-oriented accessory structure may
be located between the OHW level and the required structure setback,
subject to compliance with the standards listed below in subsections (a) -
(c). Accessory structures that existed prior to June 21, 1993 and which do
not comply with the provisions stated herein may be maintained, repaired,
or rebuilt but cannot be expanded in floor area or height.
(a) The amount of impervious surface area on the lot will not exceed 30
percent of the lot area,
(b) The principal structure and any garage/storage structure comply with
the required structure setback from the OHW level (principal structure
means the dwelling, including any attached deck, porch, patio, etc.).
(c) The water-oriented accessory structure shall comply with the
following requirements:
(i) It does not exceed 250 square feet in area, unless a boathouse
which shall not exceed 288 square feet of area,
(ii) It is not wider than 12 feet as viewed from the water,
(iii)It does not exceed 10 feet of height above grade,
(iv) It is setback at least 20 feet from side property lines except where
not possible due to lot width, in such case, the structure shall be
located in the center of the lot or as otherwise deemed acceptable
by the Planning Commission,
(v) It does not contain any sanitation facilities and is not used for
habitation,
(vi) It is screened from view from the lake and from adjoining property
as much as practical through landscaping, use of natural color(s),
topography, and/or location.
(vii)No water-oriented structure (other than a lawful boathouse) or offseason
storage of an ice fishing house is permitted within the Shore
Impact Zone. This setback requirement may be waived, but shall
not be reduced to less than 10 feet from the OHW, if the Planning
Commission determines that a practical difficulty exists which
renders strict compliance to be unreasonable. Practical difficulty
shall be defined as due to topography or other circumstance
acceptable to the City.
(viii)A boathouse may be located within the Shore Impact Zone,
provided it is at least 10 feet landward of the OHW and it complies
with the other requirements stated herein.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-29
(4) Detached accessory structures may be located in the front yard (between
dwelling and street) of a lakeshore property only upon approval of a
riparian lot detached accessory structure permit, Section 203.039, Permits.
(5) Structures, except stairways and landings, shall not be placed within a
Bluff Impact Zone.
(6) Stairways, lifts, and landings shall be used when accessing public waters
across Bluff or Shore Impact Zones. Such facilities shall also comply with
the following standards:
(a) Stairways shall not exceed four feet in width except for public
recreation uses, including trails.
(b) Landings for stairways must not exceed 32 square feet in area, unless
associated with a public recreation use.
(c) Shall be screened from view of the public water.
(G) Soils, Slopes and Grading. Natural grades shall be maintained to the extent
feasible in order to protect water quality and preserve views from the public
water. Furthermore, measures shall be taken to prevent erosion and negate the
impacts on adjacent properties.
(1) Shore Impact Zones, Bluff Impact Zones and Steep Slopes. Land within
steep slopes, shore and bluff impact zones on riparian lots shall maintain
natural grades and shall not be altered, filled or excavated with the
following exceptions:
(a) To accommodate the placement of stairways, landings, public
recreation facilities, roads, trails, and water oriented accessory
structures.
(b) To remedy slope failure utilizing acceptable methods for slope
stabilization and protection. Retaining walls may be permitted
provided the wall does not exceed four (4) feet in height. A greater
height may be permitted if it is necessary to remedy the slope failure.
(c) To maintain, repair or reconstruct existing retaining walls provided the
walls maintain the same height and length.
(d) In accordance with an approved mitigation plan.
A Grading Permit is required for (b) and (c).
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-30
(2) Structure. The existing topographical grade and elevation for new,
expanded or reconstructed single family residences shall be maintained to
the extent feasible. The finished topographical grade and elevation shall
not be less than five feet below the existing topographical grade and
elevation. Reconstruction is defined in Section 209.080(M)(2)(b).
(H) Vegetation and Woodlands.
(1) Shore Impact Zones, Bluff Impact Zones and Steep Slopes:
(a) Removal and trimming of landmark trees is prohibited, except as
necessary to remove branches that are dead, diseased, or which pose a
safety hazard.
(b) Non-landmark trees may be removed only where necessary, in the
judgment of the City, to accommodate the placement of stairways,
landings, public recreation facilities, roads, trails, and water oriented
accessory structures, or to provide a view of the public water from the
principal structure, provided that sufficient vegetation cover remains
or is planted to screen motor vehicles, dwellings and other structures
when viewed from the water. Such trees may also be trimmed or
removed as necessary where branches are dead, diseased, or pose a
safety hazard.
(I) Roads, Trailways, Driveways, and Parking Areas. Public and private roads,
trailways, driveways, and parking areas must be designed to take advantage of
natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening from view
from public waters. They must also be designed and constructed to minimize
and control erosion and to retard the runoff of nutrients in accordance with the
following criteria:
(1) All roads, driveways, and parking areas shall meet the setback
requirements established for structures and must not be placed within a
bluff or shore impact zone when other reasonable and feasible placement
alternatives exist as determined by the City. If the City Council finds that
no other reasonable option exists, these facilities may be placed within
these areas if designed to minimize adverse impacts.
(2) Parking areas for public watercraft access ramps and approach ramps shall
be located at least 50 feet from the OHW unless no other practical
alternative exists as determined by the City Council.
(3) Natural vegetation shall be used to screen parking areas when viewed
from the water.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-31
(4) Any grading, filling or excavation in the Shoreland Management Area
which will change or diminish the course, current or cross-section of
protected waters or wetlands shall be approved by the Commissioner of
the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
(J) Maximum Impervious Surface Area Within Shoreland Areas.
(1) Detached Residential – Standard Riparian and Non-Riparian Lots.
Impervious surface area shall not exceed 25 percent unless the following
conditions are satisfied and, in no case, shall impervious surface area
exceed 40 percent:
(a) No water-oriented accessory structures (except docks, boatlifts, and
retaining walls) will be located within the shore impact zone.
(b) No more than 50 percent of the impervious area on the property drains
directly to an adjoining protected water.
(2) Detached Residential – Substandard Riparian Lots. See Section
209.080(L)(2)(c)(i).
(3) Detached Residential – Substandard Non-Riparian Lots. See Section
207.050(D).
(4) All Other Uses. For uses other than Detached Residential, impervious
surface area may be permitted to cover up to 60 percent of a site. Each of
the following conditions must, however, be satisfied to cover more than 40
percent of these sites with impervious surface area:
(a) All required setbacks from the OHW level are proportionately
increased up to double (100 percent increase) the standard
requirements based upon percent of impervious surface area above 40
percent (e.g., a 75 percent increase in the standard lakeshore setbacks
if 55 percent impervious area coverage is desired).
(b) A drainage easement is granted to the City for the purpose of
maintaining natural (predevelopment) vegetative cover within the
shore impact zone.
(c) Storm water drainage from all impervious surfaces shall be directed to
a storm water detention pond before discharge to a protected water.
(5) Except for those structures located at or below the OHW, such as docks,
boat lift, and piers, all structures, including water-oriented accessory
structures, shall be included in the calculation to determine compliance
with the maximum impervious area requirements.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-32
(K)Nonconforming Uses and Substandard Structures. Any use of shoreland
property or a structure in existence on August 1, 1983 (effective date of
Ordinance 458 and adoption of the initial Shoreland Management Code), but
which does not meet the requirements of the Shoreview Development Code
shall be allowed to continue in accordance with the provisions of Section
207.050.
(L) Substandard Lots.
(1) All Substandard Lots.
(a) Adjacent lots of record in the Office of the County Recorder prior to
August 1, 1983 in common ownership which do not meet the
requirements of Section 209.080(D) must be combined and cannot be
used as separate building sites unless all lots meet or exceed 60% of
the minimum required lot width, area, and depth standards.
(b) Lots of record in the Office of the County Recorder prior to August 1,
1983, that are not adjacent lots of record in common ownership which
do not meet the requirements of Section 209.080(D), may be allowed
as separate building sites, provided:
(i) The lot meets or exceeds 60% of the minimum required lot width
and area standards as defined in Section 209.080(D) and has a
depth of at least 110 feet as defined in Section 202, or
(ii) The lot was occupied by a primary structure on or before March
20, 2000.
(c) No lot of record shall be used or reused as a separate homesite unless it
abuts an improved public right-of-way or, if the lot was legally
accessed via a private way prior to December 10, 1992, said access
may continue to be utilized provided:
(i) There is no practical way to extend a public street to the property;
(ii) The private access is protected by a permanent easement recorded
to run with the title of the property; and
(iii)The private way complies with the fire apparatus requirements set
forth in the Uniform Fire Code.
(2) Substandard Riparian Lots.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-33
(a) No structures shall be expanded, constructed or reconstructed on a
substandard lot of record unless design review approval is first
obtained from the City in accordance with Section 203.034.
(b) Reconstruction of a structure is defined to mean replacement of three
or more of the structure’s six structural components (roof, floor, and
four walls). Determination as to the extent of structural component
replacement shall be made by the Building Official.
(c) Design Standards for Substandard Riparian Lots. Any structures
expanded, constructed, or reconstructed on a substandard riparian lot
shall comply with the following standards:
(i) Impervious Surface Coverage. The impervious surface coverage
of the parcel shall not exceed 25 percent. A maximum impervious
surface coverage of 30 percent may be permitted if there are no
structures (except for docks, stairways, lifts, landings, retaining
walls, and fences) in the required setbacks from the Ordinary High
Water level and/or bluff.
If the existing impervious surface coverage on a parcel exceeds the
allowable impervious surface coverage, existing impervious
surface coverage may remain but shall not be increased. Existing
impervious surface coverage is the impervious surface coverage
legally present on or before March 20, 2000 or approved thereafter
by the City.
(ii) Building Height. The maximum building height shall not exceed
35 feet as measured from the highest roof peak to the lowest point
at finished grade.
(iii)Foundation Area. The foundation area of all structures, including
dwellings and attached accessory structures, cantilevered areas,
detached accessory structures greater than 150 square feet, and
covered porches, covered decks, and covered patios shall be
limited to 18 percent of the lot area of 1,600 square feet, whichever
is greater. If the existing foundation area exceeds the allowed
foundation area, the foundation area percentage may be maintained
but not increased. Existing foundation area is the foundation area
legally present on the property on or before March 20, 2000 or
approved thereafter by the City.
(iv) Building Setbacks.
(aa) Minimum Setback from the Property Front Line: Twenty-five
(25) feet. However, in those cases where the existing setbacks
for the two adjacent dwellings exceed this requirement, the
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-34
setback of the new dwelling or any new addition shall be equal
to the average setback of the two adjacent dwellings, plus or
minus 10 feet. In those cases where there is only one existing
adjacent structure which has a setback greater than twenty-five
(25) feet, then the setback for the new dwelling or addition
shall be equal to the average of twenty-five (25) feet and the
setback of the existing adjacent structure, plus or minus 10
feet, but never less than a minimum of 25 feet.
(bb) Minimum Setback from the Ordinary High Water Level. See
Sections 209.080(D) and (F).
(cc) Minimum Setback from an Interior Side Property Line: 10
feet. However, in those cases where an existing principal
structure is set back less than 10 feet but at least 5 feet from
the side property line, then the existing setback may be
maintained provided the expansion, addition or reconstruction
is no more than one story as defined by the Uniform Building
Code. A minimum setback of 10 feet is required for any part
of the structure that exceeds one story in height.
(v) Architectural Mass.
(aa) The use of landscaping is encouraged to reduce the visual
appearance of structures from the lakeshore.
(bb) The use of natural color(s) and/or materials on the exterior of
the structure is also encouraged to reduce the visual impact.
Natural colors are shades of brown, gray, and green. Natural
materials include wood or stone that complement the setting of
the structure.
(cc) If a variance is granted to any of these design standards or
setback requirements, provisions (a) and/or (b) may be
required as conditions of approval.
(3) Substandard Non-Riparian Lots. See Section 207.050(D).
(M)Shoreland Mitigation. A shoreland mitigation plan must be submitted for
residential development that requires land use approval including but not
limited to residential design review, variance, conditional use permit,
subdivision or rezoning. The plan shall be designed to mitigate the adverse
effects land development has on water quality and the lake environment. The
mitigation plan shall be signed by the property owner, approved by the City
Manager and a Mitigation Affidavit recorded with the Register of Deeds prior
to the commencement of development activity. Furthermore, mitigation plans
Rev. Date
5/20/13
Ord. 907
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-35
shall be completed within one year of the plan’s approval unless otherwise
approved by the City.
(1) Mitigation Practices. The mitigation plan shall include at a minimum two
of the following practices:
(a) Vegetation Protection Area. A vegetation protection area may be
established which at a minimum shall include land area within the
shore impact zone, bluff impact zone or steep slope. Within these
areas, the removal of trees, shrubs and groundcover, grading, filling
and other land disturbing activities are prohibited with the following
exceptions:
(i) Removal of vegetation is in accordance with Section 209.080(H).
(ii) Establishment of one viewing corridor by selective pruning and
selective removal of trees and shrubbery. Sufficient trees and
shrubbery shall be retained to screen development from view of the
water but provide a filtered view of the water. The viewing
corridor should be more or less perpendicular to the shore and not
be more than 30 feet wide at any point, including at the lakeshore.
Water-oriented structures, walkways, stairways and lifts shall be
located within the view protection corridor. Clearing, filling,
grading and other land disturbing activities are not permitted in this
corridor with the exception of the following:
(aa) Construction of a water-oriented structure, walkways,
stairways and lifts.
(bb) Shoreline protection activities as permitted by the DNR.
(cc) Erosion control measures approved by the City, which are
designed to remedy existing erosion problems.
(dd) Beaches as permitted by the DNR.
(b) Vegetation Restoration. Vegetation restoration areas may be
established which at a minimum shall include land within the shore
and the bluff impact zones or steep slopes. Land area shall be restored
from law, beach or other disturbances using native or natural
landscaping.
(i) Steep Slope/Bluff Restoration. Steep slopes and bluffs that are
vegetated with turf may be restored with deciduous and ornamental
trees, evergreens and shrubs that are native to the area.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-36
(ii) Shoreline Buffer Restoration. A buffer zone of at least 25 feet
from and parallel to the ordinary high water mark shall be planted
or restored and maintained with vegetation native to the area to
fullest practicable extent possible with effective erosion and
sediment control. Existing natural beaches or beaches which have
been permitted by the DNR shall be allowed to continue and be
maintained. A minimum of 30% of the lot’s shoreline area shall be
restored. This restoration area shall be contiguous unless
otherwise approved as part of the mitigation plan.
(c) Architectural Mass. The use of natural color(s) and/or materials on the
exterior of the structure shall be used to reduce the visual impact.
Natural colors are shades of brown, gray, and green. Natural materials
include wood or stone that complement the setting of the structure.
(d) Removal of Nonconforming Structures. The mitigation plan may
include the removal of structures that do not comply with the required
structure setbacks from the ordinary high water line or are located
within a shore impact zone or bluff impact zone.
(e) Reduction of Impervious Surface Coverage. The mitigation plan may
include a minimum 5% reduction of the existing impervious surface
coverage. The preferable location of this reduction is within that
portion of the lot that drains to the lake.
(2) Other practices. At the discretion of the City Manager, other restoration or
protection activities may be approved as part of a mitigation plan provided
they meet the objectives of this ordinance. Examples include the removal
of artificial sand beaches, stormwater management and replacement of
seawalls with bioengineering structures.
(N) Administration. The City shall notify and supply the Department of Natural
Resources (DNR) with plans and information on the following:
(1) Copies of all variance requests or public hearings for a Conditional Use
Permit in a shoreland area shall be submitted to the Commissioner of the
DNR at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing.
(2) A copy of the final decision granting variances or Conditional Use Permits
shall be submitted to the Commissioner of the DNR within ten (10) days
after the meeting.
(3) All preliminary plats within the shoreland area shall be submitted to the
Commissioner of the DNR at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-37
(4) All approved final plats shall be submitted to the Commissioner of the
DNR ten (10) days after the meeting.
(5) All Concept Planned Unit Developments shall be forwarded to and
approved by the Commissioner of the DNR prior to approval by the City
Council.
(6) All amendments to Section 209.080 must be approved by the
Commissioner of the DNR to be effective.
209.090 Subsurface Sewage Treatment Systems.
(A) Connection to Public Sanitary Sewer Required. Existing structures with
subsurface sewage treatment systems (SSTSs) must, upon the availability of
the public sanitary sewer to the property, hook up to the public sanitary sewer
system within one year. However, if a completely new SSTS was installed
within the five-year period prior to the availability of public sanitary sewer,
connection will not be required for up to 5 years, provided the system is
maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Section and unless at any
time the SSTS is determined to be an imminent threat to public health.
(B) Standards adopted by reference. The City hereby adopts, by this reference,
Minnesota Rules, Chapters 7080 and 7081 as now constituted and from time
to time amended, relating to the construction, maintenance, permitting,
inspection and abandonment of SSTS.
(C) Variances
(1) Variances to the building setbacks established in this Section 209.090
shall be reviewed in accordance with Section 203.070 (Variances) except
that variances to well and water line setbacks are governed by the
Minnesota Department of Health.
(2) Variance requests must include the following additional information:
(a) Specific information on the Minnesota Rule or Rules from which the
variance is requested.
(b) Reasons why the rule is difficult or inappropriate.
(c) A description of the practical difficulty (See Section 203.070(C) for
definition of practical difficulty) that prevents compliance with the
setback.
(d) How the variance will ensure a comparable degree of protection to
public health or the environment if the variance is granted.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-38
(e) The length of time for which the variance is requested.
(f) Cost considerations.
(g) Proximity of the system to other systems.
(D) Definitions. See Minnesota Rules Part 7080 for definitions of terms used in
this section.
(E) New and Replacement Systems.
(1) New or replacement SSTSs may be permitted for detached single-family
residential dwellings where it is clearly shown that there are practical
difficulties in the extension of public sanitary sewer service to the
structure as determined by the City Manager or his/her designee, provided
the property is at least one acre in size. Installation of new or replacement
ISTS on a property less than one acre in size requires approval of a
variance in accordance with Section 209.090(C) above.
(2) All new or replacement SSTSs must be sited, designed, installed,
permitted, inspected and operated in accordance with Section 209.090(B).
(3) New or replacement SSTSs shall be setback at least 150 feet from
Ordinary High Water Line of Natural Environmental Waters and at least
50 feet from the Ordinary High Water Line of General Development
Waters.
(4) New or replacement SSTSs shall not be located in a floodway, and
placement in a floodplain shall be avoided. If no alternative exists, a
system is allowed to be placed within the flood fringe, provided the
requirements of Minnesota Rule 7080.2270 are met. Any sewage
treatment system designed in accordance with Section 209.090(B) shall be
determined to be in compliance with this section.
(5) On lots created after January 23, 1996, the system design shall include at
least one designated additional soil treatment area that can support a
standard soil treatment system.
(6) Holding Tanks. Holding tanks may be allowed for the following
applications:
(a) As a replacement to a failing system; or
(b) As a replacement for an SSTS that poses an imminent threat to public
health and safety.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-39
(c) The owner of a holding tank shall provide the City Manager with a
copy of a contract with a licensed sewage maintenance business for
monitoring and removal of holding tank contents. A valid
maintenance contract shall remain in effect for the life of the holding
tank.
(7) Privies Not Allowed. Privies and other toilet waste treatment devices used
for primitive dwellings are not permitted.
(8) Operating Permit. An Operating Permit shall be required of all owners of
new holding tanks, Type IV Systems, Type V Systems, MSTS, or any
other system deemed by the City to require operational oversight. Sewage
shall not be discharged to these systems until the City certifies that the
system was installed in substantial conformance with the approved plans,
receives the final record drawings of the system, and a valid Operating
Permit is issued to the owner.
(a) The City shall receive the record drawings, operation and maintenance
manual, management plan and servicing contract, and any other
pertinent documents as appropriate for accuracy and completeness
prior to issuance of an Operating Permit.
(b) The Operating System shall include the following:
(1) System performance requirements
(2) System operating requirements
(3) Monitoring locations, procedures and recording requirements
(4) Maintenance requirements and schedules
(5) Compliance limits and boundaries
(6) Reporting requirements
(7) Department notification requirements for non-compliant conditions
(8) Valid contract between the owner and a licensed maintenance
business
(9) Disclosure, location and condition of acceptable soil treatment and
dispersal system site
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-40
(10)Description of acceptable and prohibited discharges
(c) Operating Permits shall be valid for a specific term, as determined by
the City, and shall be renewed prior to its expiration. If not renewed,
the City may require the system to be removed from service or
operated as a holding tank until the Permit is renewed. If not renewed
within ninety (90) days of the expiration date, the City may require
that the system be abandoned in accordance with Section 209.090(K).
(F) Existing Systems.
(1) Any modification, repair, alteration or expansion of an existing SSTS must
be designed, installed, constructed, permitted, inspected, and operated in
accordance with Section 209.090(B).
(2) All existing individual sewage treatment systems are required to be
maintained in accordance with Section 209.090(B).
(3) A Certificate of Compliance must be provided before a building permit
can be approved for a bedroom replacement on properties served by
individual sewage treatment systems if the application is received between
May 1st and October 31st. For applications received between November 1st
and April 30th, a compliance inspection must be completed by the
following June 1st and a Certificate of Compliance received by the City by
September 30th. If the existing individual sewage treatment system was
installed between May 27, 1989 and January 23, 1996, and an inspection
triggered by this requirement determines the system is noncompliant but
not an imminent threat, the property owner has 5 years to bring the
existing system into compliance.
(G) Maintenance.
(1) Existing SSTSs must be inspected at least every three years in accordance
with Section 209.090(B). Such inspections shall be conducted by an
inspector licensed by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency at the
expense of the property owner. Inspection reports must be submitted to
the City within 15 days of the inspection date.
(2) Septage must be removed from existing SSTSs at least every three years in
accordance with Minnesota Rules, part 7080.2450, Subpart 3. Such
material removal shall be conducted by a business licensed by the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency at the expense of the property owner.
Evidence of material removal must be submitted to the City within 30
days of the removal date.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-41
(a) Septage or any waste mixed with septage must be disposed of in
accordance with state, federal or local requirements for septage.
(3) Noncompliance with these maintenance provisions shall be treated as a
misdemeanor and each day in violation shall be treated as a separate
offense.
(H) Failing Systems. A Notice of Noncompliance shall be issued and copies
provided to the property owner and the City within 15 days from the time the
system is determined to be noncompliant.
(1) Failing subsurface sewage treatment systems shall be upgraded, replaced,
or their use discontinued and the system properly abandoned within one
year from the date of the Notice of Noncompliance unless the system is
determined to be an imminent threat to public health, safety, or welfare.
(2) Any subsurface sewage treatment system posing an imminent threat shall
be upgraded, replaced, repaired, or its use discontinued and the system
properly abandoned within 10 months after receiving written notice from
the Building Official. The Building Official may grant an extension
because of weather considerations not to exceed 6 months.
(3) An SSTS discharging raw or partially treated wastewater to ground
surface or surface water is prohibited unless permitted under the National
Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
(I) Permits. Permits are required for all SSTSs in accordance with Minnesota
Rules. Permit fees shall be established by Council Resolution. Such permit
shall be valid for a period of 180 days from the date of issuance.
(1) All work performed on an SSTS shall be done by an appropriately
licensed business, qualified employees, or persons exempt from licensing.
Permit applications shall be submitted by the person doing the individual
SSTS construction, accompanied by the required site and design data.
(2) Permits shall only be issued to the licensed person doing the SSTS
construction.
(3) Permit applications for new and replacement SSTS shall include a
management plan for the owner. The management plan shall include a
schedule for septic tank maintenance.
(4) A permit is not required for minor repairs or replacement of damaged or
deteriorated components that do not alter the original function, change the
treatment capacity, change the location of system components, or
otherwise change the original system’s design, layout, or function.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 209. Environmental Standards 209-42
(5) Any activity involving an existing system that requires a permit shall
require that the entire system be brought into compliance with the
requirements of this Section 209.090.
(J) Inspections. Inspections are required for all SSTSs and no part of an SSTS
shall be covered until and unless it has been inspected and approved by the
City.
(K) Abandonment. An existing SSTS or any component thereof that will no
longer be used must be abandoned in accordance with the adopted standards
of this Code, and a record of the abandonment submitted to the City within 90
days, as required.
(L) Licensing. All design, installation, alteration, repair, maintenance, pumping
and inspection activities for SSTSs must be performed by a business licensed
or exempted under Minnesota Rules or an appropriately certified qualified
City employee.
(M)Periodically Saturated Soil Disagreements. Disputes involving documented
discrepancies on the depth of the periodically saturated soil for SSTS design
or compliance purposes shall be resolved according to Minnesota Rules,
Chapter 7082.0700, subp. 5.
209.100 Private Wells.
(A) Existing structures with private wells shall be allowed continued use. No
person, firm or corporation shall alter, repair or extend any private well
without first obtaining a permit from the Minnesota Department of Health. If
municipal water facilities are available to the property at the time of the
needed alteration, repair or extension, connection to the municipal water
system is required.
(B) In the event that an existing structure with a private well connects to the
municipal water facilities, the private well may continue to be used for
outdoor watering and maintenance.
(C) All public or private supplies of water for domestic purposes shall conform to
the Minnesota Department of Health standards for water quality.
(D) All private wells which are abandoned must be properly capped and closed
according to the Minnesota Department of Health requirements.
(E) On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 210. Nuisance 210-1
210 Nuisance
210.010 Nuisance.
(A) Public Nuisance Prohibition. A person must not act, or fail to act, in a
manner that is or causes a public nuisance. For purpose of this
ordinance, a person that does any of the following is guilty of
maintaining a public nuisance:
(1) Annoys, offends, injures, or endangers the health, comfort, repose,
morals, decency, peace, or safety of any considerable number of
members of the public; or
(2) Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous for
passage a public waterway, park, square, street, alley, highway, or
any other public property or right of way; or
(3) Maintains property conditions that constitute a fire hazard or a
physical risk to the property or persons or otherwise dangerous to
human life, public safety personnel or the public welfare.
(4) Depreciates the value of the property of a considerable number of
members of the public; or
(5) Is declared to be a nuisance by any provision of this code, any
statute, or regulation.
(B) The following are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting
health and safety:
(1) Certain ponds, pools and accumulation of stagnant water.
(2) Accumulation of refuse or debris.
(3) The pollution or contamination of any well or cistern, stream, lake,
canal, or body of water by sewage, or industrial waste or other
substance.
(4) Of noxious weeds as defined in Minnesota Rules and other rank
growth of vegetation upon private or public property including
grass and weeds over nine inches in height and non-woody
vegetation over 18 inches in height on vacant properties.
(5) Accumulation in the open of discarded or disused machinery,
household appliances, and furnishings, automobile bodies, or other
material, in a manner conducive to the harboring of rats, mice,
snakes or vermin, or the rank growth of vegetation among the
Rev. Date
5/4/09
Ord. #849
Entire
Section
Rev. Date
4/16/14
Ord. 920
Rev. Date
2/2/15
Ord. 926
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 210. Nuisance 210-2
items so accumulated, or in a manner creating fire, health or safety
hazards from such accumulations.
(6) All dangerous unguarded machinery, in any public place, or so
situated or operated on private property as to attract the public.
(7) Ice, snow, or rainwater to fall from any building or structure upon
any public street or sidewalk, or to direct any rainwater or water
from ice melt or snow melt so as to flow across any public
sidewalk.
(8) Any well, hole or excavation left uncovered or in such other
condition as to constitute a hazard to a child or other person, being
or coming upon the premises where the same is located.
(9) Hazardous buildings, subject to the provision of State Statute
463.16.
(10) Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly
tight, or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or
to emit foul and disagreeable odors.
(11) Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders in unreasonable
quantities.
(12) Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not operating
under local license.
(13) All trees, hedges, billboards, or other obstructions, which prevent
people from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an
intersection.
(14) All wires and limbs of trees, or other objects that are so close to the
surface of a sidewalk, trail or street as to constitute a danger to
pedestrians or vehicles.
(15) Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use of
streets, alleys, sidewalks, trails or public grounds, except under
conditions permitted by this ordinance or other applicable law.
(16) Any barbed wire fence located less than six (6) feet above the
ground and within three (3) feet of a public sidewalk or way.
(17) Wastewater cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other
public property.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 210. Nuisance 210-3
(18) Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or
public stormwater system, gutter or ditch with trash or other
materials.
(19) The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on
adjacent private property.
(20) Shade Tree Nuisances.
a. Any living or standing tree(s) to any degree with a shade tree
disease or Plant Pest.
b. Any logs, branches, stumps, or other parts of any dead or dying
tree so infected unless such parts have been fully burned or
treated under the direction of the City Manager.
c. Any standing dead trees or limbs on public or private property
which may threaten human health or property.
(21) Illicit discharges or connections to the MS4 or storm drainage
system.
(22) The overcrowding of a room or portion of a dwelling with longterm
storage of items, goods, or any combustible materials so as to
prevent upkeep, maintenance, or regular housekeeping. A room
may be considered overcrowded when: interior storage covers an
excessive amount of the floor area of a room, constitutes a
potential excessive fire load, prevents access to windows or doors,
prevents access to or obstructs mechanical systems or air
movement, effectively eliminates use and access to required
electrical devices, impedes access and movement of emergency
personnel, blocks hallways, limits the operation of doors or
provides pest harborage.
(23) Any other health or safety nuisance as declared by the City
Council.
(C) Enforcement. The provisions of this regulation shall be enforced by the
City’s law enforcement agency or by such other officers, employees, or
agents as designated by the City Council. Such officers, employees, or
agents shall have the power to inspect private premises in accordance
with law, and take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission
or maintenance of public nuisances. The provisions of this regulation for
the abatement of nuisances shall be in addition to any other penalty or
remedy provided by this code, by county ordinance, or by state statute or
regulation.
210.020 Abatement Procedure.
Rev. Date
3/19/12
Ord. #890
Rev. Date
4/16/14
Ord. 920
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 210. Nuisance 210-4
(A) Procedure. Except as otherwise provided in Section 210.020 (C) or
210.020 (D), whenever the officer charged with enforcement determines
a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on a premise in the City,
the officer shall notify in writing the owner of record or occupant of the
premises of such fact and order that the nuisance be terminated and
abated. The notice of violation shall specify the steps to be taken to
abate the nuisance and the time within which the nuisance is to be
abated. If the notice of violation is not complied with within the
specified time, the officer shall report that fact to the City Council.
Thereafter, the City Council may, after notice to the owner or occupant
and an opportunity to be heard, determine that the condition identified in
the notice of violation is a nuisance and order that if the nuisance is not
abated within the time prescribed by the City Council, the City may seek
injunctive relief by serving a copy of the Council Order and a Notice of
Motion for Summary Enforcement or, obtain an administrative search
warrant for access to the premises or property has been denied, and abate
the nuisance. In those cases where the nuisance pertains to noxious
weeds, rank growth and grass and weeds as defined in Section
210.010(B)(4), the City Council after notice and hearing may cause the
nuisance to be abated immediately by the City. In those cases where the
nuisance has been recurring and can be abated by reasonable
maintenance procedures, the City Council’s order to abate shall be
effective for up to two (2) years.
(B) Notice. Written notice of the violation, notice of the time, date, place
and subject of any hearing before the City Council; notice of the City
Council Order; and Notice of Motion for Summary Enforcement hearing
shall be served by a peace officer or a designated official on the owner
of record or occupant of the premises, either in person or by certified or
registered mail. If the premise is not occupied, the owner of record is
unknown, or if the owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice,
notice of the violation shall be served by posting it on the premises.
(C) Emergency Procedure/Summary Enforcement. In cases of an
emergency where delay will permit a continuing nuisance to
unreasonably endanger public health, safety or welfare, the City may
order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance. To proceed with
summary enforcement, the officer or designated official shall determine
that a public nuisance exists or is being maintained on the premise in the
City and that the delay in abatement will unreasonable endanger public
health, safety or welfare. The officer or designated official shall make a
reasonable attempt to notify in writing the occupant or owner of the
premises of the nature of the nuisance, whether public health, safety or
welfare will be unreasonably endangered by delay in abatement required
to complete the procedures set forth in subdivision 210.020(A) and may
order that the nuisance be immediately terminated or abated. If the
Rev. Date
2/2/15
Ord. 926
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 210. Nuisance 210-5
nuisance is not immediately terminated or abated, the City may order
summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.
(D) Immediate Abatement. Nothing in this section shall prevent the City,
without notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition
that poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.
(E) Judicial Remedy. Nothing in this section shall prevent the City from
seeking a judicial remedy when no other adequate administrative remedy
exists.
210.030 Recovery of Cost.
(A) Record of Abatement Cost. The City Manager or his/her designee shall
keep a record of the costs of abatements, including administrative costs,
done under this ordinance and shall report monthly all work done to the
appropriate officer for which assessments are to be made, stating and
certifying the description of the land, lots, parcels involved and the
amount assessable to each.
(B) Personal Liability. The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been
abated by the City, or a person who has caused a public nuisance on
property not owned by that person shall be personally liable for the cost
of the abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the work
has been completed and the cost determined, the City Clerk or other City
official shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner.
Thereupon, the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the
City’s administrative office.
(C) Assessment. After notice and hearing as provided in Minnesota Statutes
Section 429.061, as it may be amended from time to time, if a nuisance
is a public health or safety hazard on private or public the City Clerk
shall, on or before September 1 next following abatement of the
nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along with all other such charges
as well as other charges for current services to be assessed under
Minnesota Statutes, Section 429.101 against each separate lot or parcel
to which the charges are attributable. The City Council may then spread
the charges against the property under the provisions of Minnesota
statutes Section 429 and any other pertinent Statutes for certification to
the County Auditor and collection along with current taxes the following
year or in annual installments, not exceeding ten, as the City Council
may determine in each case.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development
Regulations
Section 211. Property Maintenance 211-
1
211 Property Maintenance
211.005 General Provisions
(A) Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to residential and nonresidential
properties and constitutes the minimum requirements and standards
for the premises and structures located on the premises.
(B) Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and
exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise
provided for in this Code. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or
permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe
condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this Section.
Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are
responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the
dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they occupy
and control.
211.010 Parking and Storage of Vehicles and Equipment
(A) Parking or Storage of Commercial Usage Vehicles, Inoperable Vehicles,
Unlicensed Vehicles and Vehicle Parts.
(1) Commercial usage vehicles, inoperable vehicles, unlicensed vehicles or
any part or equipment appurtenant to any vehicle shall not be:
(a) Parked or stored outdoors on lots in residential districts except for the
following:
(i) One commercial usage vehicle of over 3/4 ton carrying capacity or
9,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, but not in excess of one ton
carrying capacity or 12,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, may be
stored outside.
(ii) No more than one commercial usage vehicle of any size bearing
exterior evidence of commercial advertising, identification or
equipment may be stored outside.
(b) Parked or stored on lots in non-residential districts for more than 48
continuous hours.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development
Regulations
Section 211. Property Maintenance 211-
2
(B) Parking or Storage of Recreation Vehicles, Boats, All Terrain Vehicles
(ATV’s), Snowmobiles, etc.
(1) Recreational vehicles, boats, ATV’s, snowmobiles, special purpose trailers
or other vehicles designed or used for off-road purposes may be parked or
stored in a garage or lawfully erected building, or may be parked or stored
outdoors as follows:
(a) No more than two such vehicles, not more than one of which is a
recreational vehicle, shall be parked or stored outdoors on each lot.
For the purposes hereof, a vehicle on a trailer shall be considered one
vehicle.
(b) Any such vehicle parked or stored outdoors shall be owned or leased
by the occupant of the premises where parked or stored.
(c) Any such vehicle shall not be parked or stored within five feet of a
side yard lot line, or within ten feet of a rear yard property line.
Vehicles may be parked within the required front setback provided
vehicles are parked on an approved asphalt, concrete or similar
approved hard surface and shall not be within five feet of the front
yard property line.
(d) Recreational vehicles shall not be used as temporary or permanent
living quarters.
(C) Other Vehicles. Passenger automobiles and all other vehicles not regulated by
Section 211.010(A) and 211.010(B) may be parked or stored in a garage or
lawfully erected building, or may be parked or stored outdoors as follows:
(1) Lots in Residential Districts. On an asphalt, concrete or similar approved
hard surface but not within five feet of a side or front property line or
within 10 feet of a rear property line. No more than four vehicles or one
per licensed driver residing on the premises, whichever is more may be
parked or stored outside.
(2) Lots in Non-Residential Districts. On a parking area that is asphalt,
concrete or similar approved hard surface but not for periods exceeding 48
hours. Provided, however, vehicles may be stored for periods exceeding
48 hours in Districts allowing for the sale of new or used automobiles or
boats on property approved by the City for use as an open sales lot.
Rev. Date
4/18/05
Ord. #774
Rev. Date
4/18/05
Ord. #774
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development
Regulations
Section 211. Property Maintenance 211-
3
211.020 Refuse
(A)
(1) Definition. Refuse means all solid waste products which are composed
wholly or partly of the following materials: garbage, sweepings, cleanings,
trash, rubbish, litter, industrial solid wastes, domestic solid wastes, organic
wastes, residues of animals, meat, fruit, vegetables, grains or fish; animal
excreta or carcasses of animals; rubbish including wood, leaves,
vegetation, tree trimmings, dead trees and shrubs, branches, sawdust,
shavings, grass trimmings, paper products, straw, rags, clothing, and all
other combustibles; waste matter composed of soil, clay, sand, earth,
gravel, fill, stones, bricks, plaster, glass, glassware, crockery, ashes,
cinders, shells, metal and other non-combustibles; waste debris resulting
from the construction, demolition, repair or alteration of structures or
buildings; and accumulated waste materials composed of cans, containers,
tires, junk, vehicle parts, appliances, electronic devices or other substances
which may become a nuisance.
(2) Refuse Container. A receptacle designed for the temporary storage of
refuse usually made out of metal or plastic and enclosed with a lid. Yard
waste may, however, be temporarily stored in paper or plastic bags.
(3) Construction Dumpster. A mobile receptacle for temporarily storing refuse
debris resulting from the construction, demolition, repair or alteration of
structures or buildings. Construction dumpsters are transported to the site
by truck and range in size from 10 to 45 cubic yards. Bagsters, large bags
that hold less than 10 cubic yards, are considered a construction dumpster.
(B) Refuse is considered a nuisance and/or hazardous to safety or welfare and
every person shall arrange for the collection and disposal of all accumulations
of refuse on their property at least once a week, by a collector of refuse,
licensed by the City.
(C) All refuse shall be properly contained in a container sufficiently designed for
the storage of all refuse accumulating on the premises between collections.
Refuse containers shall be kept in a tidy, sanitary and orderly manner, closed,
and all refuse stored within.
(D) Standards for the RE, R-1 & R-2 Zoning Districts, including Planned Unit
Developments that have an underlying zone of RE, R1 or R2.
Rev. Date
6/5/06
Ord. #798
Rev. Date
6/5/06
Ord. #798
Rev. Date
4/16/18
Ord. # 961
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development
Regulations
Section 211. Property Maintenance 211-
4
(1) Refuse containers, including tree debris, shall be permitted at curbside or
other permitted collection point from 12:00 p.m. of the night preceding
collection day until 12:00 p.m. on the day after designated collection day.
(2) With the exception of Subsection (D1 and D3):
a. Refuse containers shall be stored within an enclosed building, or in
the side or rear yard immediately adjacent to a structure.
(3) Refuse containers shall not be stored forward of the principle or accessory
structure, whichever is closer to the street.
(4) If the property has unique circumstances that create a hardship for the
property owner to store refuse containers in accordance with Subsection
(D2) above, said refuse containers may be stored forward of the principle
or accessory structure closest to the street provided:
a. The refuse containers are immediately adjacent to the principle or
accessory structure.
b. The refuse containers are screened from view of the public right-ofway.
c. Examples of unique circumstances may include topography,
fencing, lake frontage or single car attached garages.
(5) Tree waste may be stored in any yard, provided it is placed out at the
curbside or other permitted collection point on the next collection day for
pick-up by the waste hauler.
(6) Construction Dumpster Standards
a. Number allowed: One construction dumpster is allowed per
residential lot.
b. Placement. Dumpsters may be placed in any yard or driveway
provided it is setback a minimum of 5 feet from a property line,
and does not impede traffic visibility and public safety. Dumpsters
shall not be placed in any public street. Dumpsters placed in a
private roadway shall not impede access by emergency vehicles.
c. Duration.
i. A dumpster located on a residential property without an
associated building permit is permitted for a period not to
exceed fourteen (14) calendar days and not more than two
(2) times in a calendar year.
ii. A dumpster located at a residential property with an
associated building permit is permitted throughout the
duration of the building project and must be removed
within fourteen (14) days of the project completion.
(E) Any hazardous materials must be disposed in accordance with applicable State
and Federal regulations.
Rev. Date
4/16/18
Ord. # 961
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development
Regulations
Section 211. Property Maintenance 211-
5
211.030 Grading and Drainage
(A) All properties shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water, except in natural occurring ponding areas on
said property.
(B) Grading shall not be altered, and gutters and downspouts shall not be installed
as to direct additional surface and storm water onto adjoining properties.
(C) Discharging any sump pump water, swimming pool water, or water which has
been used in a manufacturing process or mechanical process so as to flow
upon or over streets, sidewalks, or other public property or adjacent private
property is prohibited except for the following:
(1) Property that is owned by the person discharging the water.
(2) Sump pump or swimming pool water discharged directly to the curb flow
line that does not flow into or across the street.
(3) Discharge water from sump pump or swimming pool that flows across
unimproved public property to the curb.
(D) Vegetation shall be restored by sodding or seeding disturbed areas upon
completion of grading or any yard maintenance resulting in the removal of
vegetation in accordance with Section 209.040(E).
211.040 Outside Storage. All materials and equipment shall be stored in an approved
fully enclosed structure except the following which may be stored outside:
(A)Laundry drying equipment, recreational equipment and patio furniture
provided it is stored in a rear or side yard and is set back a minimum of five
feet from the property line and not stored within a public right-of-way.
(B) Firewood provided it is stored in a rear or side yard and it is set back a
minimum of five feet from the property line. Storage of firewood in the front
yard may be permitted for loading and unloading and shall not exceed five
days. Firewood shall be stacked in a neat, orderly, safe manner and in a
manner to prevent the harboring of rodents. The maximum height allowed is
six feet. The maximum amount of firewood stored on properties less than two
Rev. Date
6/5/06
Ord. #798
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development
Regulations
Section 211. Property Maintenance 211-
6
acres shall be two cords. One cord is four feet in width by four feet in height
by eight feet in length (4’ x 4’ x 8’).
(C) Recreational Facilities: Recreational facilities are permitted in accordance
with the following:
(1) Shall be set back at least five feet from the side and ten feet from the rear
property lines.
(2) Shall not be placed on drainage, utility or other easements.
(3) Shall not be located in front of the principal structure, with the exception
of basketball hoops, skateboard ramps or other facilities placed adjacent to
or on a driveway or patio area.
(D) Miscellaneous Structures: Dog kennels, playhouses, and similar structures
shall not be located closer than five feet from the side or rear property lines,
and shall not be located within the front yard.
211.050 Glare. In all districts, no light or combination of lights which cast light upon a
public street shall exceed 1 foot candle meter reading as measured from the
centerline of the street nor shall any light or combination of lights cast light upon
residentially zoned property exceeding 0.4 foot candle meter reading as measured
at the receiving residential lot line.
211.060 General Property Maintenance.
(A) All structures, buildings, fences and landscaping shall be maintained so as to
prevent unsightliness, health hazards, or unsafe conditions.
(B) Grass clippings, weed clippings, and leaves shall be disposed of in a
reasonable time by composting in a proper manner, hauling to a regulated
composting site, or by bagging or otherwise properly containing such material
until waste pick up. Composting areas shall be located in a rear yard, at least
ten feet from any property line, at least thirty feet from any adjoining
residence and designed so that seepage from the compost will not run off into
public or private streets, storm sewers, drainage ditches, water retention
basins, wetland areas, streams or lakes. No person shall rake or deposit grass
clippings, weeds, noxious weeds, leaves, chemicals, sand or other refuse on or
into a public or private street, storm sewer, drainage ditch, water retention
basin, wetland area, stream or lake.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development
Regulations
Section 211. Property Maintenance 211-
7
(C) Exterior property areas shall be kept free from species of weeds or plant
growth which are noxious or a detriment to public health. Noxious weeds are
those defined in Minnesota Rules. Grass plots and lawn areas, including any
contiguously abutting street boulevard areas, shall not exceed nine inches in
height. Non-woody vegetation on vacant properties shall not exceed eighteen
inches in height. Native grasses indigenous to Minnesota, planted and
maintained on any occupied lot or parcel of land as part of a garden or
landscape treatment are exempt from the maximum height limitation,
provided the native landscaping does not interfere with traffic or pedestrian
safety. Wetlands and other drainage features, pastures, and undisturbed land
are exempt from this provision.
(D) Snow-free and ice-free access shall be provided to building entries and egress
doors. Storage of snow shall be maintained on the property and cannot be
placed on any public street, alley, sidewalk, bike path, trailway, or adjoining
private property or boulevard.
(E) Sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall
be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous
conditions.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore any exterior surface of any
structure or building surface damaged, mutilated or defaced by any marking,
carving or graffiti to an approved state of maintenance and repair. Such repair
shall be completed within ten (10) days after said defacement.
(F) Vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a
clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause
a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety.
211.070 Housing Code
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Housing Code is to establish a minimum level of
maintenance standards for all housing and residential accessory structures in
the City in order to:
(1) Protect the character, value and stability of residential properties within
the City.
Rev. Date
6/5/06
Ord. #798
Rev. Date
6/5/06
Ord. #798
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development
Regulations
Section 211. Property Maintenance 211-
8
(2) Correct and prevent housing conditions that adversely affect or are likely
to adversely affect the life, safety, general welfare and health, including
the physical, mental and social well-being of persons occupying dwellings
within the City.
(3) Provide minimum standards necessary to the health and safety of
occupants of the buildings.
(4) Provide minimum standards for the maintenance of existing residential
buildings, and to thus prevent deterioration and blight.
(5) Correct and prevent unsafe or deficient housing conditions which are a fire
hazard or a physical risk to the property or persons or otherwise dangerous
to human life, public safety personnel or the public welfare.
(B) Applicability and Scope. This Housing Code shall apply to exterior and
interior area of all residential properties in the City. The construction, repair,
alteration and maintenance of residential property shall comply with the
provisions of this Code and other applicable sections of the Shoreview
Municipal Code including the Building Code, the Fire Code and the
Development Ordinance.
(C) Exterior Structures. The exterior of residential dwellings and accessory
structures in the City shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Foundations, Walls and Roofs. Every foundation, exterior wall, roof and
all other exterior surfaces shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of
maintenance and repair:
(a) The foundation elements shall adequately support the building at all
points.
(b) Exterior walls shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or
timbers, falling or loose stucco or brick, substantial amounts of peeling
paint and any conditions which might admit moisture, rodents and
pests to the interior portions of the walls or to the interior spaces of the
structure.
(c) The roof structure and all of its components shall be tight and have no
defects which admit water. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent
water from causing dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior
Rev. Date
6/5/06
Ord. #798
Rev. Date
4/16/14
Ord. 920
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development
Regulations
Section 211. Property Maintenance 211-
9
portion of the structure. Roof materials shall be compatible in color
and style.
(d) Non-decay resistant wood shall be finished with an approved
protective coating.
(2) Stairs, Porches, Decks and Railings.
(a) Stairs, porches, decks, railings and appurtenance attached thereto shall
be maintained so as to be safe and capable of supporting a load as
determined in the Building Code and shall be kept in sound condition
and good repair.
(b) A flight of stairs which has four (4) or more risers high shall have hand
rails which are to be so designed and located as determined by the
Building Code; and
(c) Stairs, porches, decks, railings and appurtenance attached thereto shall
be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, falling or
loose stucco or brick, substantial amount of peeling paint and any
conditions which might admit moisture to the interior portions of any
structure and free of conditions that show lack of maintenance.
(3) Windows, Doors and Hatchways. Windows, exterior doors and hatchways
shall be substantially tight and shall be kept in sound condition, good
repair and weather tight.
(a) Windows, doors and frames shall be maintained in relation to the
adjacent wall constructions, as to exclude rain, and substantially to
exclude wind from entering the structure.
(b) Window and Screens
i. Windows shall be fully supplied with window panes which are
without open cracks or holes.
ii. Window screens shall be kept in a good state of repair without
holes or tears. During the period of April 1 to October 31, every
door, window and other outside openings of habitable rooms shall
be supplied with tightly fitting screens.
Rev. Date
6/5/06
Ord. #798
Rev. Date
6/5/06
Ord. #798
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development
Regulations
Section 211. Property Maintenance 211-
10
(c) Window sashes shall be in good condition and fit reasonably tight
within its frame. Windows designed to be opened and closed shall be
capable of being held in an open or closed position by window
hardware.
(d) Doors and Hatchways
i. Exterior doors, door hinges and door latches shall be in good
condition.
ii. Exterior doors, when closed, shall fit reasonably well within its
frame.
(e) Hatchway shall be so maintained as to prevent the entrance of rodents,
rain and surface drainage water into the structure.
(f) Doors available as an exit in a dwelling shall be capable of being
easily opened from the inside.
(4) General. The exterior of all residential dwellings and accessory structures
shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as
not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. All exterior
surfaces, including, but not limited to, siding, doors, door and window
frames, porches, trim, soffits and fascia, eaves and gutters, balconies,
decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition.
(D) Interior of Structures. The interior of residential structures, including
common areas of multi-family dwellings in the City shall comply with the
following standards:
(1) Interior Walls, Floors, Ceiling and Woodwork. Interior walls, floors,
ceilings and associated woodwork or trim must be maintained in a sound
condition and in workmanlike repair. All interior surfaces, including
windows and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary
condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired,
removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other
defective surface conditions shall be corrected.
(2) Hallways. The width of hallways shall be not less than 36 inches. The
height of hallways shall not be less than 7 feet nominal, with clearance
below projections from the ceiling of not less than 6 feet and 8 inches
Rev. Date
6/5/06
Ord. #798
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development
Regulations
Section 211. Property Maintenance 211-
11
nominal, except existing approved hallways shall be permitted to continue
use as a hallway.
(3) Number of Means of Escape. In any dwelling or dwelling unit of two
rooms or more, means of escape shall be provided in accordance with the
following:
a. Primary Means of Escape. Every sleeping room and living area shall
have a primary means of escape. This escape shall be a door, stairway
or ramp providing a means of unobstructed travel with a minimum of
three feet (3’) unobstructed travel path from the egress and exit to the
outside of the dwelling unit or street ground level.
b. Secondary Means of Escape. Except as provided in (D)(3)(c), every
sleeping room shall have a secondary means of escape which shall be a
door, stairway or ramp or window with a minimum of three feet (3’)
unobstructed travel path from the egress and exit to the outside of the
dwelling unit or street ground level, or an outside window conforming
to the requirements of the Minnesota State Building Code.
c. A secondary means of escape shall not be required when there is a
door leading directly to the outside of the building at or to ground
level; or when the dwelling unit is protected by an approved automatic
sprinkler system; or when there is an existing approved means of
escape.
d. Doors and windows that provide the primary and/or secondary means
of escape shall be immediately accessible and must be operable and
able to open freely and completely.
(4) Access.
a. Where access is permitted by way of windows, the windows shall be
arranged and maintained so as to be easily opened.
b. There shall be no obstructions by railings, barriers or gates that divide
the open space into sections appurtenant to individual rooms,
apartments or other occupied spaces.
c. In every occupied building or structure, means of egress from all parts
of the building shall be maintained free and unobstructed with a
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development
Regulations
Section 211. Property Maintenance 211-
12
minimum of three feet (3’) unobstructed travel path. Means of egress
shall be accessible to the extent necessary to ensure reasonable safety
for occupants having impaired mobility.
(5) Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing or other walking
surface, including carpeting and other surfaces shall be maintained in
sound condition and good repair and not be a tripping hazard.
(6) Plumbing systems. Plumbing systems shall be maintained in good
working order, and must be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.
(7) Connected to water and sewer system. Kitchen sinks, lavatory basins,
bathtubs, or showers and water closets shall be properly connected to
either the municipal water and sewer system or to an approved private
water and sewer system, and shall be supplied with hot and cold running
water.
(8) Heating Facilities. Single and multiple family dwellings shall have
heating facilities which are safely maintained and in good working
condition. Said facilities shall be capable of safely and adequately heating
all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms located therein. The
heating facilities shall be capable of maintaining a minimum room
temperature of seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit (twenty-one (21) degrees
Celsius) at three (3) feet above the floor in all habitable rooms including
bathrooms and under all weather conditions.
(9) Electrical service, outlets, and fixtures. Residential structures and
dwelling units shall be supplied with electrical service that is adequate to
safely meet the electrical needs of the structure and dwelling units in
accordance with the provisions of the Building Code. Electrical outlets
and fixtures shall be maintained and connected to the source of electrical
power in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code.
(10)Light and ventilation. No owner shall use or occupy or allow another to
use or occupy any residential structure, including common areas of multifamily
dwellings, for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, and/or
eating therein which does not comply with the provisions of the Building
Code for light and ventilation. Lighting and ventilation shall be
maintained in sound condition and workmanlike repair.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development
Regulations
Section 211. Property Maintenance 211-
13
(11)Fire safety. No owner shall use or occupy or allow another to use or
occupy any residential structure, including common areas of multi-family
dwellings which does not comply with the applicable provisions of the
Uniform Fire Code and all accepted standards for safety from fire.
a. Smoke Alarms: Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with International Fire Code
Section 907.2.10 and Minnesota State Statute 299F.362.
b. Carbon Monoxide Detectors: Every single-family dwelling and every
multifamily dwelling unit shall be provided with an approved and fully
operational carbon monoxide alarm within ten (10) feet of each room
lawfully used for sleeping purposes in accordance with Minnesota
Statutes 299F.050 and .051.
(12)Cleanliness. Residential structures, including common areas of multifamily
dwellings, and dwelling interiors shall be maintained in clean and
sanitary condition, free of accumulations of combustible materials,
garbage and refuse so as not to breed insects and rodents, produce
dangerous gases, odors and bacteria, mold or other unsanitary conditions,
or create a fire hazard.
(13)Common Solid Waste Disposal Facilities. Interior solid waste disposal
facilities designed for common use by occupants of multi-family
residential structures shall be maintained in sound condition and
workmanlike manner. Waste shall be disposed of in a timely manner to
prevent the accumulation of garbage and refuse.
(14)Elevators and Related Devices. Elevators shall be maintained in
accordance with Minnesota Rules Chapter 1307, Elevators and Related
Devices.
(E) Extermination.
(1) Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent
infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be
promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to
human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to
prevent re-infestation.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development
Regulations
Section 211. Property Maintenance 211-
14
(2) Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination
within the structure or dwelling unit prior to renting or leasing the
structure.
(F) Interior Storage
(1) Combustible materials shall not be stored within three feet (3’) of open
flame heat sources such as furnaces, water heaters, woodstoves and
fireplaces.
(2) Clearance between other heat or flame sources and combustible materials
shall be maintained in a manner that does not constitute a fire hazard.
(3) Combustible materials shall not be stored in hallways, stairways, and
landings unless a minimum of three feet (3’) unobstructed travel is
provided.
(4) Rooms within the dwelling unit, other than those identified in 211(G)
below may be used for storage purposes provided a minimum of three feet
(3’) unobstructed travel is provided to doors and windows.
(5) Storage shall be maintained 2-feet or more below the ceiling.
(G) Room Function. Interior storage shall not interfere with the primary function
of the following rooms: kitchen, bathroom(s), living room, hallways,
bedrooms that are used for sleeping purposes.
(1) Kitchen. The dwelling unit shall have permanently installed cooking
(oven and stove), and refrigerator, including freezer, that is in safe
operating condition.
(H) Housing and Code Enforcement Officer. It shall be the duty of the City
Manager to enforce the provisions of code.
(I) Inspections. The Housing and Code Enforcement Officer shall be authorized
to make or cause to be made inspections to determine the condition of
dwellings and premises in the City under this code in order to safeguard the
health, safety and welfare of the public. The Housing and Code Enforcement
Officer, or his designated representatives, shall be authorized to enter any
dwelling or premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of performing his
duties under this code. If the owner, operator or person in possession of the
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development
Regulations
Section 211. Property Maintenance 211-
15
dwelling shall refuse to consent to the inspection and there is probable cause
to believe that a violation exists within the particular structure, a search
warrant may be obtained.
(J) Access by owner or operator. Every occupant of a dwelling shall give the
owner or operator thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such
dwelling unit, rooming unit or its premises, at reasonable times, for the
purpose of affecting inspection and maintenance, making such repairs, or
making such alterations as are necessary to comply with the provisions of this
code.
(K) Compliance orders.
(1) Whenever the Enforcement Officer determines that any dwelling, dwelling
unit or rooming unit in the City under this code, or the premises
surrounding any of these, fails to meet the provisions of this code, he may
issue a compliance order setting forth the violations of the code and
ordering the owner, occupant, operator or agent to correct such violations.
This compliance order shall:
(a) Be in writing.
(b) Describe the location and nature of the violations of this code.
(c) Establish a time for the correction of such violation.
(d) Be served upon the owner, his agent or the occupant, as the case may
require. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such
owner, agent or upon any such occupant, if a copy thereof is:
(i) Served upon him personally, or
(ii) Sent by registered or certified mail to his last known address or
(iii)Upon failure to effect notice through (i) or (ii) above, as set out in
this section, posted at a conspicuous place in or about the property
which is affected by the notice.
(2) Transfer of Ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property,
dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development
Regulations
Section 211. Property Maintenance 211-
16
whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage,
lease or otherwise dispose of said property, dwelling or structure to
another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation
have been complied with or until such owner shall first furnish the
grantee, transferee, mortgagee, or lessee a true copy of any compliance
order or notice of violation issued by the City and shall furnish to the City
a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee,
or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of
violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for
making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or
notice of violation.
(L) Posted to Prevent Occupancy. Whenever any dwelling or dwelling unit does
not comply with the minimum standards of Section 211.070 and is found to be
unfit for human habitation and otherwise dangerous to life, health, safety and
welfare of the occupants, public safety personnel or the public welfare, the
dwelling or dwelling unit shall be posted with a placard by the City Manager
to prevent occupancy. Any person who occupies a placarded premises, and
the owner or any person responsible for the premises, who allows occupancy
of the placarded premises shall be liable for the penalties provided by this
code.
Rev. Date
6/5/06
Ord. #798
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 212. Building and Fire Code 212-1
212 Building and Fire Code
212.010 Building Code.
(A) Adoption of Minnesota State Building Code. The Minnesota State Building
Code, as adopted by the Minnesota Commissioner of Administration, pursuant
to Minnesota Statutes Chapter 16B.59 to 16B.75 including any optional
chapter hereinafter specifically adopted; and including all amendments, rules
and regulations established, adopted and published from time to time by the
Minnesota Commissioner of Administrator through its Building Codes and
Standards Division is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated as if fully
set forth herein, and shall be known as the Shoreview Building Code.
(B)Building Code – Optional Chapter. The following optional provision, as
identified in the most current addition of the Minnesota State Building Code,
is hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the Shoreview Building Code:
1306. Special fire protection system with (Subpart 2) for new construction.
212.020 Building Permits.
(A) Applications. In addition to information required by the Building Code,
permit applications shall include the following information:
(1) Plot Plan and Certificate of Survey. Application shall be accompanied by
two (2) copies of a plot plan showing the correct location of the proposed
buildings with respect to the lot lines and also the correct location of all
other buildings existing or proposed to be constructed on the lot. This
plan shall also show the proposed location of water supply, sanitary
facilities, existing and proposed grade elevations, and proposed disposal of
surface water. In the case of unplatted land, the plot plan shall show that
the location of all buildings to be erected shall not obstruct future street
extensions or preclude future subdivisions and development of the
property. A certificate of survey by a registered land surveyor shall be
required for any lot which is to be occupied by a principal building.
(2) An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, as per Section 209.040(E)(2).
(3) Plans and Site Plans.
(a) Application for permits for single family residences shall be
accompanied by two (2) copies of the plans and specifications clearly
illustrating and specifying the work to be done, and such plans shall be
so complete as to fully illustrate the character of the proposed work.
Rev. Date
8/6/07
Ord. 819
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 212. Building and Fire Code 212-2
(b) Certain Plans Required. Applications for permits for any building or
structure (other than single family residences) shall include the
following plans:
(i) Complete details of the proposed site development, including, but
not limited to, location of buildings, driveways, parking spaces,
dimensions of the parking spaces, dimensions of the lot, lot area
and yard dimensions.
(ii) Complete landscaping plans including species and size of trees
and shrubs proposed.
(iii) Complete plans for proposed sidewalks to service parking,
recreation and service areas within the proposed development.
(iv) Complete plans for proposed storm water drainage systems
sufficient to drain and dispose of all surface water accumulations
within the area.
(v) Complete architectural, structural, electrical and mechanical plans
for the proposed buildings.
(vi) Complete plans and specifications for exterior walls finishes and
surfaces proposed for all principal and accessory buildings.
(vii) Complete data as to dwelling units, sizes and ratios of dwelling
units to total lot space.
(viii)Any additional data requested on forms furnished by the
administrative staff.
(3) Proof of Ownership. Applicants for building permits to construct, enlarge,
alter, repair, demolish or move commercial and industrial structures or
residential structures containing more than two dwelling units, shall
supply proof of ownership for the property for which the permit is
requested in a form acceptable to the City Attorney. Proof of ownership
shall not be required for building permits to construct, alter, repair,
demolish, or move sheds, shelters, unattached garages, driveways,
sidewalks or fences.
(B) Number of Permits. Except as provided herein, only one principal building
shall be constructed on each lot within the City:
(1) PUD. The City Council may approve more than one building permit on a
single lot in any zoning district as part of an approved Planned Unit
Development.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 212. Building and Fire Code 212-3
(2) Residential District/Preliminary Plat. The City Council may approve more
than one building permit for a dwelling unit on a single lot in a Residential
District if all of the following criteria have been satisfied by the applicant:
(a) A preliminary plat has been approved by the City Council and the
building permits are requested to allow construction of model homes
on lots within the approved preliminary plat before a final plat
approval.
(b) Each model home will be constructed with a different exterior and/or
floor plan.
(c) The lots for which the building permits are requested shall have
available to them City streets, sanitary sewers, water and storm sewers
constructed according to City specifications.
(d) The buildings shall be connected to the approved sanitary sewer and
water systems before the structures are occupied for any purpose of
either a permanent or temporary nature.
(e) The applicant shall comply with all landscaping and erosion control
measures required by the City Building Inspector which shall be
specified on each building permit. The applicant shall deposit cash
with the City equal to 1 and 1/2 times the estimated cost of compliance
prior to the issuance of building permits and shall agree that the City
can utilize the cash deposit for landscaping and erosion control if the
applicant fails to comply.
(f) The number of building permits authorized pursuant to this section
shall be specified by the City Council at the time of preliminary plat
approval but shall not exceed an amount equal to 10% of the proposed
lots rounded to the next highest whole number, or 4 whichever is less.
(C) Exterior Improvements.
(1) All exterior improvements of a structure, or portion thereof, to single
family dwellings, multiple family dwellings of twelve (12) units or less or
any structure accessory to a residential use shall be completed in
accordance with City-approved construction plans within one hundred
eighty (180) days after the date the City issued the building permit.
(2) All exterior improvements of a structure, or portion thereof, to multiple
family dwellings of more than twelve (12) units or any commercial,
industrial, office, institutional or non-residential structure shall be
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 212. Building and Fire Code 212-4
completed in accordance with City-approved construction plans within
one (1) year after the date the City issued the building permit.
(3) In all cases, the compliance deadline shall be upheld unless a written
extension is submitted and approved by the Building Official. An
extension may only be granted in the event that a natural disaster or a
calamitous event occurs which unavoidably delays the completion of the
building project. The decision of the Building Official may be appealed to
the Planning Commission, who acts as the Board of Adjustments and
Appeals.
(D) Planning Commission and Council Review. Building permits for multiple
family, commercial or industrial structures may not be issued until site and
building plans have been reviewed by the City's Planning Commission and
Council.
(E) Other Improvements. A building permit shall be required for the structures
exempt from Minnesota State Building Code requirements but regulated
within this Development Ordinance including but not limited to, decks and
platforms less than 30 inches above adjacent grade and not attached to a
structure with frost footings; driveways; fences; patios; sheds less than 200
square feet in size; sidewalks and swimming pools.
(F) Building Permit Fees. Building permit fees for general construction;
driveways and sidewalks; structures and buildings; moving of a building or
dwelling into, out of, or from one location to another within the City;
wrecking or demolishing of a building; and fences shall be as prescribed from
time to time by City Council resolution on file with the City Manager.
(G) Plan Review Fee. When the Building Inspector determines that the review of
plans and specifications for a particular construction or structure is necessary,
a plan review fee shall be paid to the City in addition to any other building
permit fee; provided that, plan review fees shall not be charged for the
construction of single and double family residential dwellings unless the
estimated value of such construction exceeds $15,000. Plan review fees shall
be as prescribed, from time to time, by City Council resolution on file with the
City Manager.
212.030 Fire Code
(A) Adoption of Codes and Standards. The Minnesota State Fire Code as adopted
by the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety pursuant to Minnesota
Statute 299F.011 and as defined by Minnesota Rules Section 7510.3290
through 7510.3480 shall be applicable within the City of Shoreview subject to
the following modifications:
Rev. Date
5/13/15
Ord. 930
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 212. Building and Fire Code 212-5
(B) More Restrictive Standards Apply. If there is a conflict between the standards
contained in the Minnesota State Fire Code, the Minnesota State Building
Code, and/or the Shoreview Municipal Code, the provisions of the more
restrictive regulation shall be applicable and prevail.
(C) Balcony-Patio Cooking Devices. The Minnesota State Fire Code, Article 11,
shall be amended by adding Section 11.117 to read as follows:
(1) No person shall use a cooking device of any kind, which utilizes an open
flame in combination with charcoal or a similar combustible material to
generate a flame or heat, on any balcony or patio which is attached to or
within fifteen (15) feet of any building in which there are two or more
dwelling units on more than one level, unless each dwelling unit has its
own private means of ingress and egress, or unless the decking, railing,
overhang, and wall or walls abutting and adjacent to the balcony or patio
are constructed of noncombustible material.
(D) Open Flame Prohibited. In any structure containing 3 or more dwelling units,
no person shall kindle, maintain, or cause any fire or open flame on any
balcony above ground level, or on any ground floor patio within 15 feet of the
structure, provided that, listed electric gas fired barbecue grills that are
permanently mounted and wired or plumbed to the building's gas supply or
electrical system and that maintain a minimum clearance of 18 inches on all
sides, unless listed for lesser clearances, may be installed on balconies and
patios when approved by the fire chief.
(E) Fuel Storage Prohibited. No person shall store or use any fuel, barbeque,
torch, or other similar heating or lighting chemical or device in the locations
designated in Section 212.030(D).
(F) Fireworks.
(1) Permit Required.
(a) Commercial Fireworks. No person shall use or display commercial
fireworks without a permit, as provided in Section 707.020(A).
(b) Consumer Fireworks. No person shall sell or store consumer
fireworks without a license, as provided in Section 707.020(B).
(G)Codes and Standards on File. One copy of each code or standard referred to
in Section 212.030(A-E) shall be marked "Official Copy" and shall be kept on
file in the office of the Shoreview Building Inspector for use and examination
by the public.
(H) Enforcement.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 200. Development Regulations
Section 212. Building and Fire Code 212-6
(1) The Fire Chief shall enforce the provisions of the Shoreview Fire Code.
(2) The Fire Chief may designate members of the Fire Department as
Inspectors.
(I) Appeals. Whenever the Fire Chief shall disapprove or refuse to grant a
permit, or issue an order or notice as provided in the Shoreview Fire Code, or
when it is claimed that the Shoreview Fire Code has been wrongly applied or
interpreted, the aggrieved person may appeal the decision of the Fire Chief as
follows:
(1) The aggrieved person must first request the Fire Chief to reconsider the
Fire Chief's decision. The request to reconsider must be made within ten
days from the date of the Fire Chief's initial decision.
(2) The person aggrieved by the final decision of the Fire Chief may file a
written appeal with the City Manager. The appeal to the City Manager
must be made within thirty days from the date of the final action of the
Fire Chief.
(3) The person aggrieved by the decision of the City Manager may file a
written appeal with the City Council. The appeal to the City Council must
be made within thirty days from the date of the decision of the City
Manager.
(4) The person aggrieved by the decision of the City Council may appeal to
the State Fire Marshal in accordance with Minnesota Statute Section
299F.011, Subdivision 5.
(J) Penalty. Any person violating any provisions of the Shoreview Uniform Fire
Code or any order made pursuant thereto, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Each days' violation after notice thereof shall constitute a separate offense.
(K) Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase in the
Shoreview Fire Code is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the
Shoreview Fire Code.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 301. Elections 301-1
300 Council and Administration
301 Elections
301.020 Even Year Election Date. Commencing in 1996, the City's General Election
shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each
even numbered year.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 302. Council 302-1
302 Council
302.010 Compensation. The Mayor and Councilmembers of the City of Shoreview
shall be compensated as follows:
(A) As of January 1, 2019, the salary of the Mayor shall be Eight Hundred and
Nineteen dollars ($819) per month.
(B) As of January 1, 2019, the salaries of Shoreview City Councilmembers
shall be Six Hundred and Eight dollars ($608) per month.
Rev. Date
5/7/18
Ord. #964
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 303. Personnel Policy 303-1
303 Personnel Policy
303.240 Appointments.
(A) Procedure. The City Manager shall make every appointment to a position
of City employment, except when State law or ordinance otherwise
provides. Each appointment shall be based on merit and qualifications for
the position as determined by the City Manager.
(B) Relationship to Other City Personnel. No person shall be appointed as a
City employee who is the child, parent, stepparent and/or legal guardian,
sibling, grandparent, grandchild, aunt or uncle of any elected official or
elected official's spouse, appointed official or appointed official's spouse,
regular employee or regular employee's spouse. The appointment of an
employee's spouse to the same department in which the employee has the
authority to appoint, supervise, evaluate, or discipline the position, or if
the position is classified as confidential, is prohibited.
(C) Associate Employees in Positions Handling Cash. No person shall be
appointed to an associate position which requires the handling of cash, if a
relative of that associate employee is already in a position that requires
handling cash. A relative is the child, parent, step-parent and/or legal
guardian, sibling, grandparent, grandchild, aunt or uncle of any associate
employee.
(D) Definitions:
Regular Full-time Employee. A regular full-time employee is defined as a
person who has completed the required probationary period and who is
employed on a regularly scheduled basis of forty (40) or more hours per
week in a single job category contained in the City's Job Classification
Plan.
Regular Part-time Employee. A regular part-time employee is defined as a
person who has completed the required probationary period and who is
employed on a regularly scheduled basis for at least twenty (20) hours per
week but less than forty (40) hours per week in a single job category
contained in the City's Job Classification Plan.
Associate Employee. An associate employee is a person who is employed
by the City but who does not satisfy the criteria for a regular full-time or a
regular part-time employee.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 303. Personnel Policy 303-2
303.245 Holidays. The following shall be the official holidays for the City and no
official business shall be conducted on them: New Year's Day, January 1;
Martin Luther King's Birthday, the third Monday in January; President's Day,
the third Monday in February; Memorial Day, the last Monday in May;
Independence Day, July 4; Labor Day, the first Monday in September;
Veteran's Day, November 11; Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in
November; the Friday after Thanksgiving Day; Christmas Eve Day, December
24, and Christmas Day, December 25. Except that in years when Christmas
Eve Day falls on a Friday, Saturday or Sunday, employees will be given an
extra floating holiday in lieu of the December 24th holiday. Otherwise, the
holidays which fall on a Saturday will be observed the preceding Friday.
Those which fall on a Sunday will be observed the following Monday.
303.250 Discipline. Except as otherwise provided by State law or ordinance, the City
Manager or designee shall make all decisions regarding discipline of City
employees, including suspension and termination.
303.255 Administration. The City Manager may establish such administrative
policies and rules as may be appropriate to administer the employment
practices of the City. All City employees shall comply with these policies and
rules.
303.260 Compensation Plan. The City Manager will establish and maintain a
compensation plan for all regular positions which will be reviewed and
approved by the City Council on an annual basis.
303.265 Indemnification. The City or its insurance carrier will defend and indemnify
all of its officers and employees, whether elective or appointive, against any
claim or demand arising out of an alleged act or omission occurring in the
performance of their official duties or employment. If judgment is rendered in
favor of the officer or employee, any judgment for costs and disbursements
shall be assigned to the City, and all monies collected shall be paid to the City.
The provisions of this section requiring indemnification do not apply in cases
of intentional tort, malfeasance in office, or willful or wanton negligence. In
those cases, the City Council may indemnify the officer or employee if it finds
such action to be in the public interest. Indemnification under this paragraph
is subject to the liability limits imposed by Minn. Stat. 466.05 and any other
relevant statutes.
303.270 Prohibitions. No person shall willfully or corruptly make any false statement,
certificate, mark, rating or report in regard to any test, certificate or
appointment held or made under the municipal personnel system, or in any
manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud impeding the impartial
execution of the City's employment policies. No person seeking employment
to or promotion in the municipal service shall either directly or indirectly give,
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 303. Personnel Policy 303-3
render or pay any money, service or other valuable consideration to any person
for, on account of, or in connection with his test, proposed appointment,
promotion or proposed promotion.
303.275 Background Investigations. The purpose and intent of this section is to
establish regulations that will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota’s
Computerized Criminal History information for specified non-criminal
purposes of employment background checks for the positions described
below.
The Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department is authorized, as the exclusive law
enforcement agency for the City of Shoreview, to do a criminal history
background investigation on the applicants and contractors for the following
positions within the City:
Regular full-time and part-time positions
Associate positions
Volunteer positions
Independent contractors for the Recreation Division
In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen
employment applicants, volunteers and certain independent contractors, the
Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department is authorized to access data maintained
in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension’s (BCA) Computerized
Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any
data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Ramsey County
Sheriff’s Department under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement
official or his or her designee. A summary of the results of the Computerized
Criminal History data may be released by the Ramsey County Sheriff’s
Department to the hiring authority, to include the City Manager, Human
Resources Manager, other city staff and/or consultants as appropriate.
Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant/volunteer/independent
contractor must authorize the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department by written
consent to undertake the investigation. Failure to provide consent may
disqualify the individual from the prospective position. The written consent
must fully comply with the provisions of Minnesota Statute Chapter 13
regarding the collection, maintenance and use of the information. For
positions of employment, background checks will only be conducted on
finalists.
Except for the positions set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 364.09, the
City will not reject an applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant’s
prior conviction unless the crime is directly related to the position of
employment sought. If the City rejects the applicant's request on this basis, the
Rev. Date
10/6/08
Ord. 835
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 303. Personnel Policy 303-4
City shall notify the applicant in writing, including all of the information as
required in Minnesota Statute 364.05.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 304. Planning Commission 304-1
304 Planning Commission
304.010 Establishment. A planning commission for the city of Shoreview is hereby
established. The Planning Commission shall be the City planning agency.
304.020 Composition. The Planning Commission shall consist of seven (7) members
who shall be appointed by the City Council. Any member of the planning
commission may be removed by a majority vote of the City Council.
304.030 Terms and Compensation. Appointments to the Planning Commission shall
be made at the first regular January meeting of the City Council, or more often
if required. Members shall be appointed for three year terms beginning
February 1 and ending January 31 of the third year following. In the event of a
vacancy occurring during any term, appointments shall be for the balance of
the unexpired term. Members of the Planning Commission shall receive as
compensation such fees or salary as the City Council shall provide as
resolution. Members of the Planning Commission shall hold office until their
successors are appointed and qualified.
304.040 Organization. The City Council shall appoint a chairman from among the
members of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may create
and fill such other offices as it may determine. All officers of the Planning
Commission shall serve until the following January 31.
304.050 Meetings and Reports. The Planning Commission shall hold at least one
regular meeting each month. It shall adopt rules for the transaction of
business. It shall keep a public record of all motions, resolutions, transactions,
findings, minutes, and reports, which shall be promptly reduced to writing and
a copy forwarded to each member of the City Council. The City Attorney and
the City Engineer shall be official advisors to the Planning Commission. They
shall attend Planning Commission meetings upon request and shall be
compensated therefore in the same amount as that received for attending City
Council meetings.
304.060 Expenditures. Expenditures of the Planning Commission shall be within
amounts appropriated by the City Council. The Planning Commission shall
submit a report of all expenditures to the City Council on or before January 1st
of each year.
304.070 Powers and Duties. The Planning Commission shall be the City's planning
agency. It shall exercise the duties imposed on it by the City Council
including, but not limited to, the following:
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 304. Planning Commission 304-2
(A) Comprehensive Plan. The Planning Commission shall prepare and
periodically review the City's Comprehensive Municipal Plan. It shall
make recommendations to the City Council regarding the adoption of the
plan or amendments thereto. Prior to submitting its recommendations to
the City Council, the Planning Commission shall hold at least one Public
Hearing. A notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be
published once in the City's official newspaper at least ten (10) days before
the date of the hearing.
(B) Official Controls. After a Comprehensive Plan has been adopted by the
City Council, the Planning Commission shall prepare and propose
reasonable and practical regulations for the implementation of the policies
contained in the Comprehensive Plan including, but not limited to, Zoning
Regulations, Subdivision Regulations, and official maps.
(C) Board of Adjustments and Appeals. The Planning Commission shall be
the City's Board of Adjustments and Appeals. In this capacity the
Planning Commission shall have the following duties:
(1) To hear and make recommendations to the City Council where it is
alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by an administrative officer in the interpretation or
enforcement of the City's Zoning or Subdivision Regulations.
(2) To hear and determine requests for variances pursuant to Chapter 214.
(3) To hear appeals from affected property owners when a building permit
for the construction of a building is not issued because the building is
to be constructed within the limits of a mapped street, outside of any
building lines that may have been established upon an existing street,
or within an area identified for public purposes on an official map or
maps adopted by the City. The Board may authorize the issuance of a
permit for such buildings in any case in which the Board finds, upon
the evidence and arguments presented to it, as follows:
(a) That the entire property of the affected property owner, of which
such areas identified for public purposes forms a part, cannot yield
a reasonable return to the owner unless such a permit is granted;
and
(b) That, when balancing the interest of the City in preserving the
integrity of the official map or maps and of the Comprehensive
Municipal Plan against the interests of the affected property owner
in the use and enjoyment of the benefits of ownership, the issuance
of the permit is required by considerations of justice and equity.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 304. Planning Commission 304-3
If the Board authorizes the issuance of a building permit as provided
herein, the City shall have six (6) months from the date of the decision
of the Board to institute proceedings to acquire such land or interest
therein. If no such proceedings are started within that time, the
building permit shall be issued in accordance with applicable
ordinances, if the application for such permit otherwise conforms to
City regulations.
(D) Development Regulations. The Planning Commission shall have the
power and duties imposed on it by the City's Development Regulations.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 305. Park and Recreation Commission 305-1
305 Park and Recreation Commission
305.010 Establishment of Commission. A Park and Recreation Commission is
hereby established to advise the City Council on park and recreation related
matters.
305.020 Composition. A Park and Recreation Commission shall consist of seven (7)
to nine (9) members appointed by the City Council. The City Council may, at
its own discretion, appoint a youth representative with full voting privileges.
The youth representative must be a high school sophomore, junior, or senior
and attend two regular meetings before being appointed. Any member of the
Commission may be removed by a majority vote of the City Council.
305.030 Terms and Compensation. Appointment to the Commission shall be made
at the first regular January meeting of the City Council, or more often if
required. Members shall be appointed for three (3) year terms beginning
February 1 and ending January 31 of the third year following. Initial
appointments pursuant to this ordinance shall be as follows: two (2) members
shall be appointed for the term of one (1) year; two (2) members for the term
of two (2) years; three (3) members for a term of three (3) years. Members
appointed after the initial Commission shall be appointed for a three year
term. Members of the Commission may receive compensation as the City
Council shall provide by resolution.
305.040 Vacancies. In case of a vacancy during the term of office of any member of
the Commission, the City Council shall appoint a new member to serve the
remainder of the term. A vacancy shall exist if any of the following occur:
death, disability, failure to serve, as shown by failure to attend a specific
number of regular meetings as established by the Commission rules of
procedure, residence outside of the city, or resignation.
305.050 Organization. The Commission shall annually elect one member to serve as
chairman. The chairman is responsible for the agenda of the meetings,
presiding at meetings, minutes of meetings and reports and recommendations
to the City Council. The Park and Recreation Department shall maintain all
records of the Commission.
305.060 Meetings and Reports. The Commission shall hold at least one regular
meeting each month. It shall adopt rules of procedure for business and shall
keep a public record of all motions, resolutions, findings, minutes and reports
which shall be reduced in writing and a copy forwarded to the City Council.
The Park and Recreation Director shall be the official advisor attending
meetings upon request.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 305. Park and Recreation Commission 305-2
305.070 Duties and Functions. The duties and functions of the Commission shall be
as follows:
(A) Serve in an advisory capacity to the City Council on parks and recreation
matters.
(B) Endeavor to secure a full and complete understanding of the City's needs
and desires for parks and recreational facilities and be sensitive to the
acceptance within the community of the current programs.
(C) Convey to the City Council their understanding of the community's
sentiment regarding recreation and parks and to submit recommendations
to the City Council on parks and recreation programs and policy.
(D) Review conditions and adequacy of City park property.
(E) Review conditions and adequacy of City recreation programs.
(F) Provide hearings to groups or individuals upon request regarding parks and
recreation matters.
(G) Propose regulations for control of City park property to the City Council.
(H) Advise and assist architectural engineers on preparation of specific plans
prior to their presentation to the City Council for formal approval.
(I) Represent the City at community functions where appropriate and
approved by the City Council.
(J) Represent the City at meetings with other community, county or state
boards of similar nature where appropriate and approved by the City
Council.
(K) Perform other duties and functions or conduct studies and investigations as
specifically directed or delegated by the City Council.
(L) Advise and assist the Planning Commission in maintaining the community
facilities and capital improvement portions of the comprehensive plan.
(M)Be aware of the role and services provided by athletic organizations within
the community.
(N) Advise the City Council regarding forestation or reforestation programs
for the City.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 306. Civil Defense 306-1
306 Civil Defense
306.010 Purpose. Because of the existing and increasing possibility of the occurrence
of disasters of unprecedented size and destructiveness resulting from enemy
attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or from fire, flood, earthquake or
other natural causes, and in order to insure that the preparations of this City
will be adequate to deal with such disasters, and generally to provide for the
common defense and to protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to
preserve the lives and property of the people of this City, it is necessary:
(A) To establish a local Civil Defense Agency;
(B) To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during civil defense
emergencies;
(C) To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this City and other
political subdivisions of this State and of other states with respect to the
carrying out of civil defense functions.
It is further declared to be the purpose of this chapter and the policy of the
City that all civil defense functions of this City be coordinated to the
maximum extent practicable with the comparable functions of the Federal
government, the State government, and comparable functions of the states
and localities, and of private agencies of every type, to the end that the
most effective preparations and use may be made of the nation's
manpower, resources, and facilities dealing with any of the
aforementioned disasters that may occur.
306.020 Definitions.
(1) Civil Defense. "Civil Defense" means the preparation for and the carrying
out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military
forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and
damage resulting from disasters caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other
enemy hostile action, or from fire, flood, earthquake, or other natural
causes. These functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting services,
police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, air-raid
warning services, communications, radiological, chemical and other
special weapons of defense, evacuation of persons from stricken areas,
emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, existing or properly
assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public
utility services, and other functions related to civilian protection, together
with all other activities necessary or incidental to preparation for and
carrying out the foregoing functions.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 306. Civil Defense 306-2
(2) Civil Defense Emergency. "Civil Defense Emergency" means any
emergency declared by the Governor under Minnesota Statutes Chapter
12.
(3) Civil Defense Forces. "Civil Defense Forces" means any person employed
by the City and any other volunteer or paid member of the local Civil
Defense Agency engaged in carrying on civil defense functions in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any rule or order
thereunder.
306.030 Civil Defense Agency. The Civil Defense Agency shall be under the
supervision and control of a Director of Civil Defense hereinafter called the
Director. The Director shall be appointed by the City Council for an indefinite
term and may be removed by the City Council at any time. The salary of the
Director shall be set by the City Council annually. He also may be reimbursed
for his necessary expenses, at the discretion of the City Council. The Director
shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and
operation of the Civil Defense Agency, subject to the direction and control of
the City Council. The Civil Defense Agency shall be organized into such
divisions and bureaus, consistent with the State and local civil defense plans,
as the Director deems necessary to provide for the efficient performance of
local civil defense functions during a civil defense emergency.
306.040 Powers and Duties of Director.
(A) Intergovernmental. The Director shall represent the City on any regional
or state organization for civil defense. He shall develop proposed mutual
aid agreements with other political subdivisions within or outside the State
for reciprocal civil defense aid and assistance in a civil defense emergency
too great to be dealt with unassisted and he shall present such agreements
to the City Council for its action. Such arrangements shall be consistent
with the State civil defense plan and during a civil defense emergency, it
shall be the duty of the Civil Defense Agency and civil defense forces to
render assistance in accordance with the provisions of such mutual aid
arrangements. Any mutual aid arrangement with a political subdivision of
another state shall be subject to the approval of the Governor.
(B) Training. In accordance with the State and City Civil Defense Plan, the
Director shall institute such training programs and public information
programs and shall take all other preparatory steps, including the partial or
full mobilization of civil defense forces in advance of actual disaster, as
may be necessary to the prompt and effective operation of the City Civil
Defense Plan in time of a civil defense emergency. He may, from time to
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 306. Civil Defense 306-3
time, conduct such practice air-raid alerts or other civil defense exercises
as he may deem necessary.
(C) Personnel. The Director shall organize, recruit, and train air-raid wardens,
auxiliary police, auxiliary firefighters, emergency medical personnel, and
any other personnel that may be required on a volunteer basis to carry out
the civil defense plans of the City and the State. The Director may dismiss
any civil defense volunteer at any time and require him to surrender any
equipment and identification furnished by the City.
(D) Facilities. Consistent with the civil defense plan, the Director shall
provide and equip emergency hospitals, casualty stations, ambulances,
canteens, evaluation centers, and other facilities, or conveyances for the
care of injured or homeless persons.
(E) Enforcement. The Director shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations
issued by the governor with reference to civil defense.
(F) Authority. The Director shall direct and coordinate the general operations
of all local civil defense forces during a civil defense emergency in
conformity with controlling regulations and instructions of State civil
defense authorities. The heads of departments and agencies shall be
governed by his orders in respect thereto.
(G) Emergency Powers. During the first 30 days of a civil defense emergency,
if the legislature is in session or the Governor has coupled his declaration
of the emergency with a call for a special session of the legislature, the
Director may, when necessary to save life or property, require any person,
except members of the Federal or State military forces and officers of the
State or any other political subdivision, to perform services for civil
defense purposes as he directs and he may commandeer, for the time
being, any motor vehicle, tools, appliances or any other property, subject
to the owner's right to just compensation as provided by law.
306.050 Civil Defense Workers.
(A) Eligibility. No person shall be employed or associated in any capacity in
the Civil Defense Agency who advocates or has advocated a change by
force or violence in the constitutional form of government of the United
States or in this State or the overthrow of any Government in the United
States by force or violence, or who has been convicted of or is under
indictment for information charging any subversive acts against the United
States.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 306. Civil Defense 306-4
(B) Service. Civil defense volunteers shall be called into service only in case
of a civil defense emergency for which the regular municipal forces are
inadequate or for necessary training and preparation for such emergencies.
All volunteers shall serve without compensation.
(C) Identification. Each civil defense volunteer shall be provided with such
suitable insignia or other identification as may be required by the Director.
Such identification shall be in a form and style approved by the Federal
Government. No volunteer shall exercise any authority over the person or
property of others without his identification. No person except an
authorized volunteer shall use the identification of a volunteer or
otherwise represent himself to be an authorized volunteer.
(D) Weapons. No civil defense volunteer shall carry any firearm while on duty
except on written order of the Chief of the Police Department.
(E) Personnel Policy. Personnel procedures of the City applicable to regular
employees shall not apply to volunteer civil defense workers but shall
apply to paid employees of the Civil Defense Agency.
306.060 Participation in Labor Dispute or Politics. The Civil Defense Agency shall
not participate in any form of political activity, nor shall it be employed in a
legitimate labor dispute.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 307. Economic Development Commission 307-1
307 Economic Development Commission
307.010 Establishment of Commission. An Economic Development Commission is
hereby established to advise the City Council on Economic Development and
to create a focal point for the economic development of the City.
307.020 Composition. The Economic Development Commission shall consist of nine
(9) to thirteen (13) members appointed by the City Council, of which the
majority must be residents. Membership shall be open to any resident or nonresident
representative of a Shoreview-based business that is interested in the
business climate and economic development direction of the City. Any
member of the commission may be removed by a majority vote of City
Council.
307.030 Terms and Compensation. Appointment to the Economic Development
Commission shall be made at the first regular January meeting of the City
Council, or more often if required. Members shall be appointed for two (2)
year terms beginning February 1st and ending January 31st of the second year
following. Initial appointments shall be as follows: three (3) members shall
be appointed for the term of one (1) year; four (4) members for two (2) years.
Members appointed after the initial Commission shall be appointed for a twoyear
term. Members of the Advisory Commission may receive compensation
as the City Council shall provide by resolution.
307.040 Vacancies. In case of a vacancy during the term of office of any member of
the Commission, the City Council shall appoint a new member to serve the
remainder of the term. A vacancy shall exist if any of the following occur:
death, disability, failure to serve, or resignation.
307.050 Organization. The Commission shall annually elect one member to serve as
Chair. The Chair is responsible for the agenda of meetings, presiding at
meetings, minutes of meetings, and reports and recommendations to the City
Council. The Community Development Department shall maintain all records
of the Commission. An Executive Committee may be formed and undertake
duties assigned to it by the Commission.
307.060 Meetings and Reports. The Commission shall hold meetings as needed. It
shall keep minutes which shall be reduced to writing and a copy forwarded to
the City Council. The Community Development Director shall be the official
advisor.
307.070 Duties and Functions. The duties and functions of the Commission shall be
as follows:
Rev. Date
5/20/19
Ord. #971
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 307. Economic Development Commission 307-2
(A) Endeavor to secure a full and complete understanding of the City's needs
and desires for Economic Development activities.
(B) Assist with the development of a business retention and attraction
program, i.e., a marketing plan.
(C) Assure the integration of the City's economic development efforts with its
land use planning efforts. This means that business attraction is not an end
to itself, but is an element of community development.
(D) Assist in the identification of commercial/industrial rehabilitation areas,
and in working with the affected businesses to sell the effort.
(E) Assist in business promotion and recognition events, such as the Metro
East Development Fair or a Business Appreciation Night.
(F) Interact with the Chamber of Commerce as a means of improving
communications and responsiveness and avoiding duplication.
(G) Create a focal point for the economic development efforts of the City.
(H) Participate in the policy making process as requested by the City Council.
This may involve occasional joint meetings with the Planning Commission
and/or City Council.
(I) Perform other duties and functions as specifically delegated by City
Council.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 308. Human Rights Commission 308-1
308 Human Rights Commission
308.010 Policy. It is hereby declared that it is the public policy of the City, in
cooperation with the State Department of Human Rights, to secure for all
citizens equal opportunity in housing, employment, public accommodations,
public services and education, and to work consistently to improve the human
relations climate of the City of Shoreview.
308.020 Establishment and Composition. There is hereby reestablished a Human
Rights Commission of the City of Shoreview. The Commission shall be
composed of seven (7) to nine (9) members and shall be advisory to the City
Council. The City Council may, at its own discretion, appoint youth
representatives from local area high schools to serve as non-voting members.
The youth representative must be a high school sophomore, junior, or senior
and attend two regular meetings before being appointed. All members,
excluding the youth members, shall be residents of the City of Shoreview.
Members shall be appointed by the City Council.
308.030 Terms. Members of the Human Rights Commission shall be appointed to
staggered terms of three (3) years. Terms shall expire on January 31st of each
year. The first Human Rights Commission members terms were staggered in
the following manner: two (2) members whose terms expired on January 31,
1994; two (2) members whose terms expired on January 31, 1995; and three
(3) members whose terms expired on January 31, 1996. The terms of new
members will be set to ensure that memberships continue to be staggered.
Upon expiration of a term of office, the members may continue to serve until a
qualified successor is appointed.
308.040 Removal. The Council, by a majority vote, may remove any member of the
Human Rights Commission without cause.
308.050 Vacancies. Vacancies occurring in the membership of the Human Rights
Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term.
308.060 Compensation. Members of the Human Rights Commission shall serve
without compensation.
308.070 Duties, Responsibilities. In fulfillment of its purpose, the Human Rights
Commission serves in an advisory capacity to the City Council. New
programs and policies must receive the approval of the City Council prior to
implementation. Specific duties and responsibilities include:
(A) Adopt By-Laws and/or Rules of Conduct for its affairs.
Rev. Date
3/19/07
Ord. 812
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 308. Human Rights Commission 308-2
(B) Develop, in cooperation with the State Department of Human Rights,
programs of formal and informal education.
(C) Formulating human rights programs for the City of Shoreview, subject to
review and approval by the Shoreview City Council. These programs shall
direct and encourage the work of all individuals and agencies involved in
planning, policy making and educational programming in the area of civil
and human rights and shall aid citizens in bridging cultural and other
differences.
(D) Coordinating efforts with the Human Rights Commissions of neighboring
cities.
(E) Making recommendations to the City Manager and City Council in regard
to the planning or operation of any City Department on issues of civil and
human rights and making recommendations regarding the adoption of such
specific policies or actions as are needed to provide for full equal
opportunity in the City of Shoreview.
(F) Advising and making recommendations to the City Council in regard to
human rights issues.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 309. Code of Ethics 309-1
309 Code of Ethics
309.010 Declaration of Policy. Public officials should be held to a high standard of
conduct and responsibility due to the nature of their duties and responsibilities.
The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials
be independent, impartial and responsible to the people that government
decisions and policy be made through the proper channels of the government
structure; that public office not be used for personal financial gain; and that
the public have confidence in the integrity of its government.
In recognition of these goals and pursuant to Minnesota Statute 471.895, there
is hereby established a Code of Ethics for public officials of the City. The
purposes of this code is to establish ethical standards of conduct for all such
public officials while acting in their official capacity representing the City by
setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests
of the City.
309.020 Definition of Terms. Whenever used herein, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings set forth below:
(A) City. The City of Shoreview.
(B) Public Official. Any person holding a position by election or appointment
in the service of the municipality, whether paid or unpaid, including
members of the City Council and all City boards, committees,
commissions, and task forces.
(C) Anything of Value. Money, real or personal property, a permit or license,
a favor, a service, forgiveness of a loan or promise of future employment.
It does not mean reasonable compensation or expenses paid to an official
by the government of Shoreview for work performed.
(D) Compensation. A payment of "anything of value" to an individual in
return for that individual's services of any kind.
(E) Interested Person. A person or a representative of a person or association
that has a direct financial interest in a decision that a public official is
authorized to make.
(F) Gifts. A trinket or memento costing $5 or less.
309.040 Ethical Standards. In general, public officials are to serve all persons fairly
and equitably without regard to their personal or financial benefit. The
credibility of City government hinges on the proper discharge of duties in the
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 309. Code of Ethics 309-2
public interest. Public officials must ensure that the independence of their
judgment and actions is preserved without any consideration for personal gain.
The following specific ethical standards shall guide public officials:
(A) Incompatible Offices. A public official shall not hold another
"incompatible" office as that term has been defined in Minnesota Statutes
and interpreted by the Courts. The City Manager shall not hold an
incompatible office or outside employment without prior notice to and
approval by the City Council.
(B) Undue Influence and Disqualification. A public official shall not hold
other office or be employed in a job which compromises the performance
of the public official's duties without disclosure of such potentially
conflicting office or employment; and, in any event, public officials shall
disqualify themselves from participating in actions which might be
compromised by their holding of another office or means of employment.
(C) Open Meeting Law. A public official shall not violate the open meeting
law except as permitted under Minnesota Statute 13D.
(D) Use of Confidential Information. Public officials shall not disclose to
others, or use to further their personal interest, confidential information, as
defined by the Minnesota Data Privacy Act, acquired by them in the course
of their official duties.
(E) Not Public Data. A public official shall not disclose to the public, or use
for the public official’s gain or another person’s personal gain, information
that was obtained due to person’s public position if the information was
not public data or was discussed at a closed session of the City Council.
(F) Attorney-Client Privilege. A public official shall not disclose information
that was received, discussed, or decided in conference with the City’s legal
counsel that is protected by the attorney-client privilege unless a majority
of the City Council has authorized the disclosure.
(G) Solicitation of or Receipt of Anything of Value. A public official shall not
solicit or receive anything of value from any interested person or
association, directly or indirectly, in consideration of some action to be
taken or not to be taken in the performance of the public official’s duties.
Incidental items provided to public officials in the due course of business
while attending conferences, seminars, and training sessions, shall be
exempt from this provision.
(H) Holding Investments. No public official shall hold any investment which
might compromise the performance of his/her duties without disclosure of
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 309. Code of Ethics 309-3
said investment to the City Attorney and self disqualification from any
particular action which might be compromised by such investment, except
as permitted by statute, such as Minnesota Statute 471.88.
(I) Representation of Others. A member of the City Council shall not
represent interested persons or associations in dealings with the City in
consideration of anything of value.
(J) Financial Interest. Where a public official has a financial interest in any
matter being considered by the public official, such interest (if known to
the public official) must be disclosed to the City Attorney, and the public
official shall be disqualified from further participation in the matter.
(K) City Property. No public official shall use City owned property such as
vehicles, equipment, or supplies for personal convenience or profit except
when such property is available to the public generally, or where such
property is provided by specific City policy in the conduct of official City
business.
(L) Special Consideration. No public official shall grant any special
consideration, treatment, or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is
available to every other citizen.
(M)Authority. No public official shall exceed his/her authority, or breach the
law, or ask others to do so.
(N) Giving Anything of Value. No elected public official shall give anything
of value to potential voters in return for their votes, promises, or financial
consideration which would be prohibited by the State of Minnesota Fair
Campaign Practices statute.
(O) Public Funds. No public official shall use City public funds, personnel,
equipment or facilities, for private gain or political campaign activities,
unless such equipment and facilities are available to the public.
(P)Use of Logo or Other City Symbols. Use of the City's logo or any other
symbol for non-official City business without approval of the City Council
is prohibited.
(Q) Expenses. Public officials shall provide complete documentation to
support requests for expense reimbursement. Expense reimbursement
shall be made in accordance with City policy.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 309. Code of Ethics 309-4
(R) Donations. No public official shall take any action which will benefit any
person or entity because of a donation of anything of value to the City by
such a person or entity.
(S) Official Action. No public official shall take an official action which will
benefit any person or entity where such public official would not otherwise
have taken such action but for the public official's family relationship,
friendship, or business relationship with such person or entity.
(T) Compliance with Laws. Public officials shall comply with all City
ordinances and state and federal statutes, including but not limited to, the
Criminal Code, Fair Campaign Practices Act, and laws governing the
functioning of municipalities, their elected and appointed officials.
(U) Acceptance of Donations to the City. Public officials may accept
donations on behalf of the City regardless of value, and said donations
shall become the property of the City.
(V) Acceptance of Personal Gifts. Public officials may personally accept nonmonetary
gifts (trinkets and mementos) costing $5 or less.
(W)Knowledge of Violations. Public officials shall disclose any possible
violations of the City's Ethics Policy to the City Attorney.
(X) Public Interest. Public officials shall act with the best interests of the City
in mind.
309.050 Complaint Review Process.
(A) Complaints Against Public Officials. Allegations of violations against
public officials shall be reviewed by the City Attorney who shall:
(1) Make recommendations to the City Council for disposition of
complaints including, but not limited to, the referral of the complaint
and/or investigation to an independent counsel or to an administrative
law judge; or
(2) Refer allegations which may constitute a violation of federal, state, or
local statutes to the appropriate authority.
(B) Complaints Against Public Employees. Allegations made against public
employees who are subordinate to the City Manager shall be reviewed by
the City Manager who will determine the appropriate responsive action.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 300. Council and Administration
Section 309. Code of Ethics 309-5
(C) Complaints Against Contract Service Providers. Allegations made against
persons or entities providing service to the City under a contract shall be
reviewed by the City Manager. The City Manager shall mail a copy of the
City’s Ethics Policy to contractors providing service to the City. Any
violation of the provisions of this policy may result in termination of
contract or service agreement.












City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 404. Bikepaths, Trailways and Sidewalks 404-1
404 Bikepaths, Trailways and Sidewalks
404.010 Obstructions Prohibited. Unless authorized by the City Council, it shall be
unlawful for any person to park a truck, passenger automobile, or recreational
motor vehicle upon, or otherwise place any type of sign or obstruction within,
the dedicated width of a bikeway, trailway or sidewalk owned by or dedicated
for use to the City.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-1
405 Right-of-Way Management
405.010 Findings and Purpose. To provide for the health, safety and well-being of its
citizens, and to ensure the structural integrity of its streets and the appropriate
use of the rights-of-way, the City strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of
good repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances. Although the general
population bears the financial burden for the upkeep of the rights-of-way, a
primary cause for the early and excessive deterioration of its rights-of-way is
frequent excavation.
Right-of-way obstruction is a source of frustration for merchants, business
owners and the general population which must avoid these obstructions or
change travel or shopping plans because of them and has a detrimental effect
on commerce. Persons whose equipment is within the right-of-way are the
primary cause of these frequent obstructions.
The City holds the rights-of-way within its geographical boundaries as an
asset in trust for its citizens. The City and other public entities have invested
millions of dollars in public funds to build and maintain the rights-of-way. It
also recognizes that some persons, by placing their equipment in the right-ofway
and charging the citizens of the City for goods and services delivered
thereby, are using this property held for the public good. Although such
services are often necessary or convenient for the citizens, such persons
receive revenue and/or profit through their use of public property.
The Minnesota Legislature has recognized that it is in the public's interest that
the use and regulation of rights-of-way be carried on in a fair, efficient,
competitively neutral and substantially uniform manner while recognizing
such regulation must reflect distinct engineering, construction, operation,
maintenance, and public and worker safety requirements and standards
applicable to various users of rights of way. Further, the legislature has
determined that because increasing numbers of persons may seek usage of
rights-of-way, municipalities such as the City must be and have been
authorized to regulate use of rights-of-way. Consistent with this mandate, the
City has endeavored to model its right-of-way regulations consistent with
those of models enacted or under consideration by municipalities throughout
the state. Further, the City has endeavored to create competitively neutral
rights-of-way standards and regulations of general applicability.
In response to the foregoing facts, the City hereby enacts this Chapter relating
to Right-of-Way Management. This Chapter imposes reasonable regulations
on the placement and maintenance of equipment currently within its rights-ofway
or to be placed thereon at some future time. It is intended to complement
the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies. Under this Chapter, persons
disturbing and obstructing the rights-of-way will bear a fair share of the
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-2
financial responsibility for the integrity of the City's rights-of-way. Finally,
this Chapter provides for recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from
persons using the public rights-of-way.
By enactment of this Chapter, the City Council hereby exercises its lawful
police power and common law authority, and all statutory authority which is
available to it, including, but not limited to, the powers conferred on it under
Minn. Stat. § 237.162 and §237.163, while preserving all power and authority
to further require franchises from rights-of-way users under Minn. Stat.
§216B.36, §222.37, §300.03, and §412.11 and other provisions of law.
405.020 Definitions. The following definitions apply in this Chapter of this Code.
References hereafter to "sections" are unless otherwise specified references to
section in this Chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not
capitalized.
(1) "Applicant" means any person requesting permission to excavate or
obstruct a right-of-way.
(2) “Camouflage” Using shape, color, and texture to cause an object to
appear to become part of something else. Camouflage does not mean
invisible but rather appearing as part of the landscape or another
structure. Includes wireless telecommunication facilities disguised to
appear as another structure such flag pole, light pole, sign, tree, or utility
pole.
(3) "City" means the City of Shoreview, Minnesota. For purposes of Section
405.280, City means its elected officials, officers, employees and agents.
(4) “Collocation” is the sharing of a structures by wireless service providers
and other right-of-way users on a single support structure or otherwise
sharing a common location.
(5) “Concealed” Fully hidden from view. Refers to a wireless
telecommunication facility that is not evident and is hidden or integrated
into a structure such as a pole, building, wall, or roof.
(6) "Degradation" means the accelerated depreciation of the right-of-way
caused by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in
the need to reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if
the excavation did not occur.
(7) "Degradation Cost" means money paid to the City to cover the cost
associated with a decrease in the useful life of a public right-of-way
caused by excavation.
Rev. Date
9/21/2017
Ord. #956
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-3
(8) "Delay Penalty" means the penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable
delays in right-of-way construction.
(9) "Department" means the Department of Public Works of the City.
(10) "Department Inspector" means any person authorized by the Manager to
carry out inspections related to the provisions of this Chapter.
(11) "Disruptive Fee" means the penalty imposed as a result of the adverse
impact on the residents of the City and others who are required to alter
travel routes and times resulting from right-of-way obstructions.
(12) “Distributed Antenna System (DAS)” is a network of spatially or
geographically separated antenna nodes that are connected to a common
source through a transport or communication medium in order to provide
wireless communication service in a specific locality or building. A DAS
can be deployed indoors (iDAS) to provide network or cellular
connectivity throughout a building or outdoors (oDAS) in areas where
regular wireless coverage does not reach.
(13) “DAS Hub” Ancillary equipment usually contained in a shelter or other
enclosure which does not have any wireless transmission or receive
equipment contained therein but is utilized in the deployment and
operation of wireless DAS receive/transmit infrastructure that is located
elsewhere.
(14)"Emergency" means a condition that (1) poses a clear and immediate
danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of property; or (2) requires
immediate repair or replacement in order to restore service to a customer.
(15)"Equipment" means any tangible thing in any right-of-way; but shall not
include boulevard plantings or gardens planted or maintained in the rightof-
way between a person's property and the street curb.
(16) “Equipment Enclosure” A structure, shelter, cabinet, box, or vault
designed for and used to house and protect the electronic equipment
necessary and/or desirable for processing wireless telecommunication
signals and data, including any provisions for mechanical cooling
equipment, air conditions, ventilation, and/or auxiliary electric generators.
(17)"Excavate" means to dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb
or penetrate any part of a right-of-way, except horticultural practices of
penetrating the boulevard area to a depth of less than 12 inches.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-4
(18)"Excavation Permit" means the permit which, pursuant to this Chapter,
must be obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An
Excavation Permit allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-ofway
described in such permit.
(19)"Excavation Permit Fee" means money paid to the City by an applicant to
cover the costs as provided in Section 405.110.
(20)"Facility or Facilities" means any tangible asset in the right-of-way
required to provide utility service.
(21) “Height, Pole” The distance measured to the highest point of the antenna
or tower from the mean ground level measured at the base of a freestanding
facility or the projected base as determined by extending the
antenna or tower base down vertically to the ground. For building
mounted antennas, height is measured to the highest point of the
equipment enclosure from the top of the cornice of a flat roof, from the
top line of a mansard roof, from a point on the roof directly above the
highest wall of a shed roof, from the uppermost point on a round or other
arch-type roof, or from the highest gable on a pitched or hip roof
(22)"In" when used in conjunction with "right-of-way," means over, above, in,
within, on or under a right-of-way.
(23) “Inventory of Small Cell/DAS Sites” refers to an accurate and current
inventory of all Small Cell/DAS Sites approved by Permittee pursuant to
a Lease Agreement, including sites that become inactive for any reason.
(24)"Local Representative" means a local person or persons, or designee of
such person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to
make decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope
of this Chapter.
(25)"Management Cost" means the actual cost incurred by the City for public
rights-of-way management; including but not limited to costs associated
with registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying Right-of-
Way Permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects;
maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user equipment during
public right-of-way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way
restoration; restoring work inadequately performed; and revoking Rightof-
Way Permits and performing all other tasks required by this Chapter,
including other costs the City may incur in managing the provisions of
this Chapter. Management Cost does not include payment by a
Telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the right-of-way, the
fees and costs of litigation relating to the interpretation of Minnesota
Session Laws 1997, Chapter 123; Minnesota Statutes Sections 237.162 or
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-5
237.163 or any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the City's fees
and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to Section 1.30 of this
Chapter.
(26)"Manager" means the City Manager of the City of Shoreview, or the
Manager's designee.
(27) “Maintenance” means to repair unscheduled and scheduled deficiencies
in telecommunications equipment or performing routine actions which
keep the equipment in working order (known as scheduled maintenance)
or prevent trouble from arising (preventive maintenance).
(28) “Micro Wireless Facility” is a small cell wireless facility.
(29)"Obstruct" means to place any object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free
and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
(30)"Obstruction Permit" means the permit which, pursuant to this Chapter,
must be obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing
the holder to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of
that right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-ofway
for the duration specified therein.
(31)"Obstruction Permit Fee" means money paid to the City by a registrant to
cover the costs as provided in Section 405.110.
(32)"Patch or Patching" means a method of pavement replacement that is
temporary in nature. A patch consists of (1) the compaction of the subbase
and aggregate base, and (2) the replacement, in kind, of the existing
pavement for a minimum of two (2) feet beyond the edges of the
excavation in all directions. A patch is considered full restoration only
when the pavement is included in the City's five (5) year project plan.
(33)"Performance Security" means a performance bond, a restoration bond, a
letter of credit, or cash deposit posted to ensure the availability of
sufficient funds to assure that right-of-way excavation and obstruction
work is completed in both a timely and quality manner.
(34)"Permittee" means any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way has been granted by the City under this Chapter.
(35)"Person" means any natural or corporate person, business association or
other business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole
proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any
kind, an utility, a successor or assign of any of the foregoing, or any other
legal entity which has or seeks to have equipment in any right-of-way.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-6
(36)"Probation" means the status of a person that has not complied with the
conditions of this Chapter.
(37)"Probationary Period" means one year from the date that a person has
been notified in writing that they have been put on probation.
(38) “Public Utility Structure” is a structure which is owned by a
governmental agency or utility company and which may be/can be used
to support illumination devices or lines and other equipment carrying
electricity or communications.
(39) “Radio Propagation Study” The propagation of radio waves is described
through the modeling of the different physical mechanisms (free-space
attenuation, atmospheric attenuation, vegetation and hydrometer
attenuation, attenuation by diffraction, building penetration loss, etc).
This modeling is necessary for the conception of telecommunications
systems and, once they have been designed, for their actual field
deployment. Propagation models are implemented in engineering tools
for the prediction different parameters useful for the field deployment of
systems, for the study of the radio coverage (selection of the emission
sites, frequency allocation, powers evaluation, antenna gains,
polarization) and for the definition of the interferences occurring between
distant transmitters.
(40)"Registrant" means any person who (1) has or seeks to have its equipment
located in any right-of-way, or (2) in any way occupies or uses, or seeks
to occupy or use, the right-of-way or any equipment in the right-of-way.
(41)"Repair" means the temporary construction work necessary to make the
right-of-way usable for travel.
(42)"Restore or Restoration" means the process by which an excavated rightof-
way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is
returned to the same condition that existed before the commencement of
the work.
(43)"Restoration Cost" means an amount of money paid to the City by a
Permittee to cover the cost of restoration.
(44)"Right of Way" means the surface and space above and below a public
roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane and public sidewalk in
which the City has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for
travel purposes and utility easements of the City.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-7
(45)"Right-of-Way Permit" means either the Excavation Permit or the
Obstruction Permit, or both, depending on the context, required by this
Chapter.
(46)"Service" or "Utility Service" includes but is not limited to (1) those
services provided by a public utility as defined in Minn. Stat. §216B.02,
Subds. 4 and 6; (2) telecommunications, pipeline, community antenna
television, fire and alarm communications, water, electricity, light, heat,
cooling energy, or power services; (3) the services provided by a
corporation organized for the purposes set forth in Minn. Stat. §300.03;
(4) the services provided by a district heating or cooling system; and (5)
cable communications systems as defined in Minn. Stat. Chap. 238; and
A(6) Telecommunication Right-of-Way User.
(47) “Small Cell Site” is defined as a low-power radio access facility, together
with associated antennas, mounting and mechanical equipment, which
provides and extends wireless communications systems’ service coverage
and increases network capacity.
(48) “Small Wireless Facility” A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications:
(A)Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic
feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements,
the antenna could fit within an enclosure of no more than six cubic
feet; and
(B)All other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless
facility, excluding electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power
systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff
switches, cable, conduit, vertical cable runs for the connection of
power and other services, and any equipment concealed from public
view within or behind an existing structure or concealment, is in
aggregate no more than 28 cubic feet in volume; or
(C)A micro wireless facility
(49)"Supplementary Application" means an application made to excavate or
obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit
that had already been issued.
(50)"Telecommunication Rights-of-Way User" means a person owning or
controlling a facility in the public right-of-way, or seeking to own or
control a facility in the public right-of-way, that is used or is intended to
be used for transporting telecommunication or other voice or data
information. For purposes of this Chapter, a cable communication system
defined and regulated under Minn. Stat. Chap. 238, and
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-8
telecommunication activities related to providing natural gas or electric
energy services are not telecommunications right-of-way users.
(51) “Traffic Light/Traffic Signal System” are electrically operated colored
signaling devices positioned at road intersections, pedestrian crossings,
and other locations to control conflicting flows of traffic.
(52) “Transmission Media” is all of the Permittee's radios, antennas,
transmitters, wires, fiber optic cables, and other wireless transmission
devices that are part of the Small Cell/DAS Equipment.
(53)"Unusable Equipment" means equipment in the right-of-way which has
remained unused for one year and for which the registrant is unable to
provide proof that it has either a plan to begin using it within the next
twelve (12) months or a potential purchaser or user of the equipment.
(54) “Upgrade or Capital Improvement” is the construction, installation, or
assembly of new telecommunications equipment or the alteration,
expansion, or extension of an existing equipment to accommodate a
change of function or unmet programmatic needs, or to incorporate new
technology.
(55) “Utilities” Underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water
transmission or distribution systems; collection, communication
(excluding wireless telecommunication facilities), supply or disposal
systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits,
cables, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, hydrants or other similar
equipment and accessories in conjunction therewith; but not including
buildings.
(56) “Utility Pole” is a structure that is: (1) owned or operated by: (a) a public
utility; (b) a communications service provider; (c) a municipality; (d) an
electric membership corporation; or (e) a rural electric cooperative; and
(2) designed and used to: (a) carry lines, cables, or wires for telephone,
cable television, telecommunications or electricity; or (b) provide
lighting.
405.030 Administration. The Manager is the principal City official responsible for
the administration of the Right-of-Way Permits, and the regulations related
thereto. The Manager may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.
405.040 Franchise: Franchise Supremacy. The City may, in addition, to the
requirements of this Chapter, require that any person, which has or seeks to
have equipment located in any right-of-way, obtain a franchise for the full
extent permitted by law, now or hereinafter enacted. The terms of any
franchise which are in direct conflict with any provision of this Chapter,
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-9
whether granted prior or subsequent to enactment of this Chapter, shall control
and supersede the conflicting terms of this Chapter, provided, however, that
requirements relating to insurance, bonds, penalties, security funds, letters of
credit, indemnification or any other security in favor of the City may be
cumulative in the sole determination of the City or unless otherwise
negotiated by the City and the franchise grantee. All other terms of this
Chapter shall be fully applicable to all persons, whether franchised or not.
405.050 Registration and Right-of-Way Occupancy.
(A) Registration. Each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to occupy or use,
the right-of-way or any equipment in the right-of-way, including by lease,
sublease or assignment, or who has, or seeks to have, equipment in any
right-of-way must register with the Manager. Registration will consist of
providing application information and paying a registration fee.
(B) Registration Prior to Work. No person may construct, install, repair,
remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any equipment or
any part thereof in any right-of-way without first being registered with the
Manager.
(C) Exceptions. Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the
provisions of a City ordinance permitting persons to plant or maintain
boulevard plantings or gardens in the area of the right-of-way between
their property and the street curb. Except as hereinafter provided, persons
planting or maintaining boulevard plantings or gardens shall not be
deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way, and shall not be required to
obtain any permits or satisfy any other requirements for planting or
maintain such boulevard plantings or gardens under this Chapter.
However, excavations deeper than 12 inches are subject to the permit
requirements of section 405.080 of this Chapter. Nothing herein relieves a
person from complying with the provisions of Minn. Stat. Chapter 216D,
"one call" law.
405.060 Registration Information.
(A) Information Required. The information provided to the Manager at the
time of registration shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Each registrant's name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate
number, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and
facsimile numbers.
(2) The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and
facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative
or designee shall be available at all times. Current information
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-10
regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency shall
be provided at the time of registration.
(3) A certificate of insurance shall be on a form approved by the City:
(a) Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the registrant
by an insurance company license to do business in the State of
Minnesota, or that registrant is covered by self insurance which the
Manager determines to provide the City with protections
equivalent to that of a Minnesota licensed insurance company,
legally independent from the registrant;
(b) Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for personal
injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage
arising out of the (i) use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the
registrant, its officers, agents, employees and Permittees, and (ii)
placement and use of equipment in the right-of-way by the
registrant, its officers, agents, employees and Permittees, and that
registrant's insurance coverage includes, but is not limited to,
protection against liability arising from completed operations,
damage of underground equipment and collapse of property;
(c) Naming the City as an additional insured as to whom the coverages
required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense
will be provided as to all such coverages;
(d) Requiring that the Manager be notified thirty (30) days in advance
of cancellation of the policy; and
(e) Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability
coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage
established by the Manager in amounts sufficient to protect the
City and carry out the purposes and policies of this Chapter.
(4) The City may require a copy of the actual insurance policies.
(5) If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate required to be
filed under Minn. Stat. §300.06 as recorded and certified to by the
Secretary of State.
(6) A copy of the person's certificate of authority from the Minnesota
Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or federal
agency, where the person is lawfully required to have such certificate
from said commission or other state or federal agency.
(7) Such other information as the City may require.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-11
(B) Notice of Changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information listed
above current at all times by providing to the Manager information as to
changes within fifteen (15) days following the date on which the registrant
has knowledge of any change.
405.070 Reporting Obligations.
(A) Operations. Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by
December 1st of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan
with the Manager.
(1) Such plan shall be submitted by using a format designated by the
Manager and shall contain the information determined by the Manager
to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the
frequency of excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way.
(2) The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
(a) The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of all
Projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (in this
section, a "Next-Year Project"); and
(b) The tentative locations and estimated beginning and ending dates
for all Projects contemplated for the five years following the next
calendar year (in this section, a "Five-Year Project").
(3) The term "project" in this section shall include both Next-Year
Projects and Five-Year Projects.
(4) By January 1st of each year, the Manager will have available for
inspection in the Manager's office a composite list of all Projects of
which the Manager has been informed in the annual plans. All
registrants are responsible for keeping themselves informed of the
current status of this list.
(5) Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change any Project in
its list of Next-Year Projects, and must notify the Manager and all
other registrants of all such changes in said list. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a Next-Year Project of
another registrant listed by the other registrant.
(B) Additional Next-Year Projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Manager will not deny an application for a Right-of-Way Permit for
failure to include a project in a plan submitted to the City if the registrant
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-12
has used commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the
project.
405.080 Right-of-Way Permit Requirement.
(A) Right-of-Way Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in the
City's regulations, no person may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way or
utilize land area or infrastructure without first having obtained the
appropriate Right-of-Way Permit from the City Manager and posting of
the appropriate performance security with the City Manager.
(1) Excavation Permit. An Excavation Permit is required by a registrant
to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and
to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the rightof-
way by placing equipment described therein, to the extent and for
the durations specified therein.
(2) Obstruction Permit. An Obstruction Permit is required by registrant to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-ofway
by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the
extent and for the durations specified therein.
(3) Small Cell Wireless Facilities/DAS Hub Permit. A small cell wireless
facility/DAS hub permit is required by the registrant to install facilities
and equipment over a specified portion of the right-of-way by placing
or utilizing infrastructure therein located.
(a) An application may file a consolidated permit application to
collocate up to 15 small wireless facilities, or a greater number if
agreed to by the City, provided that all the small wireless facilities
in the application:
(i) Are located within a two-mile radius;
(ii) Consist of substantially similar equipment; and
(iii)Are to be placed on similar types of wireless support structures
(b) In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the
City may approve a permit for some small wireless facilities and
deny a permit for others, but may not use denial of one or more
permits as a basis to deny all the small wireless facilities in the
application.
(c) The City shall have 90 days after the date a Small Cell Wireless
Facilities/DAS Hub Permit application is filed to issue or deny the
Rev. Date
9/21/2017
Ord. #956
Rev. Date
9/21/2017
Ord. #956
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-13
permit, or the permit is automatically issued. To toll the 90-day
clock, the City must provide a written notice of incompleteness to
the applicant within 30 days of receipt of the application, clearly
and specifically delineating all missing documents or information.
Information delineated in the notice is limited to documents or
information publicly required as of the date of application
and reasonably related to the City’s determination whether the
proposed equipment falls within the definition of a Small Cell
Wireless Facility/DAS Hub and whether the proposed
deployment satisfies all health, safety, and welfare regulations
applicable to the small wireless facility permit request. Upon an
applicant's submittal of additional documents or information
in response to a notice of incompleteness, the City has ten days to
notify the applicant in writing of any information requested in the
initial notice of incompleteness that is still missing. Second or
subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify
documents or information that were not delineated in the original
notice of incompleteness.
(d) If the City receives applications within a single seven-day period
from one or more applicants seeking approval of permits for more
than 30 small wireless facilities, the City may extend the 90-day
deadline imposed in 405.080(A)(3)(c) by an additional 30 days. If
a City elects to invoke this extension, it must inform in writing
any applicant to whom the extension will be applied.
(e) A wireless service provider may collocate small wireless
facilities on wireless support structures owned or controlled by
the City and located within the public roads or rights-of-way
provided a standard small wireless facility collocation agreement
is executed.
(i) Any initial engineering survey and preparatory construction
work associated with collocation must be paid by the applicant.
(f) A permit may be issued upon satisfaction of the following criteria:
(i) Compliance with applicable and reasonable health, safety, and
welfare regulations consistent with the City's public right-ofway
management;
(ii) Compliance with the standards set forth in Section 405;
(iii)All facilities shall make reasonable accommodations for
decorative wireless support structures or signs; and
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-14
(iv)Submittal shall address the restocking, replacement, or
relocation requirements when a new wireless support structure
is placed in a public right-of-way.
(g) A permit may be denied upon the following findings:
(i) Denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and
welfare or when necessary to protect the public right-of-way
and its current use.
(ii) The facility does not comply with the standards set forth in
Section 405.
(iii)Any denial of a right-of-way permit for a small wireless facility
permit must be made in writing and must document the basis
for the denial. The City must notify the telecommunications
right-of-way user in writing within three business days of the
decision to deny the permit. If a permit application is denied,
the telecommunications right-of-way user may cure the
deficiencies identified by the City and resubmit its application.
If the telecommunications right-of-way user resubmits the
application within 30 days of receiving written notice of the
denial, it may not be charged an additional filing or processing
fee. The City must approve or deny the revised application
within 30 days after the revised application is submitted.
(B) Right-of-Way Permit Extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the
right-of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless such
person makes a supplementary application for another Right-of-Way
permit before the expiration of the initial permit, and a new Right-of-Way
Permit, or Right-of-Way Permit extension, is granted.
(C) Delay Penalty. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 405.080(B), the
City shall establish and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in
right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching or restoration. The delay
penalty shall be established from time to time by City Council Resolution.
(D) Right-of-Way Permit Display. Right-of-Way Permits issued under this
Chapter shall be conspicuously displayed at all times at the indicated work
site and shall be available for inspection by the Manager.
(E) Performance Security. Performance security shall be in an amount
determined in the City's sole discretion, sufficient to serve as security for
the full and complete performance of Permittee's obligation under this
Chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages, or loss the City pays or
incurs because of any failure to comply with this Chapter or any other
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-15
applicable law, regulation, or standard. During the period of construction,
repair or restoration of rights-of-way or equipment within the rights-ofway,
the performance security shall be in an amount sufficient to cover
125% of the estimated cost of such work, as documented by the person
proposing to perform such work, or in a lesser amount as may be
determined by the Manager, taking into account the amount of equipment
in the right-of-way, the location and method of installation of the
equipment, the conflict or interference of such equipment with the
equipment of other persons, and the purposes and policies of this Chapter.
Sixty (60) days after completion of such work, the performance security
may be reduced in the sole determination of the City.
405.090 Application for a Right-of-Way Permit. Applications for a Right-of-Way
Permit is made to the Manager. Right-of-Way Permit applications shall
contain, and will be considered complete only upon compliance with the
requirements of the following provisions:
(A) Registration with the Manager pursuant to this Chapter;
(B) Submissions of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area
of the proposed project and the location of all existing and proposed
equipment;
(C) Payment of all money due to the City for:
(1) Permit fees, estimated restoration costs, and other management costs;
(2) Prior obstructions or excavations;
(3) Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the City because
of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the Rights-of-Way
or any emergency actions taken by the City;
(4) Franchise fees, if applicable.
(D) Payment of disputed amounts due the City by posting performance
security or depositing in a City-approved escrow account an amount equal
to at least 110% of the amount owing.
(E) When an Excavation Permit is requested for purposes of installing
additional equipment, and the posting of a restoration bond for the
additional equipment is insufficient, the posting of an additional or larger
restoration bond for the additional equipment may be required.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-16
405.095 Small Cell Wireless Facility/DAS Hubs
(A)Small Cell Wireless Facilities and DAS hubs may be placed in the public
right-of-way provided a Right-of-Way Permit is issued. The City shall
consider the following when reviewing a permit application:
(1) Demonstrated need for the Small Cell Wireless Facility/DAS
Technologies within the geographic area as identified by a radio
propagation study in order to deliver adequate service;
(2) Proof that all co-location sites in the area of need are/were pursued
and have been denied; or that there does not exist the ability to colocate
using existing structures. The Applicant must demonstrate
all actions taken to achieve collocation.
(3) The character of the area in which the Small Cell Wireless
Facility/DAS hub is requested, including evidence of surrounding
properties and uses.
(B) Small Cell Wireless Facilities and DAS Hubs located in the public rightof-
way shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Color and Camouflage. All facilities and hubs shall be
camouflaged and use design, materials, colors, textures, screening, and
landscaping to blend in with the surrounding natural setting and built
environment. All facilities and hubs shall be designed to minimize the
visual impact and, in the sole discretion of the City, so appear
compatible with the surroundings:
(a) Color. The facilities and hubs shall use colors to minimize the
visual impact when viewed from the public right-of-way and
nearby property, except in instances where the color is dictated by
federal or state authorities such as the Federal Aviation
Administration.
(b) Camouflage or Concealed. Small cell wireless facilities must be
integrated into a pole structure that is also utilized for street
lighting, traffic signal systems, parking lot lighting and utility
power lines.
(c) Scale. Small cell wireless facilities that are integrated into a pole
structure shall be in scale or proportionate to the pole structure.
(d) Equipment Enclosures shall be placed in underground vaults,
unless the City determines an above-grade installation is
appropriate for the site. These cabinets shall be heavily screened
from view with landscape materials.
Rev. Date
9/21/2017
Ord. #956
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-17
(2) Safety and Environmental Standards
(a) Unauthorized Climbing. All facilities and hubs shall be designed
to prevent unauthorized climbing or entry.
(b) Noise. If the proposed facility includes a back-up generator or
otherwise results in significant increased sound levels, sound
buffers may be required including, but not limited to, baffling,
barriers, enclosures, walls, and plantings, so that the wireless
telecommunications facility is operated in compliance with the
requirements specified in Section 209.020, Noise.
(c) Radio Frequency (RF) Emissions and Interference. Small cell
wireless facilities and DAS hubs shall comply with Federal
Communication Commission standards for RF emissions and
interference. Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be tested
for compliance with FCC RF emissions standards after installation.
(d) Maintenance. All small cell wireless facilities and DAS hubs
times be kept and maintained in good condition, appearance, order,
and repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or
property of any person.
(e) Occupational Safety. Small cell wireless facilities and DAS hubs
shall comply with applicable State of Minnesota and Federal
regulations for occupational exposure to non-ionizing radiation.
(3) Signs The use of any portion of Small Cell Wireless Facility/DAS Hub
for signs or advertising other than warning or small equipment and
emergency contact information signs is prohibited.
(4) Lighting. Small cell facilities shall not be illuminated by artificial
means and shall not display lights unless such facilities are
incorporated into the approved design of a support pole, fixtures used
to illuminate streets may be attached to the pole.
(5) Equipment Enclosures and Underground Vaults. All equipment
enclosures and underground vaults shall comply with the following
standards:
(a) Underground vaults and equipment enclosures shall be of the
smallest size necessary.
(b) Equipment enclosures shall be located in underground vaults,
unless the City determines an above-grade installation is
appropriate for the site.
(c) All above ground equipment enclosures shall be screened from
view by suitable vegetation, except where non-vegetative
screening (e.g., a decorative wall) better reflects and complements
the character of the neighborhood.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-18
(6) Pole-mounted: Small Cell Wireless Facilities may be freestanding or
integrated into freestanding poles provided the following standards are
met:
(a) Small Cell Wireless Facilities are prohibited on existing poles that
have been designed exclusively for use as street lighting, traffic
signal systems, parking lot lighting and utility lines.
(b) Small Cell Wireless Facilities shall only be permitted on poles that
are designed to integrate the Facility into the pole structure. Said
pole structure may be free-standing or also utilized for street
lighting, traffic signal systems, parking lot lighting and utility
power lines.
(c) Design. The design of the pole shall be similar in appearance to
other poles located in the right-of-way that are not being used for
Small Cell Wireless Facility.
(d) Maximum Height. The maximum pole height permitted is 50-feet
as measured from the ground grade to the highest point of the pole
structure, including the small cell facility.
(e) Concealment. Small Cell Wireless Facilities located on poles shall
be concealed, placed inside the pole structure and have no exposed
hardware or equipment.
(f) Maximum number permitted per pole: There shall be no more than
one (1) small cell facility per pole unless said pole is approved for
collocation of more than one small cell facility.
(g) Structural Capacity. The pole must have the structural capacity to
carry the loading Small Cell Wireless Facility.
(7) Maintenance and Modifications of Small Cells/DAS
(a) Coordination of Maintenance and Equipment Upgrade Activities -
Prior to Permittee engaging in planned or routine maintenance
activities, or equipment upgrades concerning Small Cell/DAS
Equipment attached to a City, County, or Utility owned pole,
Permittee shall provide twenty (20) days advance notice to the City
of Shoreview in order to coordinate such maintenance activities or
other public safety functions. Permittee shall obtain a ROW Permit
prior to engaging in any maintenance or equipment upgrade
activities in the Right-of-Way regardless of pole ownership. Such
twenty (20) day advance notice shall not be required in the case of
an emergency.
(b) Prior to making any future modifications to the Small Cell/DAS
Site described in Section 405.95B (6)(a) above, other than
maintenance and repair of site specific Small Cell/DAS Equipment
as provided in the Lease Agreement, Permittee shall file a Small
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-19
Cell/DAS Site Application with the City of Shoreview describing
the proposed modifications. The City shall review the Small
Cell/DAS Site Application pursuant to the terms and conditions in
the Lease Agreement, and if approved such Small Cell/DAS Site
Application shall be attached as an Exhibit and made a part hereto.
Any additional site modifications shall be incorporated hereto in
the same manner.
(8) Removal of Non-Compliant Installations. The City shall have the
authority at any time to order and require Permittee to remove and
abate any Small Cell/DAS Equipment or other structure that is in
violation of the City Municipal Code. In case Permittee, after receipt
of written notice and thirty (30) days opportunity to cure, fails or
refuses to comply, the City shall have the authority to remove the same
at the expense of the Permittee, all without compensation or liability
for damages to the Permittee.
405.100 Issuance of Permit; Conditions.
(A) Permit Issuance. If the Manager determines that the applicant has satisfied
the requirements of this Chapter, the Manager may issue a permit.
(B) Conditions. The Manager may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the public health, safety and welfare to ensure the structural
integrity of the right-of-way, to protect the property and safety of other
users of the right-of-way, and to minimize the disruption and
inconvenience to the traveling public.
405.110 Right-of-Way Permit Fees.
(A) Excavation Permit Fee. The Excavation Permit Fee shall be established
by the Manager in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
(1) the City Management Costs;
(2) degradation cost, if applicable.
(B) Obstruction Permit Fee. The Obstruction Permit Fee shall be established
by the Manager and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the City
Management Costs.
(C) Payment of Permit Fees. No Excavation Permit or Obstruction Permit
shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees.
The City may allow applicant to pay such fees within thirty (30) days of
billing.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-20
(D) Non-Refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the Manager
has revoked for a breach as stated in Section 405.210 are not refundable.
405.120 Right-of-Way Patching and Restoration.
(A) Timing. The work to be done under the Excavation Permit, and the
patching and/or restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many
days as work could not be done because of extraordinary circumstances
beyond the control of the Permittee or when work was prohibited as
unseasonal or unreasonable under Section 405.150.
In addition to repairing its own work, the Permittee must restore the
general area of the work, and the surrounding areas, including the paving
and its foundations, to the same condition that existed before the
commencement of the work and must inspect the area of the work and use
reasonable care to maintain the same condition for thirty-six (36) months
thereafter.
(B) Patch and Restoration. Permittee shall patch its own work. The City may
choose either to have the Permittee restore the right-of-way or the City
shall restore the right-of-way itself.
(1) City Restoration. If the City restores the right-of-way, Permittee shall
pay the costs thereof within thirty (30) days of billing. If, during the
thirty-six (36) months following such restoration, the pavement settles
due to Permittee's improper backfilling, the Permittee shall pay to the
City, within thirty (30) days of billing, the cost of repairing said
pavement.
(2) Permittee Restoration. If the Permittee restores the right-of-way, it
shall at the time of application for an Excavation Permit, post a
performance security in an amount determined by the Manager to be
sufficient to cover the cost of restoring the right-of-way to its preexcavation
condition. If, thirty-six (36) months after completion of the
restoration of the right-of-way, the Manager determines that the rightof-
way has been properly restored, the surety on the performance
security shall be released.
(C) Standards. The Permittee shall perform repairs and restoration according
to the standards and with the materials specified by the Manager. The
Manager shall have the authority to prescribe the manner and extent of the
restoration, and may do so in written procedures of general application or
on a case-by-case basis. The Manager in exercising this authority shall be
guided by the following standards and considerations:
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-21
(1) The number, size, depth and duration of the excavations, disruptions or
damage to the right-of-way;
(2) The traffic volume carried by the right-of-way; the character of the
neighborhood surrounding the right-of-way;
(3) The pre-excavation condition of the right-of-way; the remaining lifeexpectancy
of the right-of-way affected by the excavation;
(4) Whether the relative cost of the method of restoration to the Permittee
is in reasonable balance with the prevention of an accelerated
depreciation of the right-of-way that would otherwise result from the
excavation, disturbance or damage to the right-of-way; and
(5) The likelihood that the particular method or restoration would be
effective in slowing the depreciation of the right-of-way that would
otherwise take place.
(D) Guarantees. By choosing to restore the right-of-way itself, the Permittee
guarantees its work and shall maintain it for thirty-six (36) months
following its completion. During this 36-month period, it shall, upon
notification from the Manager, correct all restoration work to the extent
necessary, using the method required by the Manager. Said work shall be
completed within five (5) calendar days of the receipt of the notice from
the Manager, not including days during which work cannot be done
because of the circumstances constituting force majeure or days when
work is prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under Section 405.150.
(E) Failure to Restore. If the Permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the
manner and to the condition required by the Manager, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the Manager,
the Manager at its option may do such work. In that event the Permittee
shall pay to the City, within thirty (30) days of billing, the cost of restoring
the right-of-way. If Permittee fails to pay as required, the City may
exercise its rights under the restoration bond.
(F) Degradation Fee in Lieu of Restoration. In lieu of right-of-way
restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee.
However, the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and
the degradation fee shall not include the costs to accomplish these
responsibilities.
405.130 Joint Applications.
(A) Joint Application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to excavate or
obstruct the right-of-way at the same time and place.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-22
(B) With City Projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction or
excavation performed by the Manager, whether or not it is a joint
application by two or more registrants or a single application, are not
required to pay the obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee.
(C) Shared Fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same obstruction
or excavation, which the Manager does not perform, may share in the
payment of the obstruction or Excavation Permit fee. Registrants must
agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay and indicate the
same on their applications.
405.140 Supplementary Applications.
(A) Limitation on Area. A Right-of-Way Permit is valid only for the area of
the right-of-way specified in the permit. No Permittee may do any work
outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
Permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that
greater area (i) make application for a permit extension and pay any
additional fees required thereby, and (ii) be granted a new permit or permit
extension.
(B) Limitation on Dates. A Right-of-Way Permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. No Permittee may begin its work before the
permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the
end date. If a Permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it
must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive
the new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the
end date of the previous permit. This supplementary application must be
done before the permit end date.
405.150 Other Obligations.
(A) Compliance with Other Laws. Obtaining a Right-of-Way permit does not
relieve Permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses,
and authority and to pay all fees required by any other City, County, State
or Federal rules, laws or regulations. A Permittee shall comply with all
requirements of local, state and federal laws, including Minn. Stat.
§§216D.01-09 ("One Call Excavation Notice System"). A Permittee shall
perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established
rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right-ofway
pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-23
(B) Prohibited Work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the
Manager, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when
seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.
(C) Interference with Right-of-Way. A Permittee shall not so obstruct a rightof-
way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters
or other waterways shall be interfered with. Private vehicles may not be
parked within or next to a permit area. The loading or unloading of trucks
next to a permit area is prohibited unless specifically authorized by the
permit.
405.160 Denial of Permit. The Manager may deny a permit for failure to meet the
requirements and conditions of this Chapter, or if the Manager determines that
the denial is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public,
or if necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use.
405.170 Installation Requirements. The excavation, backfilling, patching and
restoration, and all other work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in
conformance with Engineering Standards adopted by the PUC or other
applicable local requirements, insofar as they are not inconsistent with PUC
Rules.
405.180 Inspection.
(A) Notice of Completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the Permittee shall furnish a Completion Certificate in
accordance with PUC Rules.
(B) Site Inspection. Permittee shall make the work-site available to the
Manager and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the
work.
(C) Authority of Manager.
(1) At the time of inspection, the Manager may order the immediate
cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health,
safety, or well-being of the public.
(2) The Manager may issue an Order to the Permittee for any work which
does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable
standards, conditions or codes. The Order shall state that failure to
correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within
ten (10) days after issuance of the Order, the Permittee shall present
proof to the Director that the violation has been corrected. If such
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-24
proof has not been presented within the required time, the Director
may revoke the permit pursuant to Section 405.210.
405.190 Work Done Without a Permit.
(A) Emergency Situations. Each registrant shall immediately notify the
Manager of any event regarding its equipment which it considers to be an
emergency. The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are
necessary to respond to the emergency. Within two business days after
the occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the
necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of
the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this
Chapter for the actions it took in response to the emergency.
If the Manager becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's
equipment, the Manager may attempt to contact the local representative of
each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any
event, the Manager may take whatever action it deems necessary to
respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the
registrant whose equipment occasioned the emergency.
(B) Non-Emergency Situations. Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates
a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, pay double the normal
fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by the
Legislative Code, deposit with the Manager the fees necessary to correct
any damage to the right-of-way an comply with all of the requirements of
this Chapter.
405.200 Supplementary Notification. If the obstruction or excavation of the right-ofway
begins later or ends sooner than the date given on the permit, Permittee
shall notify the Manager of the accurate information as soon as this
information is known.
405.210 Revocation of Right-of-Way Permits.
(A) Substantial Breach. The City reserves its right, as provided herein, to
revoke any Right-of-Way Permit, without a fee refund, if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance,
rule or regulation, or any condition of the permit. A substantial breach by
Permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(1) the violation of any material provision of the Right-of-Way Permit;
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-25
(2) an evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the Right-of-
Way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or
deceit upon the City or its citizens;
(3) any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a Right-of-
Way Permit;
(4) the failure to maintain the required bonds and/or insurance;
(5) the failure to complete the work in a timely manner; or
(6) the failure to correct a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant
to Sec. 405.180.
(B) Written Notice of Breach. If the Manager determines that the Permittee
has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit, the manager
shall make a written demand upon the Permittee to remedy such violation.
The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for
revocation of the permit. Further, a substantial breach, as stated above,
will allow the Manager, at his or her discretion, to place additional or
revised conditions on the permit.
(C) Response to Notice of Breach. Within twenty-four (24) hours of receiving
notification of the breach, Permittee shall contact the Manager with a plan,
acceptable to the Manager, for its correction. Permittee's failure to so
contact the Manager, or the Permittee's failure to so contact the Manager,
or the Permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan, or Permittee's
failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be cause for
immediate revocation of the permit. Further, Permittee's failure to
reasonably implement the approved plan shall automatically place the
Permittee on probation for one (1) full year.
(D) Cause for Probation. From time to time, the Manager may establish a list
of conditions of the permit, which if breached will automatically place the
Permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited to,
working out of the allotted time period or working on right-of-way grossly
outside of the permit.
(E) Automatic Revocation. If a Permittee, while on probation, commits a
breach as outlined above, Permittee's permit will automatically be revoked
and Permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full year, except
for emergency repairs.
(F) Reimbursement of City Costs. If a permit is revoked, the Permittee shall
also reimburse the City for the City's reasonable costs, including
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-26
restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorney's fees
incurred in connection with such revocation.
405.220 Mapping Data.
(A) Information Required. Each year, registrant shall provide mapping
information required by the Manager in accordance with PUC Rules.
(B) Trade Secret Information. At the request of any registrant, any information
requested by the Manager, which qualifies as a "trade secret" under
Minnesota Statutes Chapter 13.37(b) shall be treated as trade secret
information as detailed therein.
405.230 Location of Facilities.
(A) Undergrounding. Unless otherwise permitted by an existing franchise or
Minn. Stat. §216B.34, or unless existing above-ground facilities are repair
or replaced, new construction and the installation of new facilities and
replacement of old facilities shall be done underground or contained
within buildings or other structures in conformity with applicable codes.
(B) Corridors. The Manager may assign specific corridors within the right-ofway,
or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type
of facility that is or, pursuant to current technology, the Manager expects
will someday be located within the right-of-way. All excavation,
obstruction, or other permits issued by the Manager involving the
installation or replacement of facilities shall designate the proper corridor
for the facilities at issue.
Any registrant whose facility is in the right-of-way in a position at
variance with the corridors established by the Manager shall, no later than
at the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area where the
facility is located, move that facility to its assigned position within the
right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the Manager for good
cause shown, upon consideration of such factors as the remaining
economic life of the facilities, public safety, customer service needs and
hardship to the registrant.
(C) Nuisance. One year after the passage of this Chapter, any facility found in
a right-of-way that has not been registered shall be deemed to be a
nuisance. The City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in
equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking
possession of the facility and restoring the right-of-way to a useable
condition.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-27
(D) Limitation of Space. To protect health and safety, the Manager shall have
the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities
within the right-of-way if there is insufficient space to accommodate all of
the requests of registrants or persons to occupy and use the right-of-way.
In making such decisions, the Manager shall strive to the extent possible
to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-of-way, but
shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest, the
public's needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the rightof-
way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the protection of
existing equipment in the right-of-way, and future City plans for public
improvements and development projects which have been determined to
be in the public interest.
405.240 Relocation of Facilities. A Registrant must promptly and at its own expense,
with due regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently remove and
relocate its equipment and facilities in the right-of-way whenever the Manager
requests such removal and relocation, and shall restore the right-of-way to the
same condition it was in prior to said removal or relocation. The Manager
may make such request to prevent interference by the Company's equipment
or facilities with (i) a present or future City use of the right-of-way, (ii) a
public improvement undertaken by the City, (iii) an economic development
project in which the City has an interest or investment, (iv) when the public
health, safety, and welfare require it, or (v) when necessary to prevent
interference with the safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the rightof-
way.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person shall not be required to remove or
relocate its equipment from any right-of-way which has been vacated in favor
of a non-governmental entity unless and until the reasonable costs thereof are
first paid to the person therefor.
405.250 Pre-Excavation Facility and Facilities Location. In addition to complying
with the requirements of Minn. Stat. §§216D.01-09 ("One-Call Excavation
Notice System") before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each
registrant who has equipment in the area to be excavated shall mark the
horizontal and approximate vertical replacement of all said equipment. Any
registrant whose equipment is less than twenty (20) inches below a concrete or
asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with the excavation contractor to
establish the exact location of its equipment and the best procedure for
excavation.
405.260 Damage to Other Facilities. When the Manager does work in the right-ofway
and finds it necessary to maintain, support, or move a registrant's
equipment to protect it, the Manager shall notify the local representative as
early as is reasonably possible. The costs associated therewith will be billed
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-28
to that registrant and must be paid within thirty (30) days from the date of
billing.
Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any equipment in
the right-of-way which it or its equipment damages. Each registrant shall be
responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the equipment of another
registrant caused during the City's response to an emergency occasioned by
that registrant's equipment.
405.270 Right-of-Way Vacation.
(A) Reservation of Right. If the City vacates a right-of-way which contains
the equipment of a registrant, and if the vacation does not require the
relocation of registrant or Permittee equipment, the City shall reserve, to
and for itself and all registrants having equipment in the vacated right-ofway,
the right to install, maintain, and operate any equipment in the
vacated right-of-way and to enter upon such right-of-way at any time for
the purpose of reconstructing, inspecting, maintaining or repairing the
same.
(B) Relocation of Facilities. If the vacation requires the relocation of
registrant or Permittee facilities; and (a) if the vacation proceedings are
initiated by the registrant or Permittee, the registrant or Permittee must pay
the relocation costs; or (b) if the vacation proceedings are initiated by the
City, the registrant or Permittee must pay the relocation costs unless
otherwise agreed to by the City and the registrant or Permittee; or (c) if the
vacation proceedings are initiated by a person or persons other than the
registrant or Permittee, such other person or persons must pay the
relocation costs.
405.280 Indemnification and Liability. By registering with the Manager, or by
accepting a permit under this Chapter, a registrant or permittee agree as
follows:
(A) Limitation of Liability. By accepting a registration or granting a Right-of-
Way Permit, the City does not assume any liability (a) for injuries to
persons, damage to property, or loss of service claims by parties other than
the registrant, or (b) for claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the
installation, presence, maintenance, or operation of equipment by
registrants or activities of registrants.
(B) Indemnification. A registrant or Permittee shall indemnify, keep, and hold
the City free and harmless from any and all liability on account of injury
to persons or damage to property occasioned by the issuance of permits or
by the construction, maintenance, repair, inspection, or operation of
registrant's or Permittee's facilities located in the Right-of-Way.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-29
The City shall not be indemnified for losses or claims occasioned through
its own negligence except for losses or claims arising out of or alleging the
City's negligence as to the issuance of permits or inspections to ensure
permit compliance. The City shall not be indemnified if the injury or
damage results from the performance of a proper manner of acts which the
registrant or Permittee reasonably believes will cause injury or damage,
and the performance is nevertheless ordered or directed by the City after
receiving notice of the registrant's or Permittee's determination.
(C) Defense. If a suit is brought against the City under circumstances where
the registrant or Permittee is required to indemnify, the registrant or
Permittee, at its sole cost and expense, shall defend the City in the suit if
written notice of the suit is properly given to the registrant or Permittee
within a period in which the registrant or Permittee is not prejudiced by
the lack of delay of notice.
If the registrant or Permittee is required to indemnify and defend, it shall
thereafter have control of the litigation, but the registrant or Permittee may
not settle the litigation without the consent of the City. Consent will not
be unreasonably withheld.
This part is not as to third-parties, a waiver of any defense, immunity or
damage limitation otherwise available to the City.
In defending an action on behalf of the City, the registrant or Permittee is
entitled to assert in an action every defense, immunity or damage
limitation that the City could assert in its own behalf.
405.290 Abandoned and Unusable Equipment.
(A) Discontinued Operations. A registrant who has determined to discontinue
its operation in the City must either:
(1) Provide information satisfactory to the Manager that the registrant's
obligations for its equipment in the right-of-way under this Chapter
have been lawfully assumed by another registrant; or
(2) Submit to the Manager a proposal and instruments for transferring
ownership of its equipment to the City. If a registrant proceeds under
this clause, the City may, at its option:
(a) purchase the equipment; or
(b) require the registrant, at its own expense, to remove it; or
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-30
(c) require the registrant to post a bond in an amount sufficient to
reimburse the City for reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred
in removing the equipment.
(B) Abandoned Equipment. Equipment of a registrant who fails to comply
with Section 405.300, Subd. A, and which, for two (2) years, remains
unused shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned equipment is
deemed to be a nuisance. The City may exercise any remedies or rights it
has at least or in equity, including, but not limited to, (i) abating the
nuisance (ii) taking possession of the equipment and restoring it to a
useable condition; or (iii) requiring removal of the equipment by the
registrant, or the registrant's successor in interest.
(C) Removal. Any registrant who has unusable and abandoned equipment in
any right-of-way shall remove it from that Right-of-Way during the next
scheduled excavation, unless this requirement is waived by the Manager.
405.300 Appeals.
(A) A Right-of-Way user that:
(1) has been denied registration;
(2) has been denied a permit;
(3) has had a permit revoked; or
(4) believes that the fees imposed are invalid, may have denial, revocation
or fee imposition reviewed, upon written request, by the City Council.
The City Council shall act on a timely written request at its next
regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by the City Council
affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing
and supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of
the decision.
(B) Upon affirmation by the City Council of the denial, revocation, or fee
imposition, the right-of-way user shall have the rights to have the matter
resolved by binding arbitration. Binding arbitration must be before an
arbitrator agreed to by both the City Council and the right-of-way user. If
the parties cannot agree on an arbitrator, the matter must be resolved by a
three-person arbitration panel made up of one arbitrator selected by the
City, one arbitrator selected by the right-of-way user and one selected by
the other two arbitrators. The costs and fees of a single arbitrator shall be
shared equally by the City and the right-of-way user. In the event there is
a third arbitrator, each party shall pay the expense of its own arbitrator and
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and
Improvements
Section 405. Right-of-Way
Management 405-31
shall jointly and equally share with the other party the expense of a third
arbitrator and of the arbitration.
405.310 Reservation of Regulatory and Police Powers. A Permittee's or registrant's
rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the City to adopt and
enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the public.
405.320 Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion
of this Chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. If a regulatory body
or a court of competent jurisdiction should determine by a final, nonappealable
order that any permit, right or registration issued under this
Chapter or any portions of this Chapter is illegal or unenforceable, then any
such permit, right or registration granted or deemed to exist hereunder shall be
considered as a revocable permit with a mutual right in either party to
terminate without cause upon giving sixty (60) days written notice to the
other. The requirements and conditions of such a revocable permit shall be
the same requirements and conditions as set forth in the permit, right or
registration, respectively, except for conditions relating to the term of the
permit and the right of termination. If a permit, right or registration shall be
considered a revocable permit as provided herein, the Permittee must
acknowledge the authority of the City Council to issue such revocable permit
and the power to revoke it. Nothing in this Chapter precludes the City from
requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed bylaw, in
addition to requirements set forth herein.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and Improvements
Section 406. Vacation 406-
1
406 Vacation
406.010 Vacation. The public’s interest in an easement, right-of-way or publicly
dedicated land may be vacated in accordance with Minnesota Statutes 412.851
and 462.358, Sub. 7. Vacation of an easement, right-of-way or publicly dedicated
land may be initiated by the City or by a petition of a majority of property owners
of land abutting the easement, right-of-way, publicly dedicated land or part
thereof to be vacated.
(A) Application. A vacation application may be submitted by a property owner(s)
abutting the easement, right-of-way, publicly dedicated land, or part thereof.
(B) Submittal Requirements. Applications shall be made on forms on file with the
City Manager or his/her designee and shall include the following information:
(1) Completed application form and the required filing fee as established from
time to time by City Council resolution.
(2) A petition signed by a majority of the property owners abutting the
easement, right-of-way, publicly dedicated land, or part thereof to be
vacated.
(3) A map that identifies the exact location of the easement, right-of-way or
publicly dedicated land to be vacated.
(4) A legal description of the easement, right-of-way or publicly dedicated
land to be vacated.
(5) A statement describing the intended use of the property once the public
interest is vacated.
(C) Review Process. Upon receipt of a completed application, the City Council
shall hold a public hearing in consideration of the vacation request, preceded
by published and mailed notice as prescribed in Section 406(D) below. If the
vacation request was initiated by petition, the City Council may by resolution
grant or deny the vacation request based on a majority vote of its entire
membership. If the vacation request was initiated by the City, the City Council
may by resolution grant or deny the vacation request only by a vote of fourfifths
of its entire membership. In any case, the City Council may only grant
the vacation request upon a finding that the vacation is in the public interest.
(D) Notice and Hearing Procedure.
(1) Publication. Notice of the purpose, time and place of a public hearing
shall be published at least 14 days before the date of the hearing in the
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 400. Public Property and Improvements
Section 406. Vacation 406-
2
official newspaper of the City of Shoreview. Affidavits of publication
shall be made a part of the record of the proceedings.
(2) Mailed Notice. Notice of the proposed vacation shall be mailed at least 10
days before the date of the hearing to each property owner affected by the
proposed vacation and to companies that may have a legal interest in the
property. The notice shall contain, at a minimum, a copy of the proposed
vacation as well as the time, place, and date of the public hearing. An
affidavit containing the names of the property owners and the addresses to
which the notices were mailed shall be made a part of the record of the
proceedings.
(3) Department of Natural Resources Notification. In the event that any
portion of the easement, right-of-way or publicly dedicated land
terminates at or abuts upon any public water, no vacation shall be made
unless written notice of the proposed vacation is served by certified mail
upon the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources at least
30 days before the hearing on the matter. The notice to the Commissioner
is for notification purposes only and does not create a right of intervention
by the Commissioner.
(E) Record of Vacation. A certified copy of the resolution vacating public interest
in an easement, right-of-way or publicly dedicated land shall be filed with the
Ramsey County Auditor who shall then file the notice with the Ramsey
County Recorder. Any failure to file the notice shall not invalidate the
vacation proceedings.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 500. Municipal Utilities
Section 501. Municipal Water System 501-1
500 Municipal Utilities
501 Municipal Water System
501.010 Municipal Water System. The City’s municipal water system, consisting of
wells, treatment facilities, pumping stations underground and elevated storage
tanks, distribution piping, service lines, curb stops, structures, and associated
appurtenances located within the public right-of-way and applicable
easements shall be operated as a public utility and convenience from which
revenue shall be derived, subject to the provisions of this chapter. This chapter
shall be referred to as the City’s Water Utility Regulations.
501.020 Compliance with Regulations. No person, firm or corporation shall connect
any water service to the municipal water system or make use of any water
service connected to the municipal water system except in the manner
provided in this chapter. All connections to or extensions of the municipal
water system shall be in accordance with relevant portions of the Minnesota
Building Code, Minnesota Plumbing Code, and City of Shoreview Standard
Details for utility construction.
501.030 Water Fund. There is also created and the City Manager shall maintain on
the official books and records of the City a separate and special fund to be
designated as the Water Fund, which shall be held and administered by the
City Manager separate and apart from all other funds until the purposes for its
creation have been accomplished.
501.040 Municipal Water System Charges. A portion of the cost of constructing and
maintaining the municipal water system shall be recovered by the imposition
of special assessments pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 429, trunk water
facilities charges, and connection charges.
(A) Trunk Water Facility Charges. The trunk water facility charge shall be
collected when the property is platted, subdivided or otherwise developed.
These charges are required to be paid to the City prior to the City
accepting the lateral water mains, pipes and appurtenances constructed by
the property owner.
The charge is calculated as a lump sum amount determined by multiplying
a front foot charge, as determined from time to time by City Council
ordinance, times the lineal feet of all streets within or abutting the plat,
subdivision or development shall be computed by the Engineer and paid
by the property owner to the City prior to the issuance of any building
permit.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 500. Municipal Utilities
Section 501. Municipal Water System 501-2
(B) Connection Charge. A connection charge, as determined from time to time
by City Council ordinance, shall be collected when housing units are
connected to the municipal water system. In addition, before a connection
permit will be issued, the City Manager shall determine that one of the
following conditions exist:
(1) The lot or tract of land to be served by such connection or tap has
been specially assessed for the cost of constructing the water main
and trunk water system with which the connection is made; or
(2) If no special assessment has been levied for such construction cost,
the proceedings for levying special assessments have been or will
be commenced in due course; or
(3) If no special assessment has been levied, and no special assessment
proceedings will be completed in due course, a sum equal to the
portion of the cost of constructing the water main and trunk water
system, which would be assessable against said lot or tract, has
been paid to the City; or
(4) If none of the above conditions are met, no permit to tap or connect
to any water main or trunk water system shall be issued unless the
applicant shall pay an additional connection fee which shall be
equal to the portion of the cost of constructing the water main and
trunk water system which would be assessable against said lot or
tract serviced by the connection. The assessable cost is to be
determined by the Engineer upon the same basis as any assessment
previously levied against other property for the water main and
trunk water system. If no assessment has been levied, the
assessable cost will be determined upon the basis of the uniform
charge which may have been or which shall be charged for similar
tapping or connection with said main and trunk system, determined
on the basis of the total assessable cost of the water main and trunk
water system, allocated on a frontage basis, plus the cost of service
or services.
501.050 Connection Permits. A permit must be obtained to connect to the municipal
water system. The water connection permit fee, as established by Shoreview
City Council ordinance, shall be submitted at the time of permit application.
All permits for service installations shall be made by the owner of the
property, or his duly authorized agent and shall state the size and location of
the service connection and all other information as required. The applicant
shall pay to the City prior to the issuance of the permit, the total amount of
fees or deposit required for the installation of the service connection as herein
provided. No permit shall be issued except to a licensed plumber, certified
pipe layer, or homeowner performing work on his or her own premises. City
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 500. Municipal Utilities
Section 501. Municipal Water System 501-3
inspections are required for all connections to, and extensions of, the
municipal water system.
501.060 Automatic Sprinkler System Inspection Charge. Regular inspections shall
be made of all fire service connections with all piping, fire gates, and other
attached appurtenances, and the City shall have access to the premises for
such inspection and shall keep a record of all inspections made. Where a
connection is made to an automatic sprinkler system for fire service
connections only, quarterly inspection charges, as determined from time to
time by City Council ordinance, shall be assessed.
(A) The inspection charge shall apply in all cases where automatic sprinklers
are installed and where fire gates and outlets are sealed. Meters or
detection check valves must be installed on such services as required by
the City.
(B) Statements for inspection charges shall be sent to each customer on a
quarterly basis pursuant to and in conjunction with the provisions of
Section 501.090 and its subdivisions. Where the inspection charge is for
less than a quarterly period, the quarterly charge shall be pro-rated on a
monthly basis and such pro-rated amount shall be paid at the time of the
connection of the automatic sprinkler system.
(C) Should it be found that water not metered is used through a fire connection
for any purpose other than the extinguishing of a fire upon the premises,
the owner and occupant will be notified, and if such improper conditions
are not corrected within ten (10) days, the water will be shut off until
proper adjustments are made, and the owner shall be subject to a penalty
established by ordinance.
501.070 Beyond City Boundaries. Rates due and payable by each water user located
beyond the territorial boundaries of the City shall be determined by special
contract.
501.080 Statements for Water Use Charges.
(A) Water use charges, as determined from time to time by City Council
ordinance shall be payable quarterly. Such statements shall be due and
payable on or before the first day of the second month following receipt of
the billing. Where service is for less than a quarterly period, the quarterly
charge shall be pro-rated on a monthly basis. If a water meter is found to
have been operating in a faulty manner, the amount of water used will be
estimated in accordance with the amount used previously in comparable
periods of the year.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 500. Municipal Utilities
Section 501. Municipal Water System 501-4
(B) Penalties for Delinquent Payments. A penalty equal to 10% of the amount
due shall be added to accounts not paid in full on or before the first day of
the second month following the billing period and to each quarterly billing
thereafter until the amount of the delinquent account plus accrued penalty
is paid in full or otherwise certified to the County Auditor as a delinquent
account.
(C) Annual Certification of Delinquent Accounts. Each year the City Manager
shall prepare a list of delinquent water service charge accounts, including
accrued penalties thereon, in the form of an assessment roll. The City
Council shall annually review the delinquent water service charge
assessment roll and adopt an appropriate resolution directing that the
assessment roll be certified to the County Auditor as a lien against the
premises served and directing that the County Auditor collect the
assessment as part of the ensuing year's tax levy.
501.090 Service Charges relating to Municipal Water Utility. When actions or
activities of water customers require coordination with or a call out of City
utility personnel (e.g. turning water supply on/off at curbstops), a water
service charge shall be assessed to the utility account. When the call out
occurs outside of normal business hours, it will be deemed an emergency call
out. The service charges for regular and emergency call outs will be
established by Shoreview City Council ordinance.
501.100 Discontinuance of Water Service.
(A) Conditions. The City reserves the right to discontinue service to any
consumer of the municipal water system whenever:
(1) The owner or occupant of the premises served, or any person working
on any pipes or equipment thereon which are connected with the water
system, has violated or threatens to violate or causes to be violated,
any of the City's water utility regulations.
(2) In the judgment of the City Manager or his/her designee, such action is
necessary to protect the purity of the municipal water supply or the
safety of the water system and/or life, health, or safety of its
consumers.
(3) Any charge for water, service, meter, or other financial obligation
imposed on the present or former owner or occupant of the premises
served, is unpaid.
(4) The owner or occupant of the premises served has made fraudulent
statements or misrepresentations in connection with an application for
service.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 500. Municipal Utilities
Section 501. Municipal Water System 501-5
(5) The property is unsecured and/or vacant.
(B) Procedure. Prior to shut off, the property will be posted, and the owner
and/or occupant of the property shall be mailed notice to the last address
shown on the application on file with the City and current billing
statements. Said notice shall advise the owner and/or occupant of the
reason for the proposed shut off and that a hearing may be requested in
writing within ten (10) days of the date shown on the notice given to them.
It shall further provide that failure to request a hearing in writing to the
City shall be deemed a waiver and that the water will be shut off upon the
expiration of the ten (10) days.
501.110 Authorized Water Shut Downs. The City shall not be liable for any
deficiency or failure in the supply of water to consumers, whether occasioned
by shutting the water off for the purpose of making repairs or connections, or
from any other cause whatever. In case of fire, or alarm of fire, water may be
shut off to insure a supply for firefighting. When making repairs to existing
infrastructure or construction of new infrastructure, water may be shut off at
any time and kept shut off as long as necessary.
501.120 Maintenance of Service Pipe. It shall be the responsibility of the consumer
or owner to maintain the service pipe from the curb box into the house or
building. In the case of failure upon the part of any consumer or owner to
repair any leak occurring in his pipe within twenty-four (24) hours after verbal
or written notice by the City thereof, the water will be shut off. When the
waste of water is great, or when damage is likely to result from the leak, water
may be turned off immediately pending repairs.
501.130 Cross-Connection Control. Cross-connections between the municipal water
system and other systems, private wells, or equipment containing water or
other substances of unknown or questionable safety are prohibited, except
when and where, as approved by the City, suitable backflow prevention
devices are installed, tested, and maintained to ensure proper operation on a
continuing basis as per the following requirements:
(A) A backflow prevention device is to be owned, tested, and maintained by
the customer/owner of the premises being served.
(B) Installation, maintenance, and testing of backflow preventers shall be
according to the State of Minnesota Plumbing Code.
(1) It is required that reduced pressure zone backflow preventers be tested
annually and overhauled at intervals not to exceed five years. Testing
shall be performed by a qualified backflow tester. A licensed plumber
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 500. Municipal Utilities
Section 501. Municipal Water System 501-6
qualified in backflow testing shall perform all internal maintenance to
the device. Test results shall be furnished to the City.
(2) A person who is recognized by the Minnesota Department of Health as
a backflow preventer tester is considered by the City to test backflow
preventers and certify them to be functional.
(C) Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be cause to
discontinue water service in accordance with Section 501.100.
501.140 Water Use Restrictions. The watering of lawns, gardens and shrubs are
subject to restrictions in order to encourage water conservation and to ensure
availability of an adequate supply of City water without incurring unnecessary
capital expenditures. Water use restrictions apply to all Shoreview properties
regardless of water source; i.e. properties using existing private wells for
irrigation are also subject to these restrictions.
(A) Conditions
(1) Between May 15 and September 15, lawn, garden and shrub watering
is permitted only on an odd/even address basis; properties with an odd
numbered postal address may water on odd calendar days, properties
with an even numbered postal address may water on even calendar
days. With prior coordination and consent from the City, larger,
irregularly shaped, multiple-addressed or other properties requiring
specialized irrigation system configurations may be permitted to water
on days not conforming to address while still observing the intent of
watering on alternating days.
(2) Lawn, garden and shrub watering is not permitted between the hours
of 11:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
(3) Water use restrictions for lawn, garden and shrub watering apply
equally to all Shoreview properties regardless of water source, and
include properties using the municipal water supply, existing private
wells or surface water appropriations.
(4) Every day watering of newly sodded or seeded yards may be allowed
upon receipt of an exemption permit from the Public Works
Department for a period not to exceed 2 weeks.
(5) Attended water uses or hand-watering of plants and gardens is
permitted at all times.
(B) Enforcement. Violations of the water use restrictions will result in a
warning letter for first violation and the imposition of administrative fines
in accordance with Exhibit B, Shoreview Municipal Code, which will be
reflected on future utility billings or in the issuance of a citation in
accordance with the adopted Council ordinance.
Rev. Date
5/24/17
Ord. #953
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 500. Municipal Utilities
Section 501. Municipal Water System 501-7
(C) City Council Resolution. During dry weather periods, the City Council
may impose additional restrictions on the use of City water by the
adoption of an appropriate resolution. Any violation of the water
restriction resolution shall be referred to the City Attorney for prosecution
as a misdemeanor.
501.145 Wellhead Protection – New Private Wells Prohibited. To ensure the safety
and integrity of Shoreview’s municipal water supply, except as hereinafter
provided, new private wells are not permitted in areas of the City that have
access to public water infrastructure.
(A) Exceptions
(1) A private property with a functioning well will not be required to be
connected to the municipal water supply unless or until the well
becomes nonfunctioning or the habitable building undergoes major
remodeling resulting in an increase in water use that exceeds the
capacity of the well.
(2) Where it is not feasible to connect to a public water supply, or if
private on-site water supplementation is required as determined by the
City of Shoreview, a well may be drilled in accordance with the
specifications and provisions of the Minnesota Department of Health,
Water Well Construction Code.
(B) Abandonment. At the time connection to the public water supply is
completed, all existing private wells no longer in use shall be sealed by a
licensed well contractor according to the Rules of the Minnesota
Department of Health.
501.150 Existing Private Wells. The use of existing private wells may continue after
connection is made to the water system, provided there is no means of crossconnection
between the private well and the municipal supply at any time.
Hose bibs that will enable a cross-connection of the two systems are
prohibited on internal and external piping. The threads on the boiler drain of
the well volume tank shall be removed or the boiler drain hose bib replaced
with a sink faucet. When both private and City systems are in use, outside
hose bibs shall not be installed on piping connected to the municipal system.
501.160 Operation of Fire Hydrants. No person other than authorized City
employees shall operate fire hydrants or interfere in any way with the water
system without first obtaining a permit to do so from the City, subject to the
following conditions:
(A) Permit. A hydrant meter permit to use a fire hydrant for the purpose of
purchasing water from the City is required. The permit shall state the
Rev. Date
5/24/17
Ord. #953
Rev.
Date
5/24/17
Ord.
#953
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 500. Municipal Utilities
Section 501. Municipal Water System 501-8
applicant’s name and address, phone number, location of the work site,
and type of work being conducted.
(B) Deposit. The applicant shall be required to make a deposit, as determined
by City ordinance, to guarantee payment for water used and to cover
breakage and/or damage to the hydrant or meter. Charges will be deducted
from the deposit, and a billing or refund will be generated.
(C) Charges. The applicant shall pay rental charges for each thirty-day-period
or fraction thereof, and water use charges as determined by City Council
ordinance.
501.170 Water Service Contractors. A license required. All water service work shall
be performed by certified contractors licensed by the appropriate State
authority. This section shall not apply to homeowners performing work on
their own premises.
501.180 Water Meters. Except for extinguishing of fire, no person except authorized
City employees shall use water from the water supply system or permit water
to be drawn therefrom unless the same be metered by passing through a meter
supplied or approved by the City. Only persons authorized by the City shall
connect, disconnect, take apart, or in any manner change or cause to be
changed, or interfere with any such meter or the action thereof.
(A) Charge. At the time of the initial connection to the municipal water
system, a charge for water meters shall be paid to the City by customers
before delivery of the water meter for installation. Said charge shall be
determined by City Council ordinance.
(B) Maintenance. The City shall retain ownership of water meters and shall be
responsible for standard maintenance and repair. Costs associated with
replacement, repair, or adjustment of a meter due to any act, carelessness,
or neglect of the owner or occupants of the premises shall be charged
against and collected from the water consumer. Water service may be
discontinued until the cause is corrected and the amount charged is
collected.
(C) Testing. Upon written request, the City will re-read water meters and test
the meter for accuracy, if necessary. In case a test should show an error of
over five per cent of the water consumed in favor of the City, a correctly
registering meter will be installed and adjustments to water billing
statements will be considered. In case the test shows an accurate
measurement of water or an error in favor of the consumer the expenses of
making such a test, and the additional costs, if any, will be included on the
next quarterly statement. The meter testing charges will be established by
City Council ordinance.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 500. Municipal Utilities
Section 501. Municipal Water System 501-9
(D) City Access. Authorized City employees shall have access at reasonable
hours of the day to all buildings and premises connected to the municipal
water system for the purpose of maintenance of water meters without
charge to the water consumer. In the event the water consumer denies
authorized City employee access, the water consumer will, at their own
cost, provide for meter replacement or maintenance by a licensed plumber,
and said licensed plumber shall be required to provide documentation to
City as to validity of the work performed.
501.190 Non-Compliance Surcharge. A quarterly surcharge, as determined by
Ordinance, shall be added to the utility billing statement for a property where:
(A) An inspection has not been allowed or certification provided within 30
days after notice by the City.
(B) The necessary installations, inspections, and/or repairs have not been
made within the time specified.
A surcharge will be added for every quarter during which the property is not
in compliance, whether the non-compliance has been for the entire quarter or
a portion thereof.
501.200 Water Service Lines. In order to eliminate a health or safety hazard from
private property, the City is authorized to install or repair water service lines
from a City water main to a private dwelling or to contract for such work.
The cost of installing or repairing water service lines may be specially
assessed against the benefited property and the City may issue obligations to
defray the expense of such work all pursuant to the provisions of Minnesota
Statutes Chapter 429 and its subdivisions.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 500. Municipal Utilities
Section 502. Municipal Sanitary Sewer System 502-1
502 Municipal Sanitary Sewer System
502.010 Municipal Sanitary Sewer System. The City’s municipal sanitary sewer
system consisting of lift stations, manholes, collection piping, service piping,
forcemain, and associated appurtenances located within the public right-ofway
and applicable easements shall be operated as a public utility and
convenience from which revenue shall be derived, subject to the provisions of
this chapter. This chapter shall be referred to as the City’s Sanitary Sewer
Utility Regulations.
502.020 Compliance with Regulations. No person, firm or corporation shall connect
any sanitary sewer service to the municipal sanitary sewer system or make use
of the municipal sanitary sewer system except in the manner provided in this
chapter. All connections to or extensions of the municipal sewer system shall
be in accordance with relevant portions of the Minnesota Building Code,
Minnesota Plumbing Code, and City of Shoreview Standard Details for utility
construction.
502.030 Sanitary Sewer Fund. There is also created and the City Manager shall
maintain on the official books and records of the City a separate and special
fund to be designated as the Sewer Fund, which shall be held and
administered by the City Manager separate and apart from all other funds until
the purposes for its creation have been accomplished.
502.040 Connections with Sewer Required.
(A) Existing Structures. Any buildings presently used or capable of being used
for human habitation or in which a toilet or other plumbing facilities for
disposal of human waste is installed and located on property adjacent to a
sewer main, or in the platted block through which the system extends,
shall be connected to the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System within one
year from the date on which a connection is available to such building
except as allowed in Section 209.090(A). Where the property owner has
failed to connect to the sanitary sewer system within one year from the
date of sewer availability, the following procedures shall be followed:
(1) The property owner shall be notified that it is the intent of the City to
connect the property to the sanitary sewer system and assess the cost
of connection against the property owner. The notice shall be mailed
by registered mail to the property address.
(2) The cost of the improvement shall include all costs incurred by the
City in order to connect the property to the main sewer line and shall
include City permit and connection charges which must be submitted
to the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 500. Municipal Utilities
Section 502. Municipal Sanitary Sewer System 502-2
(B) New Structures. All buildings hereafter constructed within the City on
property adjacent to a sewer main or in a platted block through which the
Municipal Sanitary Sewer System extends, shall be provided with a
connection to the sewer system for disposal of all human waste before
occupancy of the building shall be allowed or a certificate of occupancy
issued.
(C) Sewer Not Available. Where sewer is not available to a building, the
building shall be connected to and deliver waste to an individual sewage
treatment system conforming to Section 209.090(E).
502.050 Municipal Sanitary Sewer System Charges. A portion of the cost of
constructing and maintaining the municipal sanitary sewer system shall be
recovered by the imposition of special assessments pursuant to Minnesota
Statute 429, a connection charge, and a sewer availability charge (SAC) on
behalf of the Metropolitan Council.
(A) Connection Charges. A connection charge, as determined from time to
time by City Council ordinance shall be collected when housing units are
connected to the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System. In addition, before a
connection permit shall be issued, the City shall determine that one of the
following conditions exist:
(1) The lot or tract of land to be served by such connection has been
assessed for the cost of construction of the sanitary sewer main with
which the connection is made; or
(2) If no special assessment has been levied for such construction cost, the
proceedings for levying the special assessment have been or will be
commenced and completed in due course; or
(3) If no special assessment has been levied, and no special assessment
proceedings will be completed in due course, a sum equal to the
portion of cost of construction of the sanitary sewer main which would
be assessable against said lot or tract has been paid to the City; or
(4) If none of the above conditions are met, no permit to connect to any
sanitary sewer main shall be issued unless the applicant shall pay an
additional connection fee which shall be equal to the portion of the
cost of construction of the said sanitary sewer main which would be
specially assessed against said lot or tract to be served by such
connection. Said assessable cost is to be determined by the Engineer
upon the same basis as any special assessment previously levied
against other property for said main. If no special assessment has been
levied, the assessable cost will be determined upon the basis of the
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 500. Municipal Utilities
Section 502. Municipal Sanitary Sewer System 502-3
uniform charge which may have been or which shall be charged for
similar connection with said sanitary sewer main.
(B) The Metropolitan Council has established sewer service availability and
connection charges (SAC) for all buildings constructed or connected to the
Metropolitan Disposal System.
502.060 Connection Permits. A permit must be obtained to connect to the municipal
sanitary sewer system. The sewer connection permit fee, as established by
Shoreview City Council ordinance, shall be submitted at the time of permit
application. All permits for service installations shall be made by the owner of
the property, or his duly authorized agent and shall state the size and location
of the service connection and all other information as required. The applicant
shall pay to the City prior to the issuance of the permit, the total amount of
fees or deposit required for the installation of the service connection as herein
provided. No permit shall be issued except to a licensed plumber, certified
pipe layer, or homeowner performing work on his or her own premises. City
inspections are required for all connections to, and extensions of, the
municipal sanitary sewer system.
502.070 Statements for Sanitary Sewer Use Charges.
(A) Sanitary sewer use charges, as determined from time to time by City
Council ordinance shall be payable quarterly. Such statements shall be due
and payable on or before the first day of the second month following
receipt of the billing. Where service is for less than a quarterly period, the
quarterly charge shall be pro-rated on a monthly basis.
(B) Penalties for Delinquent Payments. A penalty equal to 10% of the amount
due shall be added to accounts not paid in full on or before the first day of
the second month following the billing period and to each quarterly billing
thereafter until the amount of the delinquent account plus accrued penalty
is paid in full or otherwise certified to the County Auditor as a delinquent
account.
(C) Annual Certification of Delinquent Accounts. Each year the City Manager
shall prepare a list of delinquent sanitary sewer service charge accounts,
including accrued penalties thereon, in the form of an assessment roll. The
City Council shall annually review the delinquent sanitary sewer service
charge assessment roll and adopt an appropriate resolution directing that
the assessment roll be certified to the County Auditor as a lien against the
premises served and directing that the County Auditor collect the
assessment as part of the ensuing year's tax levy.
502.080 Treatment of Prohibited Wastes. Where it is determined that any waste
discharged or to be discharged has certain characteristics or elements which
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 500. Municipal Utilities
Section 502. Municipal Sanitary Sewer System 502-4
are or may be harmful to the structures, processes, or operation of the sanitary
sewer system or persons operating it, such discharge shall be discontinued or
that the waste shall be treated prior to its discharge into the system in a
manner which will eliminate such characteristics or elements.
502.090 Surface or Ground Water. It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, or
user of any premises to direct into or allow any storm water, surface water,
ground water, well water, or water from industrial or commercial air
conditioning systems to drain into the City’s sanitary sewer system. Roof
drains, foundation drains, sump pumps, and other forms of surface drainage
shall not be connected to or discharge to the sanitary sewer system. The City
shall periodically perform Inflow and Infiltration (I&I) inspections to verify
that connections to the City’s sanitary sewer system are in compliance with
the provisions of this section.
502.100 Prohibited Waste Discharge.
(A) No person shall discharge, cause, or allow to be discharged into the
sanitary sewer system, any waste containing concentrations in excess of
the following:
Pollutant Limitation (Maximum for any operating day)
Cadmium 2.0 mg/l
Chromium, total 8.0 mg/l
Copper 6.0 mg/l
Cyanide, total 4.0 mg/l
Lead 1.0 mg/l
Mercury 0.1 mg/l
Nickel 6.0 mg/l
Zinc 8.0 mg/l
Temperature 150?F (65?C)
pH 5.00—10.00
(B) No person shall discharge, cause, or allow to be discharged into the
sanitary sewer system any wastes which contains any of the following:
(1) More than 100 mg/l of fats, wax, grease or oils (hexane soluble),
whether emulsified or not, or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and
150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees centigrade) at the point of
discharge into the sewer system.
(2) Liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are
or may be sufficient to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any
other way to the sanitary sewer system or to the operation of the
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 500. Municipal Utilities
Section 502. Municipal Sanitary Sewer System 502-5
system. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosimeter,
at the point of discharge into the sewer system, be more than five
percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive
limit (L.E.L.).
(3) Any noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or gases, which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, are capable of creating a
public nuisance or hazard to life, or are or may be sufficient to prevent
entry into a sewer for its maintenance and repair.
(4) Any toxic substance, chemical elements or compounds in quantities
sufficient to interfere with the biological processes of efficiency of
treatment works, or that will pass through a treatment works and cause
the effluent therefrom or the water into which it is discharged, to fail to
meet applicable state or federal standards.
(5) Garbage that has not been ground or comminuted to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely in suspension under flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than onehalf
inch in any dimension.
(6) Radioactive wastes or isotopes or such half-life of concentrations that
they are in noncompliance with present or future regulations issued by
the appropriate authority having control over their use and which will
or may cause damage or hazards to the system or personnel operating
it.
(7) Solid or viscous wastes which will or may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer, or other interference with the proper operation of any
disposal system, such as grease, uncomminuted garbage, animal guts
or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails,
whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble
dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains,
spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastic, gas tar, asphalt, residues from
refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, gasoline, naphtha, and
similar substances.
(8) Any waste from septic tanks or similar facilities.
(9) Any mineral acids, waste acid pickling or plating liquors from the
pickling or plating or iron, steel, brass, copper or chromium, or any
other dissolved or solid substances which will or may endanger health
or safety, or attack or corrode any part of the sanitary sewer system.
(10)Liquids or vapors having a temperature higher than 150 degrees
Fahrenheit immediately prior to discharge into the sewer system.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 500. Municipal Utilities
Section 502. Municipal Sanitary Sewer System 502-6
(11) Phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances in
concentrations which will or may cause the effluent from the
treatment works or the water into which it is discharged to fail to
meet applicable state or federal standards.
(12) Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusually high concentrations of inert suspended solids or of
dissolved solids.
b. Excessive discoloration.
c. Unusually high volume of flow or concentration of waste
exceeding five times the average daily concentration of flow
during normal operation.
(13) Unusually high concentrations of suspended solids, BOD, COD, or
chlorine requirements, in such quantities as to constitute a significant
load on the treatment works.
(14) Any substance which is not amenable to treatment to reduction by
the type of sewage treatment processes employed to a degree
sufficient to permit the effluent from the treatment works and the
water into which it is discharged to meet applicable state and federal
standards.
502.110 Waste Trap and Separators. Oil, grease, and sand waste traps and separators
shall be installed for the proper discharge of wastewater containing excessive
amounts of oil, grease, sand, or flammable liquids when required by the
Minnesota Plumbing Code, Minnesota Rules, Chapter 4715, the Regional
Administrator of the Metropolitan Council, or when the city determines such
traps or separators are necessary. Waste traps and separators shall be
maintained in efficient operating conditions by the owner and at the owner's
expense, through the periodic removal of any accumulated residue. If a trap or
separator is not properly maintained, the city may have the system, including
affected city sewers, cleaned at the owner's expense.
502.120 Tampering With Municipal Sewer System Prohibited. No person shall
maliciously, willfully, or negligently damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or
tamper with any part of the Municipal Sewer System.
502.130 Certain Connections Prohibited. No buildings located on property lying
outside the limits of that part of the City described in Ordinance No. 294 of
the City of Roseville, as amended, shall be connected to that portion of the
sanitary sewer system of the City discharging into the Roseville-St. Paul
sanitary sewer system, except that the City may permit the installation,
maintenance, and operation of a sanitary sewer service connection between its
public sewer system and the following described real property, lying beyond
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 500. Municipal Utilities
Section 502. Municipal Sanitary Sewer System 502-7
the corporate limits of the City, and situated in the Village of Vadnais
Heights, County of Ramsey, State of Minnesota, to-wit:
The west one-half (W 1/2) of the southwest one-quarter (SW1/4) of Section
19, Township 30 north, Range 22 west, and that part of the west one-half (W
1/2) of the northwest one-quarter (NW 1/4) of Section 30, Township 30 north,
Range 22 west, lying northerly of the Minneapolis, St. Paul and Sault Ste.
Marie Railway right-of-way.
The connection of any of the above-described areas to the sanitary sewer
system of the City is dependent upon express authorization for such
connection being obtained from the City Councils of Shoreview, Roseville,
and St. Paul.
502.140 Maintenance of Sewer Service.
(A) Liability. The City assumes ownership of the sanitary sewer service from
the main collector line to the connection. If based on an inspection by the
City this portion of the sewer service requires repair the City shall assume
all costs associated with the repair. The owner of the premises shall be
liable for all repairs required to the portion of the sewer service from the
connection point to the residence
(B) Maintenance. The owner of the premises is responsible to maintain the
sewer service from the main collector to the residence in functioning
condition.
502.150 City Access. Authorized City employees shall have access at reasonable hours
of the day to all buildings and premises connected to the municipal sanitary
sewer system for the purpose of infiltration and inflow inspections without
charge to the sanitary sewer consumer. In the event the sanitary sewer
consumer denies authorized City employee access, the sanitary sewer
consumer will, at their own cost, provide for infiltration and inflow
inspections by a licensed plumber, and said licensed plumber shall be required
to provide documentation to City as to validity of the work performed.
502.160 Non-Compliance Surcharge. A quarterly surcharge, as determined by City
Council ordinance, shall be added to the utility billing statement for a property
where:
(A) An inspection has not been allowed or certification provided within 30
days after notice by the City.
(B) The necessary installations, inspections, and/or repairs have not been
made within the time specified.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 500. Municipal Utilities
Section 502. Municipal Sanitary Sewer System 502-8
A surcharge will be added for every quarter during which the property is not
in compliance, whether the non-compliance has been for the entire quarter or
a portion thereof.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 500. Municipal Utilities
Section 503. Municipal Surface Water Management System 503-1
503 Municipal Surface Water Management System
503.010 Municipal Surface Water Management System. The City’s Municipal
Surface Water Management System consisting of lift stations, catch basins
and manholes, collection piping, forcemain, storage tanks and ponds, and
structural BMPs (Best Management Practices), and associated appurtenances
located within public right-of-way and applicable easements shall be operated
as a public utility pursuant to Minnesota Statute Section 444.075, from which
revenues shall be derived subject to the provisions of this chapter and
Minnesota Statutes. This chapter shall be referred to as the City’s Surface
Water Management Utility Regulations.
503.020 Compliance with Regulations. No person, firm or corporation shall connect
any drainage system to the municipal surface water management system or
make use of any drainage system extension connected to the municipal storm
water system except in the manner provided in this chapter. All connections to
or extensions of the municipal surface water management system shall be in
accordance with the relevant portions of the Minnesota Building Code,
Minnesota Plumbing Code, and City of Shoreview Standard Details for utility
construction.
503.030 Surface Water Management Fund. There is also created and the City
Manager shall maintain on the official books and records of the City a
separate and special fund to be designated as the Surface Water Management
Fund, which shall be held and administered by the City Manager separate and
apart from all other funds until the purposes for its creation have been
accomplished.
503.040 Definitions.
(A) Utility Factor. The utility factor is defined as the ratio of runoff volume, in
inches, for a particular land use, to the runoff volume, in inches, for a 1/3-
acre residential lot, assuming a two-inch rainfall and Soil Conservation
Service (SCS) "Type B" soil conditions.
(B) Surface Water Management Fee. The surface water management fee is
defined as the quarterly charge developed for each parcel of land.
(C) Quarterly Surface Water Management Revenue. The quarterly surface
water management revenue is the estimated quarterly expenditures for
planning and inventories, capital expenditures, personnel and equipment
and operation of the surface water utility, in accordance with established
City policy. The quarterly surface water management revenue and
resulting surface water management fees shall be established for a period
of time as set by City Council ordinance.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 500. Municipal Utilities
Section 503. Municipal Surface Water Management System 503-2
503.050 Surface Water Management Factors. The utility factors for various land
uses used to determine the surface water management fees are assigned as
follows:
Classification Land Use Utility Factor
1 Rural Residential (2-1/2 acre lots) 0.21
2 Single-Family Residential (1/3 acre lots) 1.00
3 Mixed Low & Medium Density Residential 2.24
4 Apartments, Industrial Office, Institutions 3.34
(churches, schools, government buildings,
hospitals)
5 Business/Commercial 4.28
6 Undeveloped 0.03
7 Parks, Cemeteries, Golf Courses, Arboretum 0.45
8 Parking Lots 6.14
503.060 Surface Water Management Fee. Surface water management fees shall be
established for a period of time as set by City Council ordinance. The Surface
Water Management Fee shall be determined by first determining the
percentage of total runoff in the City which is attributed to Single-Family
Residential property. The fee-per-acre for Single-Family Residential is
computed by equating the runoff percentage to an equal percentage of the
Quarterly Surface Water Management Revenue, divided by the estimated total
acres of Single-Family Residential land use in the City. The per-acre fee for
all individual parcels shall be defined as the product of the Single-Family
Residential Fee, the appropriate utility factor and the total acreage of the
parcel. Single-Family Residential and Rural Residential parcels shall be
assessed on a per-lot basis using the acreages as determined by established
City policy.
503.070 Exemptions. The following land uses are exempt from the surface water
management fee:
(A) Public right-of-way
(B) Lakes
(C) Undeveloped parcels
503.080 Statement of Surface Water Management Charges.
(A) Surface Water Management charges, as determined from time to time by
City Council ordinance shall be payable quarterly. Such statements shall
be due and payable on or before the first day of the second month
following receipt of the billing. Where service is for less than a quarterly
period, the quarterly charge shall be pro-rated on a monthly basis.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 500. Municipal Utilities
Section 503. Municipal Surface Water Management System 503-3
(B) Penalties for Delinquent Payments. A penalty equal to 10% of the amount
due shall be added to accounts not paid in full on or before the first day of
the second month following the billing period and to each quarterly billing
thereafter until the amount of the delinquent account plus accrued penalty
is paid in full or otherwise certified to the County Auditor as a delinquent
account.
(C) Annual Certification of Delinquent Accounts. Each year the City Manager
shall prepare a list of delinquent surface water management charge
accounts, including accrued penalties thereon, in the form of an
assessment roll. The City Council shall annually review the delinquent
sanitary sewer service charge assessment roll and adopt an appropriate
resolution directing that the assessment roll be certified to the County
Auditor as a lien against the premises served and directing that the County
Auditor collect the assessment as part of the ensuing year's tax levy.
503.090 Permits. Persons desiring a connection to the municipal storm sewer
system shall apply to the City for a permit. The applications shall be made on forms
furnished by the City and shall be accompanied by plans, specifications, and other
required information. The fee for each permit shall be as determined from time to time
by City Council ordinance. When re-inspection is necessary, a fee established by City
Council ordinance for such re-inspection shall be paid. All costs and expenses incident to
the installation and connection shall be borne by the owner and the installer, and the
owner and the installer shall indemnify the City for any loss or damage that may, directly
or indirectly, be occasioned by the installation of the storm sewer connection, including
restoring streets and street surfaces. Permits for such connections will be issued only to
the property owner or to a person duly licensed to make such connection.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 500. Municipal Utilities
Section 504. Municipal Street Lighting System 504-1
504 Municipal Street Lighting System
504.010 Municipal Street Lighting System. The City’s Municipal Street Lighting
System consists of all street light facilities, whether owned by the City or
otherwise, for which the City purchases and supplies electrical energy from a
public utility, and any additional facilities acquired or operated by the City in
the future. For purposes of general health, safety and welfare, it is in the best
interests of the residents that the City of Shoreview operates and maintains a
street lighting system throughout the City. It is the intent of the City to
provide said service, and to receive reimbursement for the cost thereof by way
of a street lighting system utility. Pursuant to the provisions of Minnesota
Statutes Chapter 429, a street lighting system utility is established for the
purpose of defraying the cost of constructing and maintaining a street lighting
system. This chapter shall be referred to as the City’s Street Lighting Utility
Regulations.
504.020 Compliance with Regulations. No person, firm, or corporation shall connect
to or utilize poles, fixtures, pedestals or other appurtenances except in a
manner provided in this chapter. New facilities or equipment shall be
constructed in accordance with relevant portions of the Public Electric
Utilities regulations, the Minnesota Electrical Code and the City of
Shoreview’s standard details and specifications. No person other than
authorized City employees, authorized electricians or Public Utility
employees shall conduct work or testing on City owned and maintained street
lighting equipment.
504.030 Street Lighting Fund. All service charges and any proceeds from the sale of
Street Lighting System facilities and equipment shall be deposited in a Street
Lighting System Fund and shall be used to defray the cost of operating,
maintaining and replacing the Street Lighting System.
504.040 Statements for Street Lighting Use Charges.
(A) Statements - Street light use charges, as determined from time to time by
City Council ordinance shall be payable quarterly. Such statements shall
be due and payable on or before the first day of the second month
following receipt of the billing. Where service is for less than a quarterly
period, the quarterly charge shall be pro-rated on a monthly basis.
(B) Penalties for Delinquent Payments. A penalty equal to 10% of the amount
due shall be added to accounts not paid in full on or before the first day of
the second month following the billing period, and to each quarterly
billing thereafter until the amount of the delinquent account, plus accrued
penalty, is paid in full or otherwise certified to the County Auditor as a
delinquent account.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 500. Municipal Utilities
Section 504. Municipal Street Lighting System 504-2
(C) Annual Certification of Delinquent Accounts. Each year the City Manager
shall prepare a list of delinquent Street Lighting System use charge
accounts, including accrued penalties thereon, in the form of a special
assessment roll. The City Council shall review the delinquent Street
Lighting System use charge assessment roll and adopt an appropriate
resolution directing that the assessment roll be certified to the County
Auditor as a lien against the premises served and directing that the County
Auditor collect the assessment as part of the ensuing year’s tax levy.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 601. Animal Licensing and Control 601-1
600 General Regulations
601 Animal Licensing and Control
601.010 Definitions. As used in this Chapter, except as otherwise provided, the following
terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
(1) Animal. Any non-human mammal, reptile, amphibian, or bird.
(2) Animal Control Officer. An individual or employee of a business retained by
the City for purposes of enforcing the provisions of Sections 601; or a
member of the City’s law enforcement agency.
(3) Animal, Domestic. Animals kept within the home as pets, such as fish, dogs,
cats, household bird, and similar animals.
(4) Animal, Non-Domestic. Animals which are kept outside the home for
purposes of food or pleasure such as cattle, hogs, horses, bees, sheep, llamas,
goats, chickens (Gallus gallus domesticus), birds, such as emus and pigeons,
and similar animals.
(5) Animal, Wild. Any animal, reptile or amphibian which is of a species not
usually domesticated; or of a species which, due to size, wild nature or other
characteristics, may be dangerous to humans; or would ordinarily be confined
in a zoo or found in the wild. The term includes but is not limited to:
(a) Animals and birds, the keeping of which is licensed by the state or federal
government, such as wolves, pheasants, and raptors such as eagles,
falcons, hawks, and owls.
(b) Weasels, wild ferrets, badgers, deer and bison.
(c) Crossbreeds of wild animals and domesticated animals such as the cross
between dogs and coyotes and dogs and wolves.
(d) All members of the Felidae family including, but not limited to, lions,
tigers, cougars, leopards, ocelots, cheetahs, and servals, but not including
domestic cats or cats recognized as a domestic breed, registered as a
domestic breed, and shown as a domestic breed by a national or
international multibreed cat registry association.
(e) Any member of the Canidae family, such as wolves, foxes, coyotes,
dingoes, and jackals, except domesticated dogs.
(f) Any poisonous animal such as a rattlesnake, coral snake, water moccasion,
puff adder, cobra, Gila monster or golden frog.
Rev. Date
8/15/05
Ord. #778
Rev. Date
5/3/10
Ord. #868
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 601. Animal Licensing and Control 601-2
(g) Any snake or reptile which by its size, vicious nature or other
characteristic may be dangerous to human beings.
(h) Any skunk, raccoon or fox whether captured in the wild, domestically
raised, descented or not descented, vaccinated against rabies or not
vaccinated against rabies.
(i) Bears.
(j) All nonhuman primates, including but not limited to, lemurs, monkeys,
chimpanzees, gorillas, orangutans, marmosets, lorises, and tamarins.
(k) Any other animal, bird, or reptile which is commonly considered wild.
(6) At Large. An unattended animal on public property; or an unattended animal
on private property without the consent of the property owner.
(7) Beekeeper. A person who owns bees.
(8) Cat. Any domesticated feline animal, male or female, whole or neutered.
(9) Colony. An aggregate of bees consisting principally of works, but having,
when perfect, one queen, drones, brood, combs, and honey.
(10)Dangerous Animal. Any animal that has committed any of the acts set forth
below:
(a) Without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a human being
on public or private property;
(b) Killed a domestic animal without provocation; or
(c) A potentially dangerous animal which aggressively bites, attacks or
endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
(11)Dog. Any canine animal, male or female, whole or neutered.
(12) Honeybee. All life stages of the common domestic honey bee, apis mellifera
(African subspecies and Africanized hybrids are not allowed).
(13) Hive Body. The receptacle inhabited by a colony that is manufactured for
that purpose.
Rev. Date
5/24/17
Ord. #953
Rev. Date
5/24/17
Ord. #953
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 601. Animal Licensing and Control 601-3
(14) Proper Enclosure. “Proper Enclosure” means securely confined indoors or in
a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the animal
from escaping and providing protection from the elements for the animal. A
Proper Enclosure does not include a porch, a patio, or any part of a house,
garage, or other structure to exit on its own volition, or any house or structure
in which windows are open or in which door or window screens are the only
obstacles that prevent the animal from existing.
(15)Owner. Any person, firm, or corporation, organization or department
possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in or having custody or control
of an animal.
(16)Pigeon. A member of the family Columbidae.
(17)Potentially Dangerous Animal. Any animal that has committed any of the
acts set forth below:
(a) When unprovoked, bites a human or domestic animal;
(b) When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon the streets,
sidewalks or any other public property in an apparent attitude of attack; or
(c) Has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked,
causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or domestic
animals.
(18) Restrained. On a leash of not more than six (6) feet in length or on a leash
which can be retracted to a length of six (6) feet or less, and in the custody of
a person of sufficient age to adequately control the animal; in a vehicle; or
confined to the owner’s property by enclosure or fencing.
(19) Substantial Bodily Harm. Bodily injury which involves a temporary but
substantial disfigurement, or which causes a temporary but substantial loss or
impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ, or which causes a
fracture of any bodily member.
(20) Authorized Wildlife Management Program. A program that is conducted by
Ramsey County or the City, or their contractors, for control of wildlife as
approved by the City Manager.
(20)Provocation. “Provocation” means an act that an adult could reasonably
expect will cause an animal to attack or bite.
(21) Songbirds. Songbirds include birds of the suborder oscines or passerine
including but not limited to larks, jays cardinals, shrikes, finches, and orioles,
characterized by a vocal apparatus highly specialized for singing.
Ord. 858
Rev. 11/2/09
Ord. 866
Rev.
4/19/10
Ord. 866
Rev. 4/19/10
Ord. 870
Rev.10/18/10
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 601. Animal Licensing and Control 601-4
601.020 Licenses Required. The following animal licenses shall be required within the
City of Shoreview.
(A) Dog/cat license.
(1) Exceptions. All dogs and cats within the City of Shoreview shall be
licensed except the following:
(a) Dogs and cats less than six (6) months of age;
(b) Dogs and cats whose owners are temporary visitors within the City
for thirty (30) days or less;
(c) Dogs and cats which are brought into the City for appearances in an
animal show;
(d) Dogs being used by law enforcement officers.
(2) Application. Within thirty (30) days after acquiring possession of a dog
or cat which has not been licensed by the City of Shoreview, the owner
of the dog or cat shall make application for a dog or cat license. The
application shall be on forms provided by the City Manager.
(3) Vaccination. The applicant for a dog or cat license shall provide proof
that the animal has been vaccinated with anti-rabies vaccine certified to
be effective by a licensed veterinarian.
(4) License Fee. The license fee for each dog or cat must be submitted with
the application. The fee will be established by City Council Resolution.
(5) Duration of License. A license shall be issued for a period of time not to
exceed the expiration date of the rabies vaccination. No dog or cat
license shall be renewed without proof of vaccination.
(6) Issuance of License. Upon completion of the application form, receipt of
the license fee and receipt of the proof of vaccination, the City Manager
shall cause a dog or cat license to be issued to the applicant for a
particular dog or cat.
(7) Receipt and Tags. The City Manager shall issue a license fee receipt to
the applicant along with a metallic dog or cat license tag. The applicant
shall permanently affix the tag by a metal fastening device to the collar
of the licensed animal in a manner that allows the tag to be easily
observed. If a tag is lost, a duplicate may be issued by the City Manager
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 601. Animal Licensing and Control 601-5
upon presentation of a receipt showing payment of the initial license fee
and upon payment of an additional fee for each duplicate tag.
(8) Change of Address. An applicant who has obtained a dog or cat license
shall notify the City Manager of applicant’s address changes within the
corporate limits of the City within ten (10) days of any address change.
(9) Counterfeit Tags. No person shall counterfeit or attempt to counterfeit
dog or cat license tags.
(10) Transfer of Tags. No person shall transfer a dog or cat tag from one dog
or cat to another.
(B) Wild Animals.
(1) General Prohibition. All wild animals except the following are
prohibited within the City of Shoreview:
(a) Wild animals brought into the City for entertainment, exhibition or
show purposes by persons keeping wild animals for a public zoo,
upon issuance of a Wild Animal License by the City Council.
(b) Wild animals which are part of a permanent display sponsored by a
bona fide research institution, a veterinary hospital, public zoo or
other institution upon issuance of a Wild Animal License by the City
Council.
(c) Nonpoisonous snakes, amphibians, birds, hamsters, mice, rabbits,
gerbils, white rats, guinea pigs, chinchillas, or lizards and similar
small animals when kept indoors in cages continuously.
(d) Monkeys trained as personal helpers and kept by handicapped
persons upon issuance of a Wild Animal License by the City
Council.
(e) Raptors, if kept pursuant to a valid state and/or federal Falconry
permit and upon issuance of a Wild Animal License by the City
Council.
(f) Wild animals and birds that are part of the natural habitat and
environment.
(2) License Application. Applications for a Wild Animal License shall be
submitted on forms provided by the City Manager, and submitted with
the fee as established by the City Council from time to time, along with
proof of a minimum $200,000 of general liability coverage including an
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 601. Animal Licensing and Control 601-6
endorsement that the liability coverage will not be cancelled without
twenty (20) days written notice to the City of Shoreview. The insurance
must be in a form acceptable to the City.
(3) Investigation. The City Manager shall review the application, conduct
such investigation as deemed necessary, and shall prepare a written
recommendation regarding the issuance of a Wild Animal License. The
City Manager shall give ten (10) days mailed notice to all property
owners within 350 feet of the site on which the Wild Animal will be
kept. The notice shall indicate that the City has received an application
for a Wild Animal License and shall request comments from such
property owners.
(4) Review. The City Council shall review the application, the City
Manager’s recommendations, and the comments from property owners.
The City Council may issue a Wild Animal License if it determines that
the application is in compliance with the City’s regulations. The City
Council may attach any reasonable conditions to the issuance of a license
as it determines to be necessary in order to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of Shoreview residents.
(5) Duration of License. A license shall be issued for a period not to exceed
two years. A lesser duration may be appropriate, as determined by the
Council.
(a) License Renewal. Application for renewal of a Wild Animal
License shall be on form provided by the City Manager and submitted
with the license fee. The City Manager shall review the application,
inspect the premises, and verify the applicant remains in compliance
with the conditions of license approval prior to administratively
renewing the term of the license.
(6) License Renovation. The City Manager may revoke a license for a
violation of the City’s regulations relating to the license or of any of the
conditions attached to the license. Upon receipt of information
indicating that a license violation has occurred, the City Manager shall
send a notice to licensee indicating the nature of the violation, and that
failure to correct the violation within 10 days shall be cause for
revocation of the license. The notice shall indicate that licensee has the
option of requesting a hearing before the City Council prior to license
renovation. The licensee shall file a written request for hearing within
ten (10) days of the date specified in the notice or licensee shall be
deemed to have waived its right to a hearing. Upon receipt of a hearing
request, the City Manager shall schedule a hearing before the City
Council at the earliest opportunity and shall send a Hearing Notice to
licensee. All notices required to be given by the City pursuant to this
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 601. Animal Licensing and Control 601-7
section shall be sent by certified mail to licensee’s address as contained
in the City’s license application file.
(7) Raptor Licensing. During review of a Wild Animal License for a raptor,
the City Council shall:
(a) Determine that the applicant holds a valid falconry license, issued by
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources (DNR), and that the housing shelter has been
inspected;
(b) Determine that the raptor shelter conforms to the requirements for an
accessory structure, as specified in Section 205.082;
(c) Determine that the property on which the raptor is to be kept
conforms to a minimum lot area of 10,000 square feet, with a
minimum width of 75 feet and a minimum depth of 125 feet. The
Council may require a greater or permit a lesser area, width or depth
based on the use of adjoining land.
(d) Determine that the raptor shelter is setback a minimum of 5 feet
from a side property line, 10 feet from a rear property line and a
minimum of 30 feet from the principal structure on adjoining
properties. The Council may require a greater or permit a lesser
setback based on screening, topography, and land use;
(e) Determine that the raptor shelter has been inspected and approved
for use by the DNR;
(f) Licensing Standards:
(i) A maximum of one raptor per license. Multiple licenses may be
issued for an individual property based on the size of the raptors, the
experience of the falconer, parcel area, and surrounding land use.
The licenses shall not exceed the maximum number allowed by the
appropriate Federal/State permit;
(ii) The raptor shall be fully contained on the subject property at all
times through the use of the shelter and falconry equipment;
(iii)The premises and the raptor shelter be maintained in clean,
sanitary condition, free of odors and regularly cleaned of droppings;
and
(iv) No breeding shall occur, and no hatchlings (‘eyases’) less than
one-month of age shall be kept on the licensed premises.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 601. Animal Licensing and Control 601-8
(8) Existing Wild Animals. Anyone keeping a Wild Animal in Shoreview
at the time of the adoption of this regulation shall have ninety (90) days
in which to comply with the provisions of this regulation or otherwise
remove the Wild Animal from the City. Extensions beyond ninety (90)
days may be granted by the City Council for good cause but in no case
shall such extension permanently exempt a person from the requirements
of this regulation.
(C) Vietnamese Potbellied Pigs.
(1) Restrictions. Miniature Vietnamese Potbellied Pigs may be kept within
the City limits, subject to the following conditions:
(a) The possession of a Vietnamese Potbellied Pig is limited to three (3)
per residence.
(b) Male Vietnamese Potbellied Pigs must be neutered when they reach
the age of four weeks.
(c) Adult Vietnamese Potbellied Pigs shall not weigh more than 100
pounds or stand more than 22 inches at the shoulders.
(d) Vietnamese Potbellied Pigs shall undergo a blood test to show that
the animal is free from pseudorabies.
(2) License. Within thirty (30) days after acquiring possession of a
Vietnamese Potbellied Pig which has not been licensed by the City of
Shoreview, the owner of the Vietnamese Potbellied Pig shall make
application for a Vietnamese Potbellied Pig license. The application
shall be on forms provided by the City Manager.
(3) License Fee. The license fee and proof that the Vietnamese Potbellied
Pig is free from pseudorabies must be submitted with the application.
The fee will be established by City Council resolution.
(4) Duration of License. A license shall be issued for a period of two years.
(5) Issuance of License. Upon completion of the application form, receipt of
the license fee, and proof that the Vietnamese Potbellied Pig is free from
pseudorabies, the City Manager shall cause a license to be issued to the
applicant.
(6) Receipt and Tags. The City Manager shall issue a license fee receipt to
the applicant along with a metallic license tag. The applicant shall
permanently affix the tag by a metal fastening device to the collar of the
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 601. Animal Licensing and Control 601-9
licensed animal in a manner that allows the tag to be easily observed. If a
tag is lost, a duplicate may be issued by the City Manager upon
presentation of a receipt showing payment of the initial license fee and
upon payment of an additional fee for the duplicate tag.
(7) Change of Address. An applicant who has obtained a license shall notify
the City Manager of the applicant’s address changes within the corporate
limits of the City within ten (10) days of an address change.
(8) Counterfeit Tags. No person shall counterfeit or attempt to counterfeit
license tags.
(9) Transfer of Tags. No person shall transfer a license tag from one animal
to another.
(D) Chickens.
(1) Chickens may be kept within the City limits on residential properties
located in the RE, Residential Estate Zoning District and the R1, Detached
Residential District, subject to the following conditions:
(a) On residential properties less than 2 acres in size:
i. A maximum of four (4) hen chickens or pullets are permitted.
ii.Roosters are prohibited.
(b) On residential properties containing two (2) or more acres in size:
i. A conditional use permit may be required for more than four (4) hen
chickens or pullets.
ii.Roosters may be permitted provided the crowing is not a nuisance.
(c) The butchering of chickens is prohibited.
(d) Chickens shall be fully contained on the property at all times through
the use of fencing.
(e) Shelters must comply with all requirements of the Development Code
concerning accessory structure and said structures shall not be placed
in the front, side yard or side yard abutting a street on residential
property. Said shelters shall be setback a minimum of 30-feet from an
adjacent principal dwelling.
Rev. Date
11/17/08
Ord. 837
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 601. Animal Licensing and Control 601-10
(f) Food materials that are stored outside shall be in closed containers
with lids.
(g) All containment areas and shelters shall be maintained in a clean,
sanitary, and odor free environment and shall be free from the
presence of rodents or vermin at all times.
(h) Chickens shall not be raised or kept for fighting. Cockfighting is
prohibited.
(2) License. No person shall keep, maintain or breed chickens on property
located within the City of Shoreview unless a license is obtained pursuant
to the provisions stated herein. Application shall be made on a form
provided by the City Manager. The City Council shall from time to time
set a fee by ordinance for the initial license and the bi-annual renewals.
(3) Inspection. The City Animal Control Officer will conduct an inspection of
the property to determine compliance with the license and ordinance
standards.
(4) License Fee. The license fee must be submitted with the application. The
fee will be established by City Council ordinance.
(5) Duration of License. A license shall be issued for a period of two years.
(6) Issuance of License. Upon completion of the application form, receipt of
the license fee, the City Manager shall cause a license to be issued to the
applicant.
(7) Change of Address. An applicant who has obtained a license shall notify
the City Manager of the applicant’s address changes within the corporate
limits of the City within ten (10) days of an address change.
(E) Beekeeping.
(1) Bee hives may be kept in the City limits on residential properties located
in the RE, Residential Estate Zoning District and the R1, Detached
Residential District, subject to the following conditions:
(a) Maximum Colony Density based on property size:
1 acre or larger: 8
1 acre – ¾ Acre: 6
¾ Acre to ½ Acre: 4
½ acre or less: 2
Rev. Date
5/24/17
Ord. #953
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 601. Animal Licensing and Control 601-11
(b) Honeybee colonies shall be kept in hive bodies with removable
frames, which shall be kept in sound and usable condition. The hive
body structure shall not exceed one standard 9-5/8 inch depth 10-frame
hive body with no supers. In no case shall it exceed 6 feet in height.
(c) The hive body must be removed within 30 days if no longer occupied
by a colony. It shall be a violation of this section for unused equipment
to attract a swarm, even if the beekeeper is not intentionally keeping
honey bees.
(d) Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is
available within 10 feet of the hive body at all times that the colonies
remain active outside of the hive body.
(e) Each beekeeper shall ensure that no wax comb or other material that
might encourage robbing by other bees are left exposed outdoors.
Such materials must be stored in sealed insect-proof containers, or
place within a building.
(f) No selling of honey permitted within an approved home occupation
permit.
(g) Hive bodies must be set back at least 15 feet from all property lines
and at least 25 feet from a principal dwelling unit on an abutting lot. A
Hive body may not be located in a front yard or a side yard abutting a
street.
(h) A 6 foot tall flyway barrier is required in each instance where a hive
body is kept less than 25 feet from a property line, as measured from
the nearest point on the hive to the property line. The flyway barrier
may consist of a wall, fence, or a combination there of, such that bees
will fly over rather than through the material to reach the colony.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 601. Animal Licensing and Control 601-12
(2) License. No person shall keep or maintain beehives on property located
within the City of Shoreview unless a license is obtained pursuant to the
provisions stated herein. Application shall be made on a form provided by
the City Manager. The City Council shall from time to time set a fee by
ordinance for the initial license and the biennial renewals.
(3) License requirements. Prior to issuance of a license the applicant shall
complete a honeybee keeper training course. Proof of completion shall be
provided as follows:
i) Providing a certification of completion from a honeybee keeping
course from the University of Minnesota, Century College or the
Three Rivers Park District.
ii) Requesting consideration and submit documentation for having
completed a comparable course from another institution or instructor.
(4) Inspection. The City Manager will conduct an inspection of the property
to determine compliance with the license and ordinance standards.
(5) License Fee. The license fee must be submitted with the application. The
fee will be established by City Council ordinance.
(6) Duration of License. A license shall be issued for a period of two years.
(7) Issuance of License. Upon completion of the application form,
certification of training and receipt of the license fee, the City Manager
shall cause a license to be issued to the applicant.
(8) Notice. The City Manager shall provide written notification to property
owners within 150 feet of the subject property upon issuance of the
license. Failure to give a mailed notice or defects in the notice shall not
invalidate the review process provided that a bona fide attempt has been
made to contact the property owners.
(9) Change of Address. An applicant who has obtained a license shall notify
the City Manager of the applicant’s address changes within the corporate
limits of the City within ten (10) days of an address change.
601.030 Regulations.
(A) Except as herein provided, the owner of an animal within the City of
Shoreview shall cause such animal to be confined to the individual’s property
by adequate fencing, leash or enclosure.
(B) The owner of a female dog or cat in heat shall confine such animal to the
owner’s property or any veterinary hospital/clinic, in such manner that such
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 601. Animal Licensing and Control 601-13
female dog or cat cannot come into contact with other animals, except for
intentional breeding purposes.
(C) Except in designated off leash areas, the owner of an animal within the City
of Shoreview shall cause such animal to be restrained at all times while in a
public place including but not limited to school properties, trails, parks, open
space areas and streets.
(D) The owner of an animal within the City of Shoreview shall prevent the
animal from becoming a nuisance by barking, baying, crying or howling in
any manner for at least five (5) continuous minutes or intermittently for
unreasonable lengths of time.
(E) Cleaning up litter:
(1) The owner of an animal shall be responsible for cleaning up any feces of
the animal and disposing of such feces in a sanitary manner.
(2) The owner of an animal shall not permit such animal to be on public
property or the private property of another without having in the owner’s
immediate possession, a device for the removal of feces and a proper
receptacle located on the property of such animal owner.
(3) The owner of an animal shall remove feces left by such animal on public
property or the private property of another to a proper receptacle located
on property of the animal owner.
(F) No person shall keep more than three (3) dogs, three (3) cats, three (3)
Vietnamese Potbellied Pigs or four (4) chickens on residentially zoned
property. The total number of combined licensed animals per residentially
zoned property shall not exceed four (4), with chickens considered one (1)
licensed animal.
(G) The owner shall confine within a building or a secure enclosure, every wild
animal, dangerous animal, or potentially dangerous animal, and shall not take
such animal out of such building or secure enclosure, unless such animal is
securely muzzled.
(H) It shall be unlawful for any dog or cat owner to keep or maintain any dog or
cat older than six (6) months of age unless it shall have been vaccinated with
an anti-rabies vaccine certified to be effective by a licensed veterinarian. No
license renewal shall be issued except upon compliance with this section.
(I) A person who uses a dog for security purposes within the City of Shoreview
shall post a warning notice at the entrance of the premises.
Ord. 866
Rev. 4/19/10
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 601. Animal Licensing and Control 601-14
(J) It shall be unlawful for a person to keep or harbor a dangerous animal, other
than a Dangerous Dog or Potentially Dangerous Dog as hereinafter provided,
or an unlicensed wild animal within the City.
(K) The owner of an animal within the City of Shoreview shall provide said
animal with sufficient, wholesome food and water; proper shelter and
protection from weather; veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering;
and with humane care and treatment.
(L) No person shall beat, torment or otherwise abuse an animal or cause or
permit an animal fight.
(M) The owner of a dog that has been determined to be a dangerous animal by the
City’s Animal Control Officer shall comply with the provisions of Minnesota
Statutes §347.50 through §347.56. The determination of the City’s Animal
Control Officer shall be final.
601.035 Dangerous Dogs.
(A) Designation. The owner of a dog which has been designated as a
“Dangerous Dog” by the Animal Control Officer, within fourteen (14) days
after the owner has noticed that the dog is dangerous, shall:
(1) Register the dog as provided herein; or
(2) Request a hearing to appeal the “Dangerous Dog” designation on
forms provided by the City Manager or Manager’s designee.
(B) Registration. The owner of a Dangerous Dog shall apply for a Dangerous
Dog Certificate; pay the registration fee; and file a current photograph of the
Dangerous Dog. The Dangerous Dog Certificates must be renewed annually
as long as the dog remains in the City.
(C) Death or Transfer. The owner of a Dangerous Dog must notify the City in
writing within thirty (30) days of the death or transfer of the ownership or
location of the Dangerous Dog.
(D) Microchip. The owner of the Dangerous Dog must have a microchip for
identification placed in the Dangerous Dog.
(E) Sterilization. The owner of a Dangerous Dog must provide evidence that
the Dangerous Dog has been sterilized at the owner’s expense within thirty
(30) days of the Dangerous Dog designation.
(F) Restraint. The owner of a Dangerous Dog shall keep the dog, while on the
owner’s property in a proper enclosure. If the dog is outside of the proper
enclosure, the dog must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or
Ord. 866
Rev. 4/19/10
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 601. Animal Licensing and Control 601-15
leash and under the physical control of a responsible person. The muzzle
must be made in a manner that would prevent the dog from biting any
person or animal, but that would not cause injury to the dog or interfere with
its vision or respiration.
(G) Warning/Symbol/Tag. The owner of a Dangerous Dog must post on the
premises a clearly visible warning sign and symbol as provided by the City.
A Dangerous Dog must have a standardized easily identifiable tag
identifying the dog as a dangerous and containing the uniform Dangerous
Dog symbol affixed to the dog’s collar at all times.
(H) Liability. The owner of a Dangerous Dog must obtain a surety bond or
policy of liability issued by authorized companies in the amount of at least
$300,000 insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted by the dog.
(I) Landlord Disclosure. If the owner of a Dangerous Dog is a renter, the
owner shall notify the landlord of the property that the dog has been
designated as a Dangerous Dog.
(J) Destruction of Dangerous Dog. The Animal Control Officer shall require
a previously designated Dangerous Dog to be destroyed if:
(1) The dog afflicted substantial or great bodily harm on a human or a
domestic animal on public or private property.
(2) The dog inflicted multiple bites on a human on public or private
property without provocation.
(3) The dog bit multiple human victims on public or private property
without provocation; or
(4) The dog bit a human on public or private property without provocation,
in an attack where more than one dog participated in the attack.
601.036 Potentially Dangerous Dogs.
(A) Designation. The owner of dog which has been designated a “Potentially
Dangerous Dog” by the Animal Control Officer, within fourteen (14) days
after the owner has noticed that the dog is potentially dangerous, shall:
(1) Register the dog as a Potentially Dangerous Dog; or
(2) Request a hearing to appeal the Potentially Dangerous Dog
designation on forms provided by the City Manager or Manager’s
designee.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 601. Animal Licensing and Control 601-16
(B) Registration. The owner of the Potentially Dangerous Dog shall apply for a
Potentially Dangerous Certificate; pay the application fee; and provide a
current photograph of the dog. The registration must be renewed annually
as long as the dog remains in the City.
(C) Death or Transfer. The owner of a Potentially Dangerous Dog must notify
the City in writing within thirty (30) days of the death or transfer of the
ownership or location of the Potentially Dangerous Dog.
(D) Microchip. The owner of the Potentially Dangerous Dog must have a
microchip identification placed in the Potentially Dangerous Dog.
(E) Proper Enclosure/Restraint. The owner of a Potentially Dangerous Dog
shall keep the dog, while on the owner’s property in a proper enclosure. If
the dog is outside of the proper enclosure, the dog must be muzzled and
restrained by a substantial chain or leach and under the physical control of a
responsible person. The muzzle must be made in a manner that would
prevent the dog from biting any person or animal, but that would not cause
injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration.
(F) Warning/Symbol. The owner of a Potentially Dangerous Dog must post on
the premises a clearly visible warning sign and symbol as provided by the
City.
(G) Liability. The owner of a Potentially Dangerous Dog must obtain a surety
bond or policy of liability insurance issued by authorized companies in the
amount of at least $300,000 insuring the owner for personal injuries
inflicted by the Potentially Dangerous Dog.
(H) Landlord Disclosure. If the owner of the Potentially Dangerous Dog is a
renter, the owner shall notify its landlord of the Potentially Dangerous Dog
Designation.
601.040 Enforcement. The provisions of Sections 601.200 through 601.300 shall be
enforced by the Animal Control Officer. No person shall, in any manner,
interfere with or hinder an Animal Control Officer in the discharge of their duties.
601.050 Exemptions. The following provisions of this Chapter shall not apply in the
following circumstances:
(A) Unless specified herein, the provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to
animals used or confined at hospitals, clinics, or businesses operated by
licensed veterinarians.
(B) Regulations relating to vaccination requirements shall not apply to any
animal belonging to a nonresident of the City and kept within the City for not
longer than thirty (30) days, provided all such animals shall, at all times while
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 601. Animal Licensing and Control 601-17
in the City, be restrained by the owner on the property which the owner is
occupying within the City of Shoreview.
(C) Regulations relating to dangerous animals and potentially dangerous animals
shall not apply to dogs under the control of a law enforcement officer.
601.060 Seizure and Removal of Animals. Subject to the provisions of this section,
animals found in violation of this chapter may be seized by the Animal Control
Officer, impounded in a designated animal shelter, and confined therein in a
humane manner for a period of not less than five (5) business days or until
claimed by the animal’s owner, whichever occurs first.
(A) Animal Control Officers shall not enter the private dwelling of an individual
for purposes of seizing animals or otherwise enforcing the provisions of this
Chapter without first obtaining a search warrant. However, an Animal
Control Officer is empowered to enter upon a property adjacent to a private
dwelling for purposes of enforcing the provisions of this Chapter.
(B) Before seizing an animal on private property, the Animal Control Officer
shall make a reasonable attempt, taking into consideration the time of day and
nature of the violation, to notify the owner that the animal is being seized
because it was observed by the Animal Control Officer to be in violation of
the provisions of this Chapter.
(C) When an animal is seized from the private property of its owner and the
Animal Control Officer has been unable to notify the owner of the reason for
seizing animal, the Animal Control Officer shall leave a written notice
affixed to the dwelling unit, in a conspicuous manner, which includes the
following information:
(1) A description of the animal seized.
(2) Purpose for seizure of the animal.
(3) The time, place and circumstances under which the animal was seized.
(4) The location, address, telephone number and contact person where the
animal will be impounded.
(5) A statement indicating that the person claiming the animal will be
required to pay for the fees and costs associated with impoundment of
the animal.
(6) A statement indicating that failure to claim the animal within five
business days will result in the disposition of the animal.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 601. Animal Licensing and Control 601-18
(D) Immediately upon impounding animals, reasonable efforts shall be made to
notify the owner and inform the owner of the animal’s confinement and the
procedures for release of the animal to the owner.
(E) An animal which is not redeemed within five (5) business days after
impounding may be disposed of in any manner provided by law. Any animal
which is not claimed by the owner or sold, shall be euthanized and disposed
of in a sanitary manner by the Animal Control Officer.
(F) The title of all animals seized and held at the animal shelter may be
transferred to the Humane Society after the legal detention period has expired
and the animals have not been claimed by their owners.
(G) Animals taken into custody pursuant to the provisions of Minn. Stat. 343.22
or 343.29 shall be disposed of pursuant to the provisions of Minn. Stat.
343.235.
601.070 Impoundment Fees. Any animal impounded hereunder may be reclaimed by the
owner of such animal within five (5) business days after such impoundment.
Before the owner shall be permitted to recover possession of the animal, the
owner shall pay the Animal Control Officer all required fees and costs of
impoundment.
601.080 Rabies Control.
(A) The Minnesota Health Laws and Regulations are hereby adopted in cases of
rabid animals which have bitten any person or animals suspected of being
rabid.
(B) It shall be the duty of every physician to report to the City the names and
addresses of persons treated or bites inflicted by animals together with other
information helpful in rabies control.
(C) It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the City his
diagnosis of any animal observed by him as a rabies suspect.
(D) Whenever the prevalence of rabies or hydrophobia renders such action
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, the Mayor shall
issue a proclamation ordering every person owning or in possession of a dog
to confine it securely to the premises unless it is muzzled so that it cannot
bite. No person shall violate this proclamation.
601.090 Biting Animals To Be Quarantined. Whenever an animal has bitten a person,
or whenever a known or suspected rabid animal is picked up by the Animal
Control Officer or law enforcement officer, such animal shall be confined for a
minimum of ten (10) days as follows:
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 601. Animal Licensing and Control 601-19
(A) Upon proof of a current rabies vaccination, the owner of the animal may,
with the consent of the Animal Control Officer, quarantine the animal at the
owner’s residence provided that such animal shall not be permitted to come
in contact with other animals or persons and, provided further that the animal
shall be muzzled and on a leash not to exceed four (4) feet, and in control of a
competent person when taken from the place of confinement for sanitation
purposes.
(B) If no proof of a current rabies vaccination is provided, or if the Animal
Control Officer does not consent to confinement of the animal to the owner’s
residence, the animal shall be quarantined at the animal shelter or a licensed
veterinary clinic at the expense of the owner.
(C) A quarantined animal shall not be removed from the place of confinement
without the written permission of the Animal Control Officer.
(D) A quarantined animal shall be confined in an enclosure constructed of
materials suitable to prevent the animal from escaping. All openings to the
enclosure shall be locked at all times and the animal shall not be removed
from the enclosure unless the animal is muzzled on a leash not exceeding
four (4) feet in length and in control of a competent person.
601.100 Additional Fee and Proof of Insurance as to Potentially Dangerous Animals.
The owner of a potentially dangerous animal shall pay an additional annual fee as
determined by Council Resolution and shall provide the City Manager, annually,
with proof of liability insurance which covers damages that may be caused by
such animal.
601.110 Summary Destruction. Whenever an Animal Control Officer has reasonable
cause to believe that a particular animal represents a clear and immediate danger
to the residents of the City of Shoreview because it is infected with rabies or
because it is a dangerous animal, the Animal Control Officer, after making
reasonable attempts to impound such animal, may summarily destroy the animal.
601.130 Intentional Feeding of Wild Animals
(A)Feeding Prohibited. Except as hereinafter provided in Section 601.130(B),
no person shall intentionally feed wild animals within the City. Intentional
feeding means the provision of any grain, fruit, vegetables, nuts, salt licks, or
any other food that attracts wild animals. Living food sources such as trees
and other live vegetation shall not be considered food for wild animals.
(B) Feeding Songbirds. The feeding of songbirds is permitted under the
following conditions:
Ord. 870
Rev. 10/16/10
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 601. Animal Licensing and Control 601-20
(1) Feeding is done from a bird feeder that is designed to prevent other
wild animals from feeding and is placed at least 5 feet above the
ground;
(2) The bird feeder does not become an attractive nuisance to other wild
animals;
(3) Songbird feeding does not attract songbirds in such numbers to
become a nuisance or damage property; and
(4) Songbird feeding occurs on private property owned or controlled by
the person responsible for the feeder.
(C) Exception. The provisions of Section 601.130(A) shall not apply to the
employees or agents of the City, County, the State, the Federal government or
veterinarians who in the course of their official duties have wild animals in
their custody or under their management.
(D)Violations. Violations of this ordinance provision will be subject to a fine of
$100 for the first violation, $200 for a second violation, and $300 for each
subsequent violation within a 24-month period.
601.150 Wildlife Management Programs
(A)Authorization. No person shall, within the City limits, hunt or engage in the
business of removal of wild animals, unless such person shall be acting on
behalf of Ramsey County or the City as part of an authorized Wildlife
Management Program.
(B)Restrictions.
(1) No person shall threaten, intimidate, obstruct or interfere with an
authorized wildlife management program or agent providing such
services to the City.
(2) No person shall touch, damage, manipulate, disengage, make inoperative
or otherwise tamper with equipment that is being used as part of an
authorized wildlife management program.
(3) No person shall be within 100 feet of a trap or other equipment or
material being used as part of an authorized wildlife management
program unless the person is on land which they own or has the express
permission of the City or County, the City or County’s authorized agent,
or the owner of the property.
(4) No person shall enter any area which the City or County has closed to
the public as part of an authorized wildlife management program and the
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 601. Animal Licensing and Control 601-21
City or County has provided notice of such closure by conspicuously
posting signs or by other reasonable means.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 602. Open Burning 602-1
602 Open Burning
602.010 Adoption of State Law by Reference. The provisions of Minnesota Statutes,
Chapter 88, as they may be amended from time to time, with reference to the
definition of terms, conditions of operation, permits, and all other matters
pertaining to open burning are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of
this chapter as if set out in full. It is the intention of the City Council that all
future amendments of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 88, are hereby adopted by
reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this ordinance
was adopted. If there is a conflict between the provision of this chapter and the
provisions of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 88, the more restrictive provisions shall
apply.
602.020 Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate open burning within the
City of Shoreview, to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The designated
fire official is hereby authorized to adopt and impose burning restrictions to aid in
the prevention of wildfire and to consult with the Department of Natural
Resources (DNR), Division of Forestry to develop any restrictions or other
criteria.
602.030 Definitions. For purposes of this ordinance, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
(1) Designated Fire Official. The Fire Chief of the Lake Johanna Fire
Department, or the Fire Chief’s designee.
(2) Open Burning. The burning of any matter if the resulting combustion
products are emitted directly into the atmosphere without passing through a
stack, duct or chimney, except a recreational or campfire as defined herein.
Mobile cooking devices such as charcoal grills, wood smokers, manufactured
hibachis, and propane or natural gas devices are not considered open burning
devices.
(3) Recreational/Camp Fire. A fire set with an approved starter fuel no more
than three feet in height contained within a recreational fire site: using dry,
clean wood, producing little detectable smoke, odor or soot beyond the
property line; conducted with an adult tending the fire at all times; for
recreational, ceremonial, or social food preparation; extinguished completely
before quitting the occasion; and respecting weather conditions, neighbors,
burning bans, and air quality requirements so that nuisance, health or safety
hazards will not be created. No more than one recreational fire is allowed on
any property at one time.
(4) Recreational/Camp Fire Site. An area of no more than a three foot diameter
circle (as measured from the inside of the fire ring or border); completely
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 602. Open Burning 602-2
surrounded by non-combustible and non-smoke or odor producing material,
either natural rock, cement, brick, tile, blocks or ferrous metal. Burning
barrels are not a recreational fire site as defined herein. Recreational fire sites
shall not be closer than 25 feet to any structure.
(5) Running Fire. An attended fire allowed to spread through surface vegetative
matter under controlled conditions for the purpose of vegetative management,
forest management, game habitat management, or agricultural improvement.
(6) Starter Fuels. Dry, untreated, unpainted, kindling, branches or charcoal fire
starter. Paraffin candles and alcohols are permitted as starter fuels and as aids
to ignition only. Propane gas torches or other clean gas burning devices
causing minimal pollution may be used to start an open burn.
(7) Vegetative Materials. Dry leaves, dry grass clippings, twigs, branches, tree
limbs, untreated or unpainted wood that contains no glues or resins, and other
similar materials. Paper and cardboard are not considered vegetative
materials.
(8) Wood. Dry, clean fuels, such twigs, branches, limbs, manufactured fireplace
logs, charcoal, cord wood, or untreated dimensional lumber. “Wood” does
not include wood that is green with leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil soaked,
or treated with paint, glue or preservatives. Clean pallets may be used for
recreational fires when cut into less than three-foot lengths.
602.040 Prohibited Materials.
(1) No person shall conduct, cause or permit the open burning of oils, petroleum
fuels, rubber, plastic, chemically treated materials, or other materials that
produce excessive or noxious smoke such as, but not limited to, tire, railroad
ties, treated, painted or glued wood composite shingles, tar paper, insulation,
composition board, sheet rock, wiring, paint or paint fillers.
(2) No person shall conduct, cause or permit the open burning of: hazardous
waste or salvage operations; solid waste generated from an industrial or
manufactured process; materials from a service or commercial establishment;
or building materials generated from demolition of commercial or institutional
structures.
(3) No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of discarded materials
resulting from the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving or
consumption of food.
(4) No person shall conduct, cause or permit the open burning of any leaves or
grass clippings.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 602. Open Burning 602-3
(5) The use of burners, as described in Minnesota Statute §88.16, subd. 2(d) are
prohibited within the city’s jurisdiction.
602.050 Open Burning Prohibited Except by Permit. No person shall start or allow
open burning on property in the City of Shoreview without first having obtained
an open burning permit from the designated fire official; provided that a permit is
not required for a recreational/camp fire.
602.060 Permitted Open Burning.
(1) Under circumstances deemed appropriate by the designated fire official, open
burning permits may be issued by the designated fire official or by a DNR
forestry official for:
(a) Elimination of health hazard that cannot be abated by other practical
means, as determined by the commissioner of health or the local health
authority.
(b) Ground thawing for utility repair and construction.
(c) Running fires.
(d) Disposal of vegetative matter for managing forest, prairie or wildlife
habitat, and in the development and maintenance of land and rights-ofway
where chipping, composting, land-spreading or other alternative
methods are not practical.
(2) Fire training permits may only be issued by the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources (DNR).
602.070 Permit Application and Fees.
(1) Open burning permits shall be obtained by making application on a form
prescribed by the DNR and adopted by the designated fire official. The permit
application shall be presented to the designated fire official for review.
(2) An open burning permit fee shall be submitted along with an application for
an open burning permit in an amount established by City Council ordinance.
602.080 Permit Process.
(1) The applicant shall demonstrate to the designated fire official the ability to
comply with the applicable state statutes, this ordinance, or any additional
guidelines as may be adopted.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 602. Open Burning 602-4
(2) Upon receipt of the completed open burning permit application and fee, the
designated fire official may, if he or she believes necessary, require a
preliminary site inspection to locate the proposed burn site, note special
conditions, and set dates and times of permitted burn and review fire safety
considerations, including the preparation of a detailed burn event safety plan
with the designated fire official when conditions require.
602.090 Denial of Permit.
(1) If the criteria contained in Section 602.060 for the issuance of an open burning
permit are not satisfied, the application will be denied.
(2) If the criteria contained in Section 602.060 are met, the application may be
denied by the designated fire official if it is determined that a practical
alternative method for disposal exists, a pollution or nuisance condition would
result, or a satisfactory burn event safety plan cannot be drafted.
602.100 Permit Holder Responsibility.
(1) Prior to starting an open burn, the permit holder shall be responsible for
confirming that no burning ban or air quality alert is in effect.
(2) The open burning site shall have appropriate communication and fire
suppression equipment available as determined by the designated fire official.
(3) The open burn shall be attended to at all times. No fire may ever be allowed to
smolder. The fire shall be completely extinguished before the permit holder or
his or her representative leaves the site. It is the responsibility of the permit
holder to have a valid permit, as required by this chapter, available for
inspection on site by law enforcement, the Fire Department, a Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) representative or DNR officer.
(4) The permit holder is responsible for compliance and implementation of all
general conditions, special conditions, and guidelines as established in the
permit issued. The permit holder shall be responsible for all costs incurred as a
result of the burn, including but not limited to fire suppression and
administrative fees.
602.110 Revocation of Permit. An open burning permit is subject to revocation at the
discretion of a DNR officer or the designated fire official. Reasons for revocation
include but are not limited to: a fire hazard existing or developing during the
course of the burn; any permit conditions being violated during the course of the
burn; pollution or nuisance conditions developing during the course of the burn;
or a fire smoldering with no flame, or attendant, present.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 602. Open Burning 602-5
602.120 Burning Ban or Air Quality Alert.
(1) The designated fire official is authorized to determine when conditions make
open burning potentially hazardous and declare a burning ban within the city.
(2) No recreational fire or open burn will be permitted when the designated fire
official or the DNR has officially declared a burning ban due to potential
hazardous fire conditions or when the MPCA has declared an air quality alert.
602.130 Penalty. Violation of any provision of this ordinance, including maintaining a
nuisance after being notified in writing, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
602.140 Severability. If any provision of this ordinance is found to be invalid for any
reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity of the remaining
provisions shall not be affected.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 603. Trespassing 603-1
603 Trespassing
603.010 Trespassing. Whoever does any of the following is guilty of trespassing:
(A)Without permission of the owner or occupant, enters the dwelling of another.
As used in this section, "dwelling" means a building, a mobile home, a
structure, or a portion of a building, mobile home or structure which is used
by an individual as a place of residence on either a full-time or part-time basis.
(B)Without permission of the owner or occupant of a business, enters a portion of
the business premises which has been marked "No Trespassing" or "No Entry
Without Authorization" or which has been marked with words of similar
import.
(C)Without permission of the owner or occupant of construction equipment,
climbs into or upon construction equipment which has been left unattended on
a job site.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 604. Weapons 604-1
604 Weapons
604.010 Definition. "Weapon" means any gun, pistol, revolver, sling-shot, sand club,
metal knuckles, daggers, dirk, bowie knife, razor, air rifle, air gun, B-B gun,
spring gun, bow and arrow, switch blade, firearm or any similar device for the
propulsion of shot or other metal pellet by whatever means, and any other
dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument.
604.020 Discharge Prohibited. No person shall fire, release, throw or in any other
manner propel any weapon within the city, except as expressly provided by this
chapter.
604.030 Carrying. No person shall handle or carry any weapon outside of his home
unless the weapon is properly encased, except as expressly provided by this
chapter.
604.040 Confiscation. If any court determines that any weapon has been carried or
discharged in violation of this chapter, the weapon shall be forfeited to and
confiscated by the city.
604.050 Exceptions.
(A)Peace Officers. Peace officers or officers of the court may carry or discharge
weapons in the course and scope of their duties.
(B)Handgun Permits. Persons holding a handgun permit issued pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes Section 624.711 through 624.717 may carry or discharge a
handgun to the extent allowed by the permit.
(C) Recreational Programs. Any person may carry or discharge a bow and arrow
or a B-B gun while engaged in recreational activities or instructional programs
on B-B gun or archery ranges located within county or city parks.
(D)Wildlife Management Program. Any person participating in an authorized
Wildlife Management Program.
(E) Dealers. Persons licensed as dealers may handle weapons within their place
of business in the regular course of business.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 605. Alarm Systems 605-1
605 Alarm Systems
605.010 Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to ensure the availability of the City's
public safety services for appropriate public safety needs and to encourage alarm
users to adequately maintain and utilize alarm systems.
605.020 Definitions.
(A)Alarm System. An alarm installation designed to be used for the prevention
or detection of burglary, robbery, or fire and located in or on a building,
structure or facility.
(B)Alarm User. The legal entity in control of any building, structure or facility
wherein or whereon an alarm system is located.
(C) False Alarm. An alarm signal eliciting a response by personnel of the City's
Law Enforcement Agency when a situation requiring a response does not, in
fact, exist, and which is caused by the activation of an alarm system through
mechanical failure, movement, alarm malfunction, improper installation or the
inadvertence of the alarm user or its employees, family or agents. A false
alarm does not include an alarm caused by climatic conditions such as
tornadoes, thunderstorms, utility line mishaps, violent conditions of nature, or
any other conditions which are clearly beyond the control of the alarm
manufacturer, installer or user.
(D)Law Enforcement Agency. An agency or a person designated by the City
Manager.
605.030 False Alarm Reports. The City Manager shall cause the law enforcement
agency to report all false alarms occurring within the City. The report shall
include the identification of the alarm user and the date, time and location of the
false alarm.
605.040 User Fees. An alarm user whose alarm system has resulted in the recording of
more than two (2) false alarms within 365 consecutive days shall be charged in
accordance with the City Council’s adopted resolution.
605.050 Notice. Upon notice of the first and second false alarm reports for a particular
alarm system, the City shall, by U.S. mail, notify the alarm user that a false alarm
has been reported. The notice shall include a copy of the City's false alarm
regulations. Upon receipt of the third and subsequent false alarm reports for a
particular alarm system, the City Manager shall, by U.S. mail, notify the alarm
user that, within ten (10) days of the date of the City's notice, the appropriate user
fee must be paid to the City Finance Department.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 605. Alarm Systems 605-2
605.060 Collection of Delinquent Fees. All delinquent charges for user fees shall be
certified by the City Manager to the Ramsey County Department of Property
Taxation for collection with taxes due against the property on which the alarm
system is located. This certification process shall occur annually on or before
October 10 of each year.
605.070 Excessive Alarm Report. When the operation of an alarm system has resulted in
five (5) or more false alarms within 365 days, the City Manager shall request the
alarm user to provide the City with a written report indicating the actions taken or
to be taken by the alarm user to discover and eliminate the cause of the false
alarms. Failure to submit the written report within the time limits provided by the
City Manager shall be considered a violation of this ordinance.
605.080 Confidentiality. All information submitted in compliance with this ordinance
shall be held in confidence and shall be deemed a confidential report exempt from
discovery to the extent permitted by law. Subject to the requirements of
confidentiality, the City Manager shall develop statistics for the purpose of
ongoing alarm system evaluation.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 606. Unauthorized Collection of Recyclable Materials 606-1
606 Unauthorized Collection of Recyclable Materials
606.010 Purpose. The City of Shoreview has contracted with a service provider for the
collection of recyclable materials and has otherwise implemented a recycling
program within the City. The City's ability to maintain favorable contracts
depends, in part, upon the volume of recyclable materials which are placed at
curbside by Shoreview residents. The unauthorized collection or "scavenging" of
recyclable materials will reduce the volume available for collection as part of the
designated recycling program. Scavenging also causes confusion among
participating residents and thereby disrupts the publicity and educational
processes of an authorized program. The purpose of this Chapter is to ensure that
a designated recycling program will be implemented in an orderly fashion to
avoid adverse effects on the public health, welfare, safety and environment.
606.020 Definitions.
(A) "Recyclable materials" shall mean items of refuse which are part of an
authorized recycling program and which are intended for transportation,
processing, and manufacturing or reuse, including, but not limited to paper,
glass, aluminum and other metal cans and containers.
(B) "Authorized or designated recycling program" shall mean a program for the
collection and recycling of recyclable materials which is instituted, sponsored
and/or approved by the City of Shoreview.
(C) “Scavenging" shall mean the unauthorized collection of recyclable materials
that have been set out by residents of the City specifically for collection as
part of an authorized or designated recycling program.
606.030 Ownership. Ownership of recyclable materials set out for the purpose of
participating in curbside recycling programs shall remain in the person or
household from which the materials originated until collected by an authorized
collector. Upon removal by the City or its designated agents or contractors from a
designated collection point, ownership of properly prepared and stored recyclable
materials intended for a City-authorized collection program shall be vested in the
authorized collector. Materials not prepared, cleaned or stored according to City
specifications shall remain the responsibility and property of the individuals or
household from which the materials originated. Nothing in this Chapter shall
abridge the right of any individual to give or sell their recyclable materials to any
approved recyclable materials program.
606.040 Unauthorized Collection. It shall be unlawful for any person who is not
authorized by the City to take or collect recyclable material set out for authorized
collection programs within the City.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 607. Residential Recycling Service Fees 607-1
607 Residential Recycling Service Fees
607.010 Purpose and Intent. Consistent with the policies expressed in the Minnesota
Waste Management Act (MS 115A), the City of Shoreview has implemented a
curbside recycling program for all residential dwelling units within the City.
Although other sources of funding will be used when available, the City Council
has determined that the economic viability of the residential curbside recycling
program and the ultimate benefits resulting therefrom require the imposition of a
residential recycling service fee.
607.020 Computation of Fee. Annually, before August 31, the City Manager shall
determine the succeeding year's estimated budget for the collection of recyclable
materials from residential dwellings and the total number of individual residential
dwelling units within the City. The proposed residential recycling service fee for
each residential dwelling unit shall not exceed an amount equal to the unfunded
portion of the estimated recycling budget divided by the total number of
residential dwelling units within the City. Owners of real property within a R-3
Zoning District shall be charged a recycling fee for each dwelling unit within a
multiple family structure. Owners of real property within a R-4 Zoning District
shall be charged a recycling fee for each lot within a manufactured home park.
607.030 Annual Review. The residential recycling service fee shall be reviewed and
approved annually by the City Council.
607.040 Collection of Fee. The City may facilitate the collection of the residential
recycling service fee by agreement with Ramsey County to include such fee on
the real estate tax statement for individual or multiple family dwelling units. In
the alternative, residential recycling service fee statements shall be mailed to
property owners on or before April 15th and shall be payable no later than July
15th of each year. A penalty equal to 10% of the amount due shall be added to
delinquent accounts.
607.050 Certification of Delinquent Accounts. Each year, the City Manager shall
prepare a list of delinquent residential recycling service fee accounts, including
accrued penalties thereon, in the form of an assessment roll. On or before
October 1st of year, the City Council shall review the delinquent residential
recycling fee assessment roll and adopt an appropriate resolution certifying the
delinquent accounts to the County Auditor as a lien against the real property
served and further directing that the County Auditor collect the assessment as part
of the ensuing year's tax levy. All delinquent residential recycling fee
assessments shall bear interest, at a rate determined by Council resolution, from
the date on which the resolution is adopted until December 31st of the following
year.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 608. Curfew 608-1
608 Curfew
608.010 Purposes and Findings. The City Council of the City of Shoreview finds and
determines that special and extenuating circumstances presently exist within this
City that require special regulation of juveniles within the City in order to protect
them and other persons during the nighttime hours, to aid in crime prevention, to
promote parental supervision and authority over juveniles and to decrease juvenile
crime rates.
It is the intent of the Shoreview City Council to review and evaluate the need and
effect of its curfew regulations. The City Council will request its law enforcement
agency to prepare and submit an annual report to the City Council of such
regulations during the preceding calendar year.
608.020 Definitions.
(A) “Emergency Errand” means an errand necessary to avoid or seek help for a
harm or peril that is overwhelming or physical, provided the juvenile could
not have avoided the necessity of the errand by taking advance precautions.
(B) “Juvenile” means a person under the age of eighteen (18). The term does not
include persons under 18 who are married or have been legally emancipated.
(C) “Guardian” means an adult appointed pursuant to Minn. Stat. 525.6155 or
525.6165 who has the powers and responsibilities of a parent as defined by
Minn. Stat. 525.619.
(D) “Parent” means any person having legal custody of a Juvenile in the following
circumstances:
(1) as a natural or adoptive parent;
(2) as a legal guardian; or
(3) as a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
(E) “Proprietor” means an individual responsible for managing or operating a
business establishment.
(F) “Public Place” means a public street, park, facility, or other place open to the
public.
(G) “Responsible Adult” means a person over the age of eighteen (18) specifically
authorized by law or by a Parent or Guardian to have custody and control of a
Juvenile.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 608. Curfew 608-2
608.030 Curfew Hours.
(A) Juveniles Under Age 16. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful
for a Juvenile under the age of sixteen (16) years to be present in a Public
Place between 10:00 p.m. on one day and 5:00 a.m. on the following day.
(B) Juveniles That Are 16 or 17 Years of Age. Except as hereinafter provided, it
shall be unlawful for a Juvenile that is sixteen (16) or seventeen (17) years of
age to be present in a Public Place between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
5:00 a.m.
(C) Exceptions. Curfew hours shall not apply when:
(1) the Juvenile was accompanied by the Juvenile’s Parent, Guardian, or other
Responsible Adult.
(2) the Juvenile was engaged in a lawful employment activity or was going to
or returning home from the Juvenile’s place of employment.
(3) the Juvenile is on an Emergency Errand.
(4) the Juvenile is on an errand at the direction of a Parent, Guardian, or
Responsible Adult.
(5) the Juvenile is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution or Article I of the Constitution of the State of
Minnesota.
(6) the Juvenile was engaged in interstate travel.
(7) the Juvenile is on the public boulevard or sidewalk abutting the property
on which the Juvenile’s residence is located; or the Juvenile is on a public
boulevard or sidewalk abutting the immediately adjacent property,
provided that the occupant of the immediately adjacent property has not
filed a complaint with the City’s law enforcement agency.
(8) the Juvenile is attending or returning home by a direct route to the
Juvenile’s residence from an official school or religious activity which
began no later than 10:00 p.m., and the Juvenile possesses written
permission from the Juvenile’s Parent, Guardian or a Responsible Adult
authorizing the Juvenile to attend such activity.
(9) the Juvenile is legally married.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 608. Curfew 608-3
(10) the Juvenile is homeless or is using a Public or semi-Public place as the
Juvenile’s usual abode.
(D)Duties of Parents, Guardians, and Responsible Adults. It shall be unlawful for
the Parent, Guardian, or Responsible Adult having charge of a Juvenile to
knowingly permit the Juvenile to be present in a Public Place during curfew
hours.
(E) Business Establishments. No Proprietor shall knowingly permit a Juvenile to
remain in the Proprietor’s business establishment during curfew hours,
provided that a Proprietor shall not be in violation of this section if:
(1) The Proprietor reasonably and in good faith relied upon a Juvenile’s
representation of proof of age. Proof of age may be established pursuant to
Minn. Stat. 340A.503, Subd. 6, or other verifiable means, including, but
not limited to, school identification cards and birth certificates; or
(2) The Proprietor promptly notified the City’s law enforcement agency that a
Juvenile was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew
hours.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 609. Lodging Tax 609-1
609 Lodging Tax
609.010 Definitions: As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have
meanings given to them by this section.
(A) Director. The Finance Director of the City.
(B) City. The City of Shoreview.
(C) Lodging. The furnishing for consideration of lodging by a hotel, motel,
rooming house, tourist court, or resort, except where such lodging shall be for
a continuous period of thirty (30) days or more to the same lodger.
(D) Operator. A person who provides lodging to others, or any officer, agent or
employee of such person.
(E) Person. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, estate, receiver,
trustee, executor, administrator, assignee, syndicate or any other combination
of individuals. Whenever the term “person” is used in any provision of this
Chapter prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to a
corporation, association, or partnership, shall mean the officers, or partners
thereof as the case may be.
(F) Rent. The total consideration valued in money charged for lodging whether
paid in money or otherwise, but shall not include any charges for services
rendered in connection with furnishing lodging other than the room charge
itself.
(G) Lodger. The person obtaining lodging from an operator.
609.020 Imposition of Tax. There is hereby imposed a tax of three percent (3%) on the
rent charged by an operator for providing lodging to any person. The tax shall be
stated and charged separately and shall be collected by the operator from the
lodger. The tax collected by the operator shall be a debt owed by the operator to
the City and shall be extinguished only by payment to the City. In no case shall
the tax imposed by this section upon an operator exceed the amount of tax which
the operator authorized and required by this Chapter to collect from a lodger.
609.030 Collections. Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this Chapter at the
time rent is paid. The tax collections shall be held in trust by the operator for the
City. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the rent charged for the
lodging.
609.040 Exemptions. An exemption shall be granted to any person as to whom or whose
occupancy it is beyond the power of the City to tax. No exemption shall be
granted except upon a claim therefore made at the time the rent is collected and
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 609. Lodging Tax 609-2
such a claim shall be made in writing under penalty of perjury on forms provided
by the City. All such claims shall be forwarded to the City when the returns and
collections are submitted as required by this Chapter.
609.050 Advertising No Tax. It shall be unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold
out or state to the public or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any
party thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be
added to the rent or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. In
computing the tax to be collected, amounts of tax less than one cent shall be
considered an additional cent.
609.060 Payments and Returns. The taxes imposed by this Chapter shall be paid by the
operator to the City not later than twenty-five (25) days after the end of the month
in which the taxes were collected. At the time of payment the operator shall
submit a return upon such forms and containing such information as the City may
require. The return shall contain the following minimum information:
(A)The total amount of rent collected for lodging during the period covered by
the return.
(B) The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period.
(C) The signature of the person filing the return or that of an agent duly authorized
in writing.
(D)The period covered by the return.
(E) The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject to the lodging tax.
(F) A copy of the Minnesota State Sales and Use Tax Return submitted by the
operator for the period covered by the return.
The operator may offset against the taxes payable with respect to any reporting
period, the amount of taxes imposed by this Chapter previously paid as a result of
any transaction the consideration for which became uncollectible during such
reporting period, but only in proportion to the portion of such consideration which
became uncollectible.
609.070 Examination of Return, Adjustments, Notices and Demands. The Director
may rely upon the Minnesota State Sales and Use Tax Return filed by the operator
with the State of Minnesota in determining the accuracy of a return filed under
this Chapter. However, the Director shall be authorized to make any investigation
or examination of the records and accounts of the person making the return, if the
Director reasonably determines that such steps are necessary for determining the
correctness of the return. The tax computed on the basis of such examination
shall be the tax to be paid. If the tax due is found to be greater than that paid,
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 609. Lodging Tax 609-3
such excess shall be paid to the City within ten (10) days after receipt of a notice
thereof, given either personally or sent by registered mail to the address shown on
the return. If the tax paid is greater than the tax found to be due, the excess shall
be refunded to the person who paid the tax to the City within ten (10) days after
determination of such refund.
609.080 Refunds. Any person may apply to the Director for a refund of taxes paid for a
prescribed period in excess of the amount legally due for that period, provided
that no application for refund shall be considered unless filed within one year
after such tax was paid, or within one year from the filing of the return, whichever
period is the longer. The Director shall examine the claim and make and file
written findings thereon denying or allowing the claim in whole or in part and
shall mail a notice thereof by registered mail to such person at the address stated
upon the return. If such claim is allowed in whole or in part, the Director shall
credit the amount of the allowance against any taxes due under this Chapter from
the claimant and the balance of said allowance, if any, shall be paid by the
Director to the claimant.
609.090 Failure to File a Return.
(A) If any operator required by this Chapter to file a return shall fail to do so
within the time prescribed, or shall make, willfully or otherwise, an incorrect,
false, or fraudulent return, the operator shall, upon written notice and demand,
file such return or corrected return within five (5) days of receipt of such
written notice and shall at the same time pay any tax due on the basis thereof.
If such person shall fail to file such return or corrected return, the Director
shall make a return or corrected return, for such person from such knowledge
and information as the Director can obtain, and assess a tax on the basis
thereof, which tax, less any payments theretofore made on account of the tax
for the taxable period covered by such return shall be paid within five (5) days
of the receipt of written notice and demand for such payment. Any such
return or assessment made by the Director shall be prima facie correct and
valid, and such person shall have the burden of establishing its incorrectness
or invalidity in any action or proceeding in respect thereto.
(B) If any portion of a tax imposed by this Chapter, including penalties thereon, is
not paid within thirty (30) days after it is required to be paid, the City may
institute such legal action as may be necessary to recover the amount due plus
interest, penalties, the costs and disbursements of any action.
(C)Upon a showing of good cause, the Director may grant an operator one thirty
(30) day extension of time within which to file a return and make payment of
taxes as required by this Chapter provided that interest during such period of
extension shall be added to the taxes due at the rate of ten percent (10%) per
annum.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 609. Lodging Tax 609-4
609.100 Penalties. If any tax imposed by this Chapter is not paid within the time herein
specified for the payment, or an extension thereof, there shall be added thereto a
specific penalty equal to ten percent (10%) of the amount remaining unpaid. The
amount of tax not timely paid, together with any penalty provided by this section,
shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum from the time such
tax should have been paid until it is paid. Any interest and penalty shall be added
to the tax and be collected as part thereof.
609.110 Administration of Tax. The Director shall administer and enforce the
assessment and collection of taxes imposed by this Chapter. The Director shall
cause to be prepared blank forms for the returns and other documents required by
this Chapter and shall distribute the same throughout the City and furnish them on
application, but failure to receive or secure them shall not relieve any person from
any obligation required of him or her under this Chapter.
609.120 Examination of Records. The Director and those persons acting on behalf of the
Director, authorized in writing by the Director, may examine the books, papers
and records of any operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or
if no return was made, to ascertain the tax as provided in this Chapter. Every such
operator is directed and required to give to the Director, or such other authorized
agent or employee, the means, facilities and opportunity for such examinations
and investigations as are hereby authorized.
609.130 Violations. Any person who shall willfully fail to make a return required by this
Chapter; or who shall fail to pay the tax after written demand for payment, or who
shall fail to remit the taxes collected or any penalty or interest imposed by this
Chapter, after written demand for such payment, or who shall refuse to permit the
City to examine the books, records and papers under his or her control, or who
shall willfully make any incomplete, false or fraudulent return shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
609.140 Use of Proceeds. Ninety-five percent (95%) of the proceeds obtained from the
collection of taxes pursuant to this Chapter shall be used in accordance with
Minnesota Statutes §469.190, as the same may be amended from time to time, to
fund a local convention or tourism bureau for the purpose of marketing and
promoting the City as a tourist or convention center.
609.150 Appeals.
(A)Any operator aggrieved by any notice, order or determination made by the
Director under this Chapter may file a petition for review of such notice, order
or determination detailing the operator’s reasons for contesting the notice,
order or determination. The petition shall contain the name of the petitioner,
the petitioner’s address and the location of the lodging subject to the order,
notice or determination.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 609. Lodging Tax 609-5
(B) The petition for review shall be filed with the City within ten (10) days after
the notice, order or determination for which review is sought has been mailed
or served upon the person requesting review.
(C)On receipt of the petition, the City Manager, or the Manger’s designee, shall
set a date for a hearing and give the petitioner at least five (5) days prior
written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing.
(D)At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show cause why
the notice, order or determination should be modified or withdrawn. The
petitioner may be represented by counsel of petitioner’s choosing at
petitioner’s own expense.
(E) The hearing shall be conducted by the City Manager, or the Manager’s
designee, provided only that the person conducting the hearing shall not have
participated in the drafting of the order, notice or determination for which
review is sought.
(F) The person conducting the hearing shall make written findings of fact and
conclusion based upon the applicable sections of this Chapter and evidence
presented. The person conducting the hearing may affirm, reverse or modify
the notice, order or determination made by the Director.
(G)Any decision rendered by the City Manager, or the Manager’s designee,
pursuant to this subdivision may be appealed to the City Council. A petitioner
seeking to appeal the decision must file a written notice of appeal with the
City within ten (10) days after the decision has been mailed to the petitioner.
The matter will thereupon be placed on the Council agenda as soon as it is
practical. The Council shall then review the findings of fact and conclusions
to determine whether they are correct. Upon a determination by the Council
that the findings and conclusions are incorrect, the Council may modify,
reverse or affirm the decision of the City Manager, or the Manager’s designee,
upon the same standards as set forth in Subparagraph F.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 610. Clandestine Drug Lab Sites 610-1
610 Clandestine Drug Lab Sites
610.010 Purpose and Intent. The purpose of Chapter 610 is to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and reduce public exposure to health risks where law
enforcement authorities have determined that hazardous chemicals from a
suspected clandestine lab site or associated dumpsite may exist. The City Council
finds that such sites may contain hazardous chemicals, substances, or residues that
place people, particularly children or women of child-bearing age, at risk of
exposure through inhabiting or visiting the site or being exposed to contaminated
personal property.
Chemicals used in the production of illicit drugs can condense, penetrate and
contaminate surfaces, furnishings, and equipment of surrounding structures.
These conditions present health and safety risks to occupants and visitors of
structures through fire, explosion, skin and respiratory exposure to chemicals.
610.011 Interpretation and Application. The provisions of this Chapter 610 shall be
interpreted and applied as the minimum requirements necessary to protect public
health, safety and welfare. Where conditions imposed by any provision of this
Chapter 610 are either more or less restrictive than comparable provisions
imposed by any other law, ordinance, statute, or regulation of any kind, the
regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or
requirements shall prevail.
610.012 Definitions
(A) Chemical Dump Site. Any place or location where chemicals and/or other
hazardous waste material used in a clandestine drug lab have been deposited.
(B) Chemical Investigation Site. A Clandestine drug lab site that is under notice
and order for cleanup and/or remediation as a public health nuisance, and this
Chapter 610.
(C) Clandestine Drug Lab Operation. The unlawful manufacture, or attempt to
manufacture, a controlled substance(s).
(D) Clandestine Drug Lab Site. Any place or area where law enforcement has
determined that conditions associated with the operation of an unlawful
clandestine drug lab exist. A clandestine drug lab site may include dwellings,
accessory buildings, or structures, a chemical dumpsite, vehicle boat, trailer or
any other land.
(E) Cleanup. The proper removal and/or containment of substances hazardous to
humans and/or the environment at a chemical investigation site.
(F) Controlled Substance. A drug, substance or immediate precursor described
under Schedules I through V of Minnesota Statute 152.02, and as amended in
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 610. Clandestine Drug Lab Sites 610-2
the future. The term shall not include distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages,
intoxicating liquors or tobacco.
(G) Health Authority. Ramsey County Department of Public Health
(H) Household hazardous Wastes. Waste generated from a clandestine drug lab
operation. Such wastes shall be treated, stored, transported, or disposed of in a
manner consistent with Minnesota Department of Public Health, Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency and Ramsey County Health Department rules and
regulations.
(I) Law Enforcement Agency. An agency or a person designated by the City
Manager.
(J) Manufacture. In places other than a pharmacy, shall mean and include the
production, cultivation, quality control, or standardization, by mechanical,
physical, chemical or pharmaceutical means, packing, repacking, tableting,
encapsulating, labeling, relabeling, or filling, of a controlled substance.
(K)Occupant. Any person who occupies real property, whether with or without
any right, title, or interest in the property, and any person in possession or
charge or such property in the event the owner resides or is located elsewhere.
(L) Owner. Any person, firm or corporation who owns, in whole or in part, the
land, buildings or structures associated with a clandestine drug lab site.
Unless information is provided to prove otherwise, the owner of real property
is deemed to be the property taxpayer of record in the Ramsey County
records, and the owner of a vehicle, boat or trailer as deemed to be the person
listed as the owner of the most recent title to said vehicle boat or trailer.
(M) Public Health Nuisance. All dwellings, accessory structures and buildings or
adjacent property associated with a clandestine drug lab site deemed unsafe
due to potential health hazards.
(N) Remediation. Methods such as assessment, evaluation, testing, venting,
detergent scrubbing, enclosure, encapsulation, demolition, and/or removal of
contaminate materials from a chemical investigation site.
610.013 Public Health Nuisance. A clandestine drug lab site or chemical dumpsite is
hereby determined to be a public nuisance subject to the regulations of this
Chapter 610 in addition to any and all applicable federal, state, or local laws and
ordinances. No person may occupy, enter or allow occupancy or entrance to
property declared a public health nuisance under this Chapter 610 until such
declaration is vacated or modified to allow occupancy.
610.014 Notice to Other Agencies (“Agency Notice”). Law enforcement authorities, if
other than the City’s Law Enforcement Agency, upon identification of a
clandestine drug lab site or a chemical dump site shall promptly notify the City’s
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 610. Clandestine Drug Lab Sites 610-3
Law Enforcement Agency. The City’s Law Enforcement Agency shall notify the
Building Official, appropriate health authority and other appropriate agencies of
the property location, property owner if known, and conditions found.
610.015 Notice to Owner and Occupant (“Owner/Occupant Notice”). Upon
notification by law enforcement authorities, the Building Official will promptly
notify the following parties by U.S. Mail:
(A) The owner of the property, if known.
(B) Occupants of the property.
(C) Any neighbors determined to be at risk to the extent that they can be located.
(D) Other appropriate state and local authorities including, but not limited, to the
Minnesota Department of Health, the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency,
which are known to have applicable public and environmental protection
responsibilities.
The Owner/Occupant Notice must, at a minimum, include the location of the
chemical dump site or the clandestine drug lab site; the name of the property
owner, if known; the type and nature of the contamination; and the extent of the
contamination. The Building Official must also cause a copy of the
Owner/Occupant Notice to be posted at each appropriate access point to such site.
Removal of the posted Owner/Occupant Notice by anyone other than the Building
Official, City’s Law Enforcement Agency, or their designees, is prohibited.
610.016 License Suspension. Any rental housing license or business license issued by the
City will be immediately suspended upon issuance of the Owner/Occupant Notice
and may only be reinstated by the City Council after full compliance with an
abatement order and approval of a management plan.
610.017 Issuance of Abatement Order (“Abatement Order”). The Building Official
shall notify and order the property owner and occupant to have the public health
nuisance abated as provided in and this Chapter. The Abatement Order shall
include a description of the site and all portions thereof that are determined to be
contaminated and shall include statements indicating:
(A)That all or portions of the site are determined to be contaminated and at risk to
occupants or visitors are immediately vacated.
(B) That the owner commence and complete all testing and clean up procedures
and other required remedial actions on the site by dates specified in the order
or such other dates agreed to by the City.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 610. Clandestine Drug Lab Sites 610-4
(C) That the site may not be re-occupied or used in any manner until it has been
completely cleaned in accordance with the guidelines established by the
MDH.
(D)That if the owner does not commence testing and complete the clean up
procedures by the dates established in the order, the City, its officials,
employees, or agents, will arrange appropriate on-site assessment and cleanup
services at the owner’s expense.
(E) That the owner is responsible for all costs associated with the on-site
assessment and clean up of the site including all costs incurred by the City and
other public agencies, and that if the owner does not promptly pay those cost
they will be assessed against the property and collected in the manner of a
special tax.
610.018 Service of Abatement Order. The Abatement Order shall be deemed to be
properly served if a copy thereof is delivered in one of the following methods:
(A)Delivered personally.
(B) Sent by certified or first class mail addressed to the last know address.
(C)A copy posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling or area affected
by such order.
610.019 Property Owner and Occupant Responsibility to Act. Property owner(s) and
occupant(s) provided with an Owner/Occupant Notice, which may include the
posted warning notice informing them about the chemical investigation site public
health nuisance, shall promptly act to vacate within twenty-four (24) hours all
occupants from those parts of a structure that are a chemical investigation site
public health nuisance, including dwellings, buildings, motor vehicles, trailers,
boats or other vehicles and appliances.
(A) In the event the property owner(s) and occupant(s) receiving the
Owner/Occupant Notice and fails to vacate parts of a structure that are a
chemical investigation site public health nuisance, the Building Official shall
order all persons to vacate the premises. Failure to leave is a misdemeanor.
Where a person fails to vacate the premises as ordered by the Building
Official, the City’s Law Enforcement Agency may be summoned to assist in
vacating the premises and issuing such citations or in making such arrests as
may be necessary to comply with this subsection.
(B) Except as hereinafter provided, within ten (10) business days of receiving
the Abatement Order, the property owner(s) and/or occupant(s) shall act to
accomplish the following:
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 610. Clandestine Drug Lab Sites 610-5
(1) Notify the Building Official that the affected parts of the structure has
been and will remain vacated and secured until the health authority
acts to remove the chemical investigation site public health nuisance
declaration;
(2) Contract with one or more acceptable environmental hazard testing
and cleaning firms (acceptable firms are those that have provided the
Minnesota Department of Health and/or Building Official assurance of
appropriate equipment, procedures and personnel) to accomplish the
following:
(a) Conduct a detailed on-site assessment;
(b) Determine the extent of contamination;
(c) Carry out and /or direct remediation operations;
(d) Perform and/or direct follow-up sampling and testing; and
(e) Determine that the risks are sufficiently reduced, according to
Minnesota Department of Health guidelines, to allow the structure
to be reoccupied;
(3) Provide the Building Official with the identity of the environmental
hazard testing and cleaning firm with whom the owner has contracted,
for remediation of the structure as described above; and
(4) Provide the Building Official with the contractor’s plan and schedule
for remediation leading to removal of the chemical investigation site
public health nuisance declaration.
(C) The property owner(s) or occupant(s) may seek authorization for an
extension of time to allow the owner to consider options for arranging
cleanup or removal of the affected parts of the structure. The owner(s) or
occupant(s) must show good cause for any such extension. Any extension
shall be dependent on the owner(s) assurance that the affected parts of the
structure will not be occupied pending appropriate cleanup or demolition.
(D) The owner(s), occupant(s) or their contractor shall provide documentation of
the cleanup and remediation, including but not limited to follow-up
environmental testing as deemed necessary, to the Building Official. Review
and determination of acceptable cleanup must be made by the Building
Official prior to re-occupancy of the property.
610.020 Owner’s Responsibility for Cost. The owner of the site is responsible for the
costs of vacating the site and surrounding areas, testing, clean-up and public
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 610. Clandestine Drug Lab Sites 610-6
expenses. Public expenses include all costs that have or may be incurred by the
City and other public agencies including but not limited to, costs for:
(A)Emergency Response
(B) Posting and physical security of site
(C) Notification of affected parties
(D) Expenses related to the recovery of costs, including the assessment process
(E) Laboratory fees
(F) Clean-up fees
(G)Administrative fees
610.021 Recovery of Public Costs. The City is authorized under Minnesota Statutes 463
to proceed within ten (10) business days after mailing of notification, to initiate
the assessment and cleanup when the property owner (a) is not located, (b) is
located but fails to respond appropriately, or (c) notifies the City that the owner
refuses to or cannot pay the costs or arrange timely assessment and cleanup that is
acceptable to the Building Official.
(A) The City may abate the nuisance by removing any hazardous structure,
building, or otherwise, in compliance with Minnesota Statutes Chapter 463 or
by any other means provided under law.
(B) If the City abates the public health nuisance, it may recover all costs
associated with such abatement.
(C) In addition to any other legal remedy, the City may recover costs by civil
action against the person or persons who own the property or by assessing
such costs as a special tax against the property in the manner that taxes and
special assessments are certified and collected pursuant to Minnesota Statutes
§429.101
610.022 Authority to Modify or Remove Declaration of Public Health Nuisance. The
Building Official is authorized to modify the Declaration of chemical
investigation site public health nuisance. Such modifications or removal shall be
only after the Building Official has determined levels of contamination are
sufficiently reduced through remediation to warrant modification or removal of
the declaration. The Building Official may rely on information from competent
sources, including those supplied by the property owner(s) and/or others such as
state and local health, safety, and pollution control authorities to reach such
decisions.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 611. Domestic Partner Registry 611-1
611 Domestic Partner Registry
611.010 Purposes and Findings. The City of Shoreview authorizes and establishes a
voluntary program of registration for domestic partners. The domestic
partnership registry is a means by which unmarried, committed couples who
reside in Shoreview and who share a life together may document their
relationship.
Shoreview’s Domestic Partnership ordinance is a City ordinance and does not
create rights, privileges or responsibilities that are available to married couples
under state or federal law.
The City of Shoreview cannot provide legal advice concerning domestic
partnerships. Applicants and registrants may wish to consult with an attorney for
such advice including but not limited to: wills, medical matters, finances and
powers of attorney, children and dependents, medical and health care employment
benefits.
611.020 Definitions:
(1) Domestic Partners. Any two adults who meet all of the following:
(a) Are not related by blood closer than permitted under marriage laws of the
state.
(b) Are not married.
(c) Are competent to enter into a contract.
(d) Are jointly responsible to each other for the necessities of life.
(e) Are committed to one another to the same extent as married persons are to
each other, except for the traditional marital status.
(f) Do not have any other domestic partner(s).
(g) Are both at least 18 years of age.
(h) At least one of whom resides in Shoreview.
(2) Domestic Partnership. The term “domestic partnership” shall include, upon
production of valid, government-issued documentation, of said relationship in
addition to domestic partnerships registered with the City of Shoreview, and
regardless of whether partners in either circumstances have sought further
registration with the City of Shoreview:
(a) Any persons who have a currently-registered domestic partnership with a
governmental body pursuant to state, local or other law authorizing such
registration. The term domestic partnership shall be construed to include
unions, regardless of title, in which two individuals are committed to one
another as married persons except for the traditional marital status.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 611. Domestic Partner Registry 611-2
(b) Marriages that would be legally recognized as a contract of lawful
marriage in another local, state or foreign jurisdiction, but for the
operation of Minnesota law.
611.030 Registration of Domestic Partnerships. The City Clerk shall accept an
application in a form provided by the City to register domestic partners who state
in such application that they meet the definition of domestic partners.
The City Clerk shall charge an application fee for the registration of domestic
partners or notices of termination. The fees required by this Section shall be in the
amount set forth in Exhibit A: Administrative Fees.
The City Clerk shall provide each domestic partner with a registration certificate.
The registration certificate shall not be issued prior to the third working day after
the date of the application.
This application and certificate may be used as evidence of the existence of a
domestic partner relationship.
The City Clerk shall keep a record of all registrations of domestic partnership,
amendments to registrations and notices of termination. The records shall be
maintained so that amendments and notices of termination are filed with the
registration of domestic partnership to which they pertain.
The application and amendments thereto, the registration certificate, and
termination notices shall constitute government data and will be subject to
disclosure pursuant to the terms of the Minnesota Government Data Practices Act.
611.040 Amendments. The City Clerk may accept amendments for filing from persons
who have domestic partnership registrations on file, except amendments which
would replace one of the registered partners with another individual.
611.050 Termination of Domestic Partnership. Domestic partnership registration
terminates when the earliest of the following occurs:
(A) One of the partners dies; or
(B) Forty-five days after one partner sends the other partner written notice of
termination and that he or she has terminated the partnership by filing a
notice with the City Clerk.
611.060 City Fees. If the City of Shoreview offers a family fee, family membership or
family registration, domestic partners are entitled to the same family fee, family
membership or family registration.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 612. Coal Tar-Based Sealant Requirements 612-1
612 Coal Tar-Based Sealant Requirements
612.010 Purpose and Findings. The City understands that lakes, rivers, streams and
other bodies of water are natural assets which enhance the environmental,
recreational, cultural and economic resources and contribute to the general health
and welfare of the community. The use of coal tar-based sealers on asphalt
driveways is a common practice. However, scientific studies on the use of coal
tar-based driveway sealers have identified a possible relationship between
stormwater runoff and certain health and environmental concerns. Regulation of
sealer products within the City is needed in order to protect, restore, and preserve
the quality of its waters.
612.020 Definitions. Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context,
all terms used in this ordinance shall be given their commonly accepted
definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
(1) Asphalt-Based Sealer. A petroleum-based sealer material that is commonly
used on driveways, parking lots, and other surfaces and which does not
contain coal tar.
(2) Coal Tar. A byproduct of the process used to refine coal.
(3) Coal Tar-Based Sealer. A sealer material containing coal tar and which is
commonly used on driveways, parking lots and other surfaces.
(4) PAHs (Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons). A group of organic chemicals
formed during the incomplete burning of coal, oil, gas or other organic
substances. Present in coal tar and believed harmful to humans and aquatic
life.
612.030 Use of Coal Tar-Based Sealer Prohibited.
(A) No person shall apply any coal tar-based sealer to any driveway, parking lot,
or other surface within the City.
(B) No person shall contract with any commercial sealer product applicator,
residential or commercial developer, or any other person for the application of
any coal tar-based sealer to any driveway, parking lot, or other surface within
the City.
(C) No commercial sealer product applicator, residential or commercial developer,
or other similar individual or organization shall direct any employee,
independent contractor, volunteer, or other person to apply any coal tar-based
sealer to any driveway, parking lot, or other surface within the City.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 612. Coal Tar-Based Sealant Requirements 612-2
612.040 Exemption. Upon the express written approval from both the City and the
MPCA, a person conducting bona fide research on the effects of coal tar-based
sealer products or PAHs on the environment shall be exempt from the
prohibitions provided in this section.
612.050 Asphalt-Based Sealcoat Products. The provisions of this ordinance shall only
apply to use of coal tar-based sealer in the City and shall not affect the use of
asphalt-based sealer products within the City.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 613. Sexual Offender Residence Location Restriction 613-1
613 Sexual Offender Residence Location Restriction
613.010 General. The Shoreview City Council finds the following facts to exist:
(A) Individuals who have been required to register as sex offenders pursuant to
state law present an extreme threat to the public safety;
(B) These offenders are likely to use physical violence and to repeat their
offenses;
(C) Many of these offenders also commit other crimes;
(D)The City has a compelling interest to take action to promote and protect
certain areas within the City from the risks to public safety posed by
registered offenders;
(E) The City’s compelling interest is furthered by the creation of a regulatory
scheme which establishes areas around locations where children regularly
congregate in concentrated numbers; and
(F) The purpose of this Section is to create such a regulatory scheme to further the
City’s compelling interest in maintaining public safety by prescribing where
registered offenders may reside within the City.
613.020 Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the following terms shall be defined as
stated:
(A) “Children” means persons under the of age 18;
(B) “Designated offender” means any person who has been convicted,
adjudicated, or committed for a designated sexual offense, as defined herein,
or who is required to register as a predatory offender pursuant to Minn. Stat.
243.166 (2016 or as amended) in which the victim of the offense was less than
sixteen (16) years of age at the time of the offense or for which the offender
has been categorized as a “Level III sex offender” under Minnesota Statutes.
(C) “Designated sexual offense” means a conviction, adjudication of delinquency,
or commitment under Minnesota Stat. Ch. 253B, or admission of guilt under
oath without adjudication, involving any of the following offenses: Minnesota
Statutes Sections: 609.342; 609.343; 609.344; 609.345; 609.352; 609.365;
617.23; 617.246; 617.247; 617.293; successor statutes; or a similar offense
from another state.
(D) “Residence” means a place where a person abides, dwells, inhabits or stays
for more than fourteen (14) days in the aggregate during a 12-month period or
a place where the person routinely abides, dwells, inhabits or stays for four (4)
or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month. Residence does not
Rev. Date
10/3/2017
Ord. # 958
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 613. Sexual Offender Residence Location Restriction 613-2
require the person to have an ownership interest in or a formal rental or lease
agreement for the residence. A hotel, motel, or other commercial lodging
establishment, boarding house or shelter, and group home may be deemed a
person’s residence under this Section.
(E) “School bus stop” means any location where children are picked up or
dropped off by a school bus.
613.030 Location of Residence. It is unlawful for any Designated Offender to establish
residence or otherwise reside within five hundred feet (500') of any school bus
stop (hereinafter referred as “Protected Zones”):
For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement
shall be measured by following a straight line from any property line of the lot or
parcel on which the subject residence is located to the nearest property line of
subject use of a prohibited zone identified above.
The City Manager or his/her designee shall maintain an official map showing
approximate locations in which a designated offender is prohibited to reside, as
defined by this Section. The map shall be updated at least annually to reflect any
changes in the location of prohibited zones. The actual measurement of minimum
distance separation between the residence and the use within the prohibited zone
shall govern.
613.040 Rental Prohibited.
(A) It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other
dwelling, with the knowledge that it will be used as a residence by any
Designated Offender, if such place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other
dwelling, is located within a Protected Zone.
(B) If a property owner discovers or is informed that a tenant is a Designated
Offender after signing a lease or otherwise agreeing to let the Designated
Offender reside on the property, the owner or property manager should take
measures to terminate the lease or to evict the Designated Offender.
(C)A property owner’s failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall
constitute a violation and shall subject the property owner to the enforcement
provisions and procedures as provided in this section and the City Code.
613.050 Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties thereof as provided in this
Code. Each day a person maintains a residence in violation of this Section
constitutes a separate violation. Additionally, the City may seek a court order to
enjoin any person in violation of this section from taking any prohibited action
hereunder.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 600. General Regulations
Section 613. Sexual Offender Residence Location Restriction 613-3
613.060 Exceptions. A Designated Offender residing within a Protected Zone is not in
violation of this Section if any of the following applies:
(A)The Designated Offender established the residence and reported and
registered the residence pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Sections 243.166,
243.167, or successor statute, prior to the effective date of this Section.
(B) The designated offender is under the age of 18 and resides with a parent or
legal guardian.
(C) The school bus stop within five hundred feet (500') of the designated
offender's proposed residence was created after the designated offender
established residence and reported/ registered the residence pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes governing sex offender registration requirements.
(D)The person’s conviction for the Designated Offense was reversed on appeal.
613.070 Severability. If any portion of this ordinance, or its application, is held invalid,
the remaining provisions shall be considered severable and shall be given effect to
the maximum extent possible.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 701. Business License Procedures 701-1
700 Licensing
701 Business License Procedures
701.010 Purpose and Scope. The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform
procedures for the administration, issuance, and revocation of business licenses.
The provisions of 701.010 through 701.130 shall apply to all licenses issued
pursuant to this chapter, unless expressly provided otherwise.
701.020 Applications. License applications shall be submitted to the City Manager on
forms which include the following information:
(A) Date of application.
(B) Name, address and telephone number of applicant.
(C) Name, address and telephone number of applicant's business.
(D) Applicant's Social Security Number or Minnesota Business Tax
Identification Number.
(E) If applicant is a corporation, the name and address of each shareholder
owning more than a five (5%) percent interest in the corporation.
(F) Information regarding applicant's education, training and experience in the
type of work for which the license is being requested.
(G) Other information, as determined by the City Manager, to be reasonably
necessary in order to process the application.
701.030 Fees. License fees, as determined by the City Council and listed in Exhibit B,
shall be submitted in full with the license application. When a license is issued
for a term of less than one (1) year, the license fees shall be pro-rated at a rate of
one-twelfth (1/12th) of the annual fee for each month or fraction of a month
remaining in the license year. No refund of the license fee shall be made in the
event the license is surrendered, revoked or suspended before its expiration.
701.040 Term. Each license shall expire on December 31 of each year, and after the
initial year shall be issued for a term of one year.
701.050 Prior Convictions. No person shall be denied a license because of a prior
conviction unless that conviction has been determined by the City Council or be
directly related to the business for which a license is sought, as provided by
Minnesota Statutes Chapter 364. No person shall be denied a license because of
an arrest or arrests not followed by conviction.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 701. Business License Procedures 701-2
701.060 Administrative Fine, Suspension or Revocation. The City may impose an
administrative fine, suspend a license or revoke a license for a violation of the
City's regulations relating to the issuance of the license or of any of the
conditions/restrictions attached to the issuance of the license. Upon receipt of
information indicating that a license violation has occurred, the City Manager
shall send a License Violation Notice to licensee indicating the nature of the
violation and whether such violation will result in an administrative fine, license
suspension and/or license revocation.
Except as provided in Section 706.050, if the stated disposition in the License
Violation Notice includes a license suspension or revocation, the Notice shall also
indicate that licensee has the option of requesting a hearing before the City
Council prior to a license suspension or revocation or of waiving such hearing and
accepting the disposition described in the license violation notice. The licensee
shall file a written request for hearing within ten (10) days of the date specified in
the License Violation Notice or licensee shall be deemed to have waived its right
to a hearing. Upon receipt of a hearing request, the City Manager shall schedule a
hearing before the City Council at the earliest opportunity and shall send a
Hearing Notice to licensee. All notices required to be given by the City pursuant
to this section shall be sent by certified mail to licensee's address as contained in
the City's license application file.
701.070 Where Allowed. No license shall be issued for any premises unless located in an
area where the business for which the license is sought is permitted under the
zoning regulations.
701.080 Display. Except as otherwise specifically provided by this code, every license
shall be kept conspicuously posted on the premises on or from which the business
is operated, and shall be exhibited to any person upon request.
701.090 Transfers. No license shall be transferable unless specifically provided by this
code.
701.100 Inspection. As a condition of the license, each licensee shall permit properly
designated City Officers to inspect the licensee's premises and equipment at
reasonable times to assure compliance with the requirements of this code.
701.110 Bonds. Any bond required of a licensee shall be approved by the City Attorney
as to form and the City Manager as to security, and shall be conditioned that the
work shall be performed in accordance with this code and state laws and
regulations, and any special rules or regulations prescribed by designated City
employees; and shall be further conditioned to protect and save harmless the City
from any liability, damage, or expense which the City may sustain by reason of
granting the license.
Rev. Date
4/2/07
Ord. # 814
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 701. Business License Procedures 701-3
701.120 Insurance. Where a certificate or certificates of insurance are required under this
chapter, the certificate shall show that the insurance is in effect for the entire term
of the license, and shall contain a provision that the insurance may not be
cancelled without ten days notice to the City Manager. No license shall be
effective and no work shall be performed or business conducted under a license
during any period when the required insurance is not in effect. Where liability
insurance is required, the amount shall be at least $200,000 per claimant and
$600,000 per occurrence for injuries to persons and $200,000 for property
damage.
701.130 Background Investigations. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish
regulations that will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota’s Computerized
Criminal History information for specified non-criminal purposes of licensing
background checks.
The Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department is hereby required, as the exclusive law
enforcement agency for the City of Shoreview, to do a criminal history
background investigation on the applicants for the following licenses within the
city:
Liquor Licenses
Tobacco Licenses
Peddler Permits
Massage Therapy Licenses
Pawnbrokers
In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen
license applicants, the Sheriff’s Department is authorized to access data
maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions Computerized
Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data
that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Sheriff’s Department
under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or his or her
designee. A summary of the results of the Computerized Criminal History data
may be released by the Sheriff’s Department to the licensing authority, including
the Deputy Clerk, or other city staff involved in the license approval process.
Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the Sheriff’s
Department by written consent to undertake the investigation. The written
consent must fully comply with the provisions of Minnesota Chapter 13 regarding
the collection, maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions
set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 364.09, the city will not reject an applicant
for a license on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction unless the crime is
directly related to the license sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross
misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the City rejects the
applicant’s request on this basis, the City shall notify the applicant in writing,
including all of the information as required in Minnesota Statute 364.05.
Rev. Date
1/5/09
Ord. 842
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 702. Contractor’s License 702-1
702 Contractor's License
702.010 Electrical, Plumbing, HVAC and Well Contractors. Except as otherwise
provided by law, no person shall engage in the business of an electrical
contractor, plumbing contractor, heating, ventilation or air-conditioning
contractor, well contractor, or house mover without first obtaining a license or
bond from the appropriate State agency. A copy of such contractors current
license or such other evidence of licensure as is provided by the licensing agency
shall be maintained on file with the City Manager. Where verification of a license
is required, the City shall impose a license verification fee in an amount
prescribed by City Council Resolution.
702.020 Residential Contractors. No person may engage in the work of a residential
building contractor, remodeler or specialty contractor for compensation without a
valid license issued by the Minnesota Commissioner of Commerce.
(A) Definitions. As used herein, the following terms shall mean:
(1) "Remodeler" means a person in the business of contracting or offering to
contract to improve existing residential real estate. A Remodeler has two
or more special skills.
(2) "Residential Building Contractor" means a person in the business of
building residential real estate or of contracting or offering to contract to
improve Residential Real Estate.
(3) Residential Real Estate" means a new or existing building constructed for
habitation by one (1) to four (4) families, and includes detached garages.
(4) "Specialty Contractor" means a person other than a Residential Building
Contractor, Remodeler, or Material Supplier in the business of
contracting or offering to contract to make part of an improvement to
Residential Real Estate.
(B) Surcharge. In those cases where State licensing verification is required, a
license verification fee shall be imposed on each building permit as set forth
in Exhibit C.
(C) Display of License Number. The license number of a licensee as issued by
the Minnesota Commissioner of Commerce shall be placed on all
applications submitted by and permits issued to Residential Building
Contractors.
702.030 Non-Residential General, Subcontractors and Specialty Contractors. General
Contractors shall be responsible for all of the work performed at a site.
Rev. Date
1/1/06
Ord. #783
Rev. Date
1/1/06
Ord. #783
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 702. Contractor’s License 702-2
Subcontractors shall be required to comply with the provisions of the Shoreview
Code relating to the specific license requested.
Rev. Date
1/1/06
Ord. #783
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 703. Solid Waste Haulers 703-1
703 Solid Waste Haulers
703.010 License Required. No person, firm, or corporation shall operate a service for the
collection of solid waste, within the City of Shoreview, without first obtaining a
license.
703.020 Definitions. As used herein:
(A)"Solid Waste" means refuse, garbage, rubbish, and other discarded solid
materials including materials resulting from industrial, commercial and
agricultural operations, and from community activities; waste materials
consisting of earthen fill, boulders, rock and other materials normally handled
in construction operations; and solids or dissolved material in domestic
sewage or other liquids or other significant pollutants in water resources, such
as silt, dissolved or suspended solids in industrial waste, water effluents,
dissolved materials in irrigation return flows, or other common water
pollutants.
(B)"Refuse" means putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste, including garbage,
rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator residue, street cleanings, and
market and industrial solid wastes, including sewage treatment wastes, which
are in dry form.
(C)"Garbage" means discarded material resulting from the handling, processing,
storage, preparation, serving and consumption of food.
(D)"Rubbish" means nonputrescible solid waste including paper, cardboard,
crockery, grass clippings, wood, shrubbery, leaves, composted materials, or
other yard wastes.
703.030 Application Procedure. Applicants may apply for a Solid Waste Collector
License or a Rubbish Collector License on forms provided by the City Manager
which shall include the following information or materials:
(A) The name and address of the applicant.
(B) A list of the equipment which the applicant proposes to use in the collection of
such solid waste or rubbish.
(C) Address and location of solid waste or rubbish disposal site.
(D) The geographical area of the City of Shoreview in which licensee intends to
collect solid waste or rubbish.
(E) The description of applicant's customer rate structure and methods by which
customers will be informed of applicant's services.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 703. Solid Waste Haulers 703-2
(F) A copy of proposed rules which will be given to applicant's customers relating
to the collection of solid waste or rubbish. Current copies of rules shall be
kept on file with the City Manager.
(G) Copies of proposed service rates as hereinafter required. Current copies of
service rates shall be kept on file with the City Manager.
(H) A Performance Bond in the amount of $2500.00 conditioned as required by
Section 701.110 and a Certificate of Insurance indicating that the applicant
has liability coverages as required by Section 701.120.
703.040 License Fee. License fees for solid waste collectors and rubbish collectors shall
be as prescribed, from time to time, by City Council resolution.
703.050 Expiration of License. All licenses, including licenses issued prior to the
effective date of this regulation, shall expire annually on December 31. A pro rata
share of license fees received by the City prior to the effective date of this
regulation for license years which, but for the adoption of this regulation, would
have expired after December 31, 2012, shall be credited to the license holder who
elects to file a new application in accordance with the provisions of this
regulation, or, at the license holder's option, shall be refunded.
703.060 Revocation. A license holder's failure to comply with the provisions of the
Shoreview Municipal Code or any of the conditions attached to the license shall
be grounds for license revocation without refund of license fee.
703.070 Equipment. Licensees shall use equipment so constructed that the solid waste
material will not leak or spill during transport to the disposal site. The equipment
used shall be kept clean and as free from offensive odors as possible; shall have
the name, address and telephone number of the licensee painted on each side of
the equipment in conspicuous lettering; and shall not be allowed to stand on any
street, alley, or public place longer than is necessary to collect the solid waste
material.
703.080 Collection Service Hours. Every licensee shall provide each customer with
collection service at least once a week and collect all accumulated solid waste or
rubbish located at the appropriate place. Collections shall be made between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
703.090 Conditions of License.
(A) All licensees providing service to residential property shall provide for the
collection and disposal of grass clippings, wood, shrubbery, leaves,
composted material, and other yard wastes and, as part of licensee’s
Rev. Date
6/6/11
Ord. #878
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 703. Solid Waste Haulers 703-3
application, shall provide the City with a description of the rate structure for
such services.
(B) Solid waste collector licensees providing service to residential property shall
provide a volume based 30, 60 and/or 90 gallon service; and optional services
including walk-up and/or handicapped service, and, as part of licensee’s
application, shall provide the City with a description of the rate structure for
such services.
(C) Licensee shall notify the City of changes in service rate structures thirty (30)
days prior to the institution of such change and shall notify customers at least
twenty (20) days prior to the institution of such change.
(D) Licensees are prohibited from collecting service fees in advance for more than
three (3) month's service.
(E) Solid waste collector licensees shall provide service for the prompt removal of
all other waste material, except toxic or hazardous materials, by special
arrangement with customers requesting such service.
(F) On or before July 1, 2003, regular collection route and days of collection shall
be brought into compliance with the collection district schedules approved by
the City Manager.
703.100 Interruption of Service. Any licensee, who cannot provide service to its
customers, shall notify the City Manager and licensee's customers immediately.
703.110 Collection Districts. Prior to April 1, 2003, the City Manager shall establish
specific refuse and recycling collection districts and specific days of collection
within these districts for all Licensees. The coordinated collection process is
necessary to encourage citizen participation in the City’s recycling effort; to
ensure compliance with State mandates for solid waste management, as set forth
in Minn. Stat. Chapter 115A; and will be beneficial to the safety and welfare of
Shoreview residences by reducing the number of refuse and recycling vehicles
using City streets at any one time. The following considerations will be utilized
by the City Manager, in the City Manager’s discretion, when establishing
collection districts and schedules for collection:
(A)Household counts within the district;
(B) Compatibility of the Licensees existing refuse collection stops;
(C) Compatibility with municipal boundaries; and
(D)Coordination with recycling collection.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 704. Tree Service License 704-1
704 Tree Service License
704.010 License Required.
(A) Generally. No person shall engage in the business of tree trimming, tree
removal, tree stump removal or tree maintenance and disease prevention
without a license, except as provided in 704.010(B).
(B) Exceptions. No license shall be required for the removal of trees pursuant to
an excavation or grading permit as required in the Building Code. No license
shall be required for a homeowner engaged in tree trimming, tree removal,
tree stump removal or tree maintenance and disease prevention on his own
property or on property adjacent to his premises if the homeowner has the
approval of the owner of the adjacent property.
704.020 Applications. In addition to the information required by 701.020, each
application shall contain information regarding the applicant's education, special
training, and experience relating to tree trimming, tree removal, tree stump
removal or tree maintenance and disease prevention; the names of four persons
for whom the applicant has trimmed, removed, or treated trees or stumps; and a
description of the applicant's equipment.
704.030 Eligibility. No license shall be granted unless the City Council is satisfied that
the applicant is competent and has the necessary equipment to perform the work
safely and in accordance with all applicable laws and provisions of this code, and
meets all requirements of this chapter.
704.040 Equipment. If any of the proposed work may affect a public right-of-way, the
applicant shall furnish and maintain appropriate warning lights and barricades,
and shall apply for and obtain the appropriate permit required by the Building
Code for work within a public right-of-way.
704.050 Revocation and Suspension. In addition to the provisions of 701.060, any
instance where work performed is found to be improper, defective, or so unsafe as
to jeopardize life or property, shall constitute grounds for suspension or
revocation of a license.
704.060 Bond. Each applicant shall give a $2,500 surety bond to the City, in accordance
with 701.110 of this code.
704.070 Insurance. Each licensee shall file with the City Manager a certificate of
insurance indicating that the licensee has public liability insurance, in accordance
with 701.120 of this code.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 705. Lawn Fertilizer Application Control 705-
1
705 Lawn Fertilizer Application Control
705.010 License Required. No person, firm, corporation or franchisee shall engage in the
business of commercial lawn fertilizer application within the City unless a license
has been obtained from the City Manager as provided herein.
705.020 License Application Procedure. Applications for a commercial lawn fertilizer
applicator license shall be submitted to the City Manager. The application shall
consist of the following:
(A)Application Form. Application forms shall be provided by the City and shall
include the following information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of applicant and any individuals
authorized to represent the applicant.
(2) Description of lawn fertilizer formula proposed to be applied on lawns
within the City.
(3) A time schedule for application of lawn fertilizer and identification of
weather conditions acceptable for lawn fertilizer application.
(B) Fertilizer Sample. A sample of lawn fertilizer shall be submitted to the City
along with the initial application for a license, and, thereafter, at least 30 days
before fertilizer composition changes are implemented. A sample submittal
can be replaced by a chemical analysis certified by an independent testing
laboratory.
(C) License Fee. The license fee shall be as designated, from time to time, by
City Council resolution. The license shall expire on the 31st day of
December. The license fee shall not be prorated.
(D)Performance Bond. A bond in the amount of $1,000.00 shall be submitted
with the application form. The bond shall be conditioned upon compliance
with the City's regulations. Actions to collect bond proceed shall not prevent
the City from filing criminal complaints for ordinance violations.
705.030 Conditions of License. Commercial lawn fertilizer applicator licenses shall be
issued subject to the following conditions which shall be specified on the license
form:
(A) Random Sampling. Commercial lawn fertilizer applicators shall permit the
City to sample any commercial lawn fertilizer application to be applied within
the City at any time after issuance of the initial license.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 705. Lawn Fertilizer Application Control 705-
2
(B) Possession of License. The commercial lawn fertilizer application or a copy
thereof shall be in the possession of any party employed by the commercial
lawn fertilizer applicator when making lawn fertilizer applications within the
City.
(C) State Regulations. Licensee shall comply with the provisions of the
Minnesota Fertilizer and Soil Conditioner Law as contained in Minnesota
Statutes Sections 17.711 through and including 17.729 and amendments
thereto.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 706. Tobacco Products 706-
1
706 Tobacco Products
706.010 Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate the sale of
tobacco, tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery devices, and nicotine or
lobelia delivery products for the purpose of enforcing and furthering existing
laws, to protect minors and young adults against the serious effects associated
with the initiation and use of tobacco, tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery
devices, and nicotine or lobelia delivery products, and to further the official public
policy of the state in regard to preventing young people from starting to smoke as
stated in Minn. Stat. § 144.391, as it may be amended from time to time. In
making these findings, the City Council accepts the conclusions and
recommendations of the U.S. Surgeon General reports, “The Health
Consequences of Smoking—50 Years of Progress” (2014) and “Preventing
Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults” (2012); the Center for Disease
Control in their studies, “Tobacco Use Among Middle and High School Students
– United States, 2011-2015,” and “Selected Cigarette Smoking Initiation and
Quitting Behaviors Among High School Students, United States, 1997,” and of
the following medical professionals in these medical journals: Xin Xu et al.,
Annual Healthcare Spending Attributable to Cigarette Smoking: An Update, Am.
J. Prev. Med. 48(3): 326-33 (Mar. 2015); Giovino GA, “Epidemiology of
Tobacco Use in the United States,” Oncogene (2002) 21, 7326-40; Khuder SA, et
al., “Age at Smoking Onset and its Effect on Smoking Cessation,” Addictive
Behavior 24(5):673-7, September-October 1999; D’Avanzo B, et al., “Age at
Starting Smoking and Number of Cigarettes Smoked,” Annals of Epidemiology
4(6):455-59, November 1994; Chen, J & Millar, WJ, “Age of Smoking Initiation:
Implications for Quitting,” Health Reports 9(4):39-46, Spring 1998; Everett SA,
et al., “Initiation of Cigarette Smoking and Subsequent Smoking Behavior Among
U.S. High School Students,” Preventive Medicine, 29(5):327-33, November 1999,
copies of which are adopted by reference.
706.020 Definitions. Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context,
all terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of
this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) Compliance Checks. The system the city uses to investigate and ensure
that those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco- related devices, electronic
delivery devices, and nicotine or lobelia delivery products are following
and complying with the requirements of this ordinance. Compliance
checks shall involve the use of persons under the age of 21 as authorized
by this ordinance. Compliance checks shall also mean the use of persons
under the age of 21 who purchase or attempt to purchase tobacco,
tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery devices, or nicotine or
lobelia delivery products for educational, research, and training purposes
as authorized by state and federal laws. Compliance checks may also be
conducted by other units of government for the purpose of investigating
Rev. Date
7/1/18
Ord. 963
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 706. Tobacco Products 706-
2
or enforcing appropriate federal, state or local laws and regulations
relating to tobacco, tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery devices,
or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices.
(B) Electronic Delivery Device. Any product containing or delivering
nicotine, lobelia, or any other substance intended for human consumption
through inhalation of aerosol or vapor from the product. Electronic
delivery device includes any component part of a product, whether or not
marketed or sold separately. Electronic delivery device does not include
any product that has been approved or certified by the United States Food
and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco-cessation product, as a
tobacco-dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is
marketed and sold for such an approved purpose.
(C) Flavored Product. Any tobacco product, tobacco-related device,
electronic delivery device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery product that
contains a taste or smell, other than the taste or smell of tobacco,
menthol, mint, or wintergreen, that is distinguishable by an ordinary
consumer either prior to or during the consumption of the tobacco
product, electronic delivery device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery
device, including, but not limited to, any taste or smell relating to
chocolate, cocoa, vanilla, honey, fruit, or any candy, dessert, alcoholic
beverage, herb, or spice. A public statement or claim, whether express
or implied, made or disseminated by the manufacturer of a tobacco
product, tobacco-related device, electronic delivery device, or nicotine
or lobelia delivery product, or by any person authorized or permitted
by the manufacturer to make or disseminate public statements
concerning such product or device, that the product or device has or
produces a taste or smell other than tobacco, menthol, mint, or
wintergreen, shall constitute presumptive evidence that the product or
device is a flavored product.
(D) Indoor Area. All space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded by
walls, doorways, or windows, whether open or closed, covering more than
50 percent of the combined surface area of the vertical planes constituting
the perimeter of the area. A wall includes any retractable divider, garage
door, or other physical barrier, whether temporary or permanent.
(E) Loosies. The common term used to refer to a single or individually
packaged cigarette or any other tobacco product that has been removed
from its packaging and offered for sale. The term “loosies” does not
include individual cigars with a retail price, before any sales taxes, of
more than $2.00 per cigar.
(G) Minor. Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 18 years.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 706. Tobacco Products 706-
3
(H) Moveable Place of Business. Any form of business operated out of a
truck, van, automobile or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter
and not a fixed address store front or other permanent type of structure
authorized for sales transactions.
(I) Nicotine or Lobelia Delivery Products. Any product containing or
delivering nicotine or lobelia intended for human consumption, or any
part of such a product, that is not tobacco or an electronic delivery
device as defined in this section. Nicotine or lobelia delivery products
does not include any product that has been approved or otherwise
certified for legal sale by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for tobacco use cessation or for other medical purposes
and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose.
(J) Retail Establishment. Any place of business where tobacco, tobacco
products, tobacco-related devices, or delivery devices are available for
sale to the general public. The phrase shall include but not be limited to
grocery stores, convenience stores, restaurants, and drug stores.
(K) Sale. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other
consideration.
(L) Self-Service Merchandising. Open displays of tobacco, tobacco
products, tobacco-related devices, or delivery devices in any manner
where any person shall have access to the tobacco, tobacco products,
tobacco-related devices, or delivery devices, without the assistance or
intervention of the licensee or the licensee’s employee. The assistance or
intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of the tobacco,
tobacco product, tobacco-related device, or delivery device between the
customer and the licensee or employee. Self-service sales are interpreted
as being any sale where there is not an actual physical exchange of the
product between the clerk and the customer.
(M) Tobacco or Tobacco Products. Tobacco or tobacco products includes
cigarettes and any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco
that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other
means, or any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product;
cigars, cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready
rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff, snuff flour, cavendish; plug
and twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts, refuse
scraps, clipping, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and
forms of tobacco. Tobacco or tobacco products excludes any tobacco
product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco
dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 706. Tobacco Products 706-
4
marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose.
(N) Tobacco-Related Devices. Tobacco-related devices includes any pipe,
rolling papers, ashtray, or other device intentionally designed or intended
to be used in a manner which enables the chewing, sniffing or smoking
of tobacco or tobacco products.
(O) Vending Machine. Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type
of device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco- related
devices or delivery device upon the insertion of money, tokens or other
form of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to
purchase the tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco-related device.
706.030 License.
(A) License Required. No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco,
tobacco-related device, electronic delivery device or nicotine or lobelia
delivery products without first having obtained a license to do so from the
city.
(B) Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco-related
devices, electronic delivery device or nicotine or lobelia delivery products
shall be made on a form provided by the city. The application shall
contain the full name of the applicant, the applicant’s residential and
business addresses and telephone numbers, the name of the business for
which the license is sought, and any additional information the city deems
necessary. Upon receipt of a completed application, the City Clerk shall
forward the application to the City Council for action at its next regularly
scheduled City Council meeting. If the City Clerk shall determine that an
application is incomplete, he or she shall return the application to the
applicant with notice of the information necessary to make the application
complete.
(C) Action. The City Council may either approve or deny the license, or it
may delay action for a reasonable period of time as necessary to
complete any investigation of the application or the applicant it deems
necessary. If the City Council shall approve the license, the City Clerk
shall issue the license to the applicant. If the City Council denies the
license, notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant along with
notice of the applicant’s right to appeal the City Council’s decision.
(D) Term. All licenses issued under this section shall be valid for the
calendar year during which it is approved.
(E) Revocation or Suspension. Any license issued under this section may
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 706. Tobacco Products 706-
5
be revoked or suspended as provided in Section 706.130.
(F) Transfers. All licenses issued under this section shall be valid only on
the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to
whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license to another
location or person shall be valid without the prior approval of the City
Council.
(G) Moveable place of business. No license shall be issued to a moveable
place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be
licensed under this section.
(H) Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of
the general public on the licensed premise.
(I) Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be
handled in the same manner as the original application. The request for a
renewal shall be made at least 30 days but no more than 60 days before
the expiration of the current license.
(J) Issuance as privilege and not a right. The issuance of a license issued
under this section shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute
right of the applicant and shall not entitle the holder to an automatic
renewal of the license.
(K) Smoking. Smoking shall not be permitted and no person shall smoke
within the indoor area of any retail establishment or any licensed retail
tobacco shop. Smoking for the purposes of sampling tobacco, tobacco
related devices, electronic delivery devices or nicotine or lobelia
delivery products or any other product is prohibited.
706.040 Fees. No license shall be issued under this chapter until the appropriate license
fee shall be paid in full. The fee for a license under this chapter shall be
established in the City Code Exhibit B, as it may be amended from time to time.
706.050 Basis for Denial of License.
(A) Grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license under this
chapter include but are not limited to the following:
(1) The applicant is under the age of 21 years.
(2) The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any
violation of a federal, state, or local law, ordinance provision, or
other regulation relating to tobacco, tobacco-related devices,
electronic delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery products.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 706. Tobacco Products 706-
6
(3) The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco-related
devices, electronic delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery
products revoked within the preceding 12 months of the date of
application.
(4) The applicant fails to provide any information required on the
application, or provides false or misleading information.
(5) The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other local law,
ordinance, or other regulation from holding a license.
(B) However, except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of
any particular ground for denial does not mean that the city must deny the
license.
(C) If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall be revoked
upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the license under this
chapter.
706.060 Prohibited Sales. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or
offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco-related device, electronic delivery device, or
nicotine or lobelia delivery products:
(A) To any person under the age of 21 years.
(B) By means of any type of vending machine.
(C) By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need
to make a verbal or written request to an employee of the licensed
premise in order to receive the tobacco, tobacco- related device,
electronic delivery device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery products and
whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco-related
device, electronic delivery device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery
products between the licensee, or the licensee’s employee, and the
customer.
(D) By means of loosies as defined in Section 706.020.
(E) Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos,
cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic or
controlled substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally
in tobacco or added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process.
It is not the intention of this provision to ban the sale of lawfully
manufactured cigarettes or other tobacco products.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 706. Tobacco Products 706-
7
(F) By any other means, to any other person, or in any other manner or form
prohibited by federal, state or other local law, ordinance provision, or
other regulation.
706.065 Flavored Products. No person shall sell, offer for sale, or otherwise distribute
any flavored products. This restriction does not apply to retail establishments
that:
(1) Prohibit persons under 21 from entering at all times; and
(2) Derive at least ninety (90) percent of their revenues from the sale of
tobacco, tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery devices, or nicotine
or lobelia delivery products.
706.070 Self-Service Sales. It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this chapter to allow
the sale of tobacco, tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery devices, or
nicotine or lobelia delivery products by any means whereby the customer may
have access to those items without having to request the item from the licensee or
the licensee’s employee and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the
tobacco, tobacco-related device, electronic delivery device, or nicotine or lobelia
delivery products between the licensee or his or her clerk and the customer. All
tobacco, tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery devices, and nicotine or
lobelia delivery products shall either be stored behind a counter or other area not
freely accessible to customers, or in a case or other storage unit not left open and
accessible to the general public. This section shall not apply to retail stores which
derive at least 90 percent of their revenue from tobacco, tobacco-related products
electronic delivery devices, and nicotine or lobelia delivery products and where
the retailer ensures that no person younger than 21 years of age is present, or
permitted to enter, at any time.
706.080 Responsibility. All licensees under this chapter shall be responsible for the
actions of their employees in regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco-related
devices, electronic delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery products on
the licensed premises, and the sale of an item by an employee shall be considered
a sale by the license holder. Nothing in section shall be construed as prohibiting
the city from also subjecting the clerk to whatever penalties are appropriate under
this chapter, state or federal law, or other applicable law or regulation.
706.090 Compliance Checks and Inspections. All licensed premises shall be open to
inspection by the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Office or other authorized city official
during regular business hours. From time to time, but at least once per year, the
City shall conduct compliance checks by engaging with persons over 15 years but
less than 21 years to enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase tobacco,
tobacco-related products, or tobacco-related devices.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 706. Tobacco Products 706-
8
Prior written consent from a parent or guardian is required for any minor who
participates in a compliance check. Persons used for the purpose of compliance
checks shall be supervised by city designated law enforcement officers. Minors
used for compliance checks shall not be guilty of unlawful possession of tobacco,
tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia
delivery products when those items are obtained as part of the compliance check.
No person used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a false identification
misrepresenting the person’s age, and all people lawfully engaged in a compliance
check shall answer all questions about the person’s age asked by the licensee or
his or her employee and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which
he or she is asked. Nothing in this section shall prohibit compliance checks
authorized by state or federal laws for educational, research, or training purposes,
or required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal law.
706.100 Other Illegal Acts. Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a
violation of this chapter:
(A) Illegal Sales. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or
otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco- related device, electronic delivery
device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery products to any person under 21.
(B) Use of False Identification. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
person to attempt to disguise his or her true age by the use of a false form
of identification, whether the identification is that of another person or one
on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to
represent an age older than the actual age of the person.
706.110 Exceptions and Defenses. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the providing of
tobacco, tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery device, or nicotine or lobelia
delivery products to a person under 21 as part of a lawfully recognized religious,
spiritual, or cultural ceremony. It shall be an affirmative defense to the violation
of this chapter for a person to have reasonably relied on proof of age as described
by state law.
706.120 Severability. If any section or provision of this ordinance is held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect other sections or provisions which can be given force
and effect without the invalidated section or provision.
706.130 Administrative Fine, Suspension or Revocation. Any violation of the City's
regulations relating to the issuance of a license required by this ordinance, or
any violation of any conditions/restrictions attached to the issuance of such
license, shall be cause for the imposition of an administrative fine, the
suspension of the license, or the revocation of the license pursuant to the
procedures described in Shoreview Code Section 701.060.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 706. Tobacco Products 706-
9
If the violation relates to the sale of tobacco, tobacco-related devices,
electronic delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery products to
persons under 21 by licensee or licensee's employees, the following
administrative fines, suspensions or revocations shall be imposed:
(A) The first such violation within 24 months shall subject the licensee to the
payment of an administrative fine of $250 plus an additional compliance
check;
(B) The second violation within 24 months shall subject licensee to the
payment of an administrative fine of $500 plus an additional compliance
check;
(C) The third violation within 24 months shall subject the licensee to the
payment of an administrative fine of $1,000 and to a minimum seven (7)
business-day suspension of the license;
(D) The fourth violation within 24 months shall subject the licensee to the
payment of an administrative fine of $1,500 and to a minimum fifteen (15)
business-day suspension of the license;
(E) The fifth violation within 24 months shall subject the licensee to the
payment of an administrative fine of $2,000 and to a minimum of thirty
(30) business-day suspension of the license.
(F) The sixth violation within 24 months shall be cause for revocation of the
license for up to one year.
The imposition of an administrative fine and a suspension of license or to a
license revocation pursuant to this section shall be preceded by a hearing before
the City Council.
706.140 Administrative Fine – Individuals. An individual who sells tobacco, tobaccorelated
devices, electronic delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery
products to a person under 21 years of age will be charged an administrative
penalty. No penalty may be imposed until the individual has received notice,
served personally or by mail, of the alleged violation and an opportunity for a
hearing before the City Council. A decision that a violation has occurred must be
in writing. The following administrative fines shall be imposed:
(A) First Violation within 24 months - $50.00
(B) Second Violation within 24 months - $100.00
(C) Third Violation within 24 months - $150.00
(D) Fourth Violation within 24 months - $200.00
(E) Fifth Violation within 24 months - $250.00
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 706. Tobacco Products 706-
10
Failure to pay this penalty by an individual who sells tobacco to a person under 21
years of age will result in a misdemeanor violation for the first offense.
Additional offenses within five years of a previous conviction will result in a
gross misdemeanor.
706.150 Administrative Penalties Procedures. The following procedure should
generally be followed for Council review of tobacco license violations that are
subject to the administrative penalties established in 706.130 and 706.140:
(A) The City Manager or designee will contact the licensee/seller asking if the
licensee/seller will sign an admission of the facts of the alleged violation
and an acceptance of the administrative penalty listed in Section 706.130
and 706.140. Licensees/sellers have the right to request a hearing before
the City Council if not in agreement with the violation or the
administrative penalty. The City Manager may also schedule a hearing
before the Council if he/she believes there is a valid reason to deviate from
the administrative penalty.
(B) If a hearing is requested, it will be conducted in accordance with the
Administrative Procedure Act, Minn. Stat. §§ 14.57 to 14.70. The Council
will issue written findings on the alleged violation and an order imposing
sanctions, if any.
(C) If the licensee/seller and the City Manager agree on the violation and the
administrative penalty, a written admission will be provided to the
Council with a proposed order. For first and second violations, the
matter will be scheduled as part of the consent agenda, and it is
expected that the Council will generally issue the proposed order
without discussion. Nevertheless, the Council may choose to schedule
the matter for special Council review and action. The City must
provide at least ten (10) days notice to the licensee/seller before this
review is conducted. Any violations beyond the second violation must
be scheduled for a hearing before the Council.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 707. Fireworks 707-
1
707 Fireworks
707.010 Definition. For purposes of this regulation, the following terms shall mean:
(A) “Commercial fireworks" means any substance or combination of substances
or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect
by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and includes blank
cartridges, toy cannons and toy canes in which explosives are used, any type
of balloon which requires fire underneath to propel it, firecrackers, torpedoes,
skyrockets, Roman candles, daygo bombs, or other fireworks of like
construction, and any fireworks containing any explosive or inflammable
compound, or any tablet or other device containing any explosive substance
and commonly used as fireworks. The term "fireworks" shall not include
those devises defined below as “Consumer Fireworks”.
(B) “Consumer fireworks” means toy pistols, toy guns, in which paper caps
containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive compound are used and toy pistol
caps which contain less than 0.20 grains of explosive mixture as well as wire
or wood sparklers of not more than 100 grams of mixture per item, other than
sparkling items which are nonexplosive and nonaerial and contain less than
75 grams or less of chemical mixture per tube or a total of 200 grams or less
for multiple tubes, snakes or glowworms, smoke devises, or trick
noisemakers which include paper streamers, party poppers, string poppers,
snappers, and drops pops, each consisting of not more than twenty-five
hundredth grains of explosive mixture. The use of consumer fireworks is not
permitted on public property. This paragraph does not authorize the purchase
of consumer fireworks by persons younger than 18 years of age.
707.020 Permit or License Required. No person shall use or display any fireworks,
except as provided herein.
(A) Commercial Fireworks. Supervised public displays of commercial fireworks by
City, fair associations, amusement parks and other organizations other than
the City and fair associations must obtain a permit for such public displays.
Such permits shall allow the use and display of commercial fireworks for that
display only. No permit so granted shall be transferable.
(1) Application. In addition to the information required by 701.020, the
application shall state the name and address of the person who will
supervise the display, the name and address of the person who will
conduct the display, the location of the display, and the date and time of
the display.
(2) Investigation. The Fire Chief, or his designee, shall investigate each
application to determine whether the operator of the display is competent
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 707. Fireworks 707-
2
and whether the display will be of such a character or will be so located,
discharged, or fired as to be hazardous to any person or property.
(3) Conditions. Every display shall be conducted so as not to endanger any
person or property. Every display shall be conducted in accordance with
all applicable provisions of this code, state law, and regulations including
regulations of the State Fire Marshall.
(B) Consumer Fireworks. Except as herein provided, no person shall keep for retail
sale, sell at retail or otherwise dispose of or use consumer fireworks unless
licensed by the City of Shoreview. License applications shall be submitted to
the City Manager together with the license fees as determined from time to
time by City Council resolution. A license shall be issued for the specific
premises identified in the application and shall not be transferable.
(1) Application. In addition to the information required by 701.020, the
application shall provide:
(a) The net or gross quantity of explosive material to be kept on the
premises for retail sale or other disposition.
(b) The interior floor plan of the building showing the place(s) off storage
and/or display.
(c) The location, type and capacity of sprinkler(s) and fire extinguishers.
(d) A Certificate of Insurance indicating the applicant has liability
coverage as required by Section 701.020. The Certificate must
demonstrate the insurer has been notified of the type and quantity of
consumer fireworks kept on the premises.
(2) Term. A license shall expire on December 31st of each year.
(3) License Restrictions. A license shall be issued subject to the following
restrictions:
(a) No transient sales of consumer fireworks are permitted.
(b) No outdoor sales, storage or retail display of consumer fireworks is
permitted unless the property is licensed in accordance with other
applicable zoning regulations.
(c) Use of fireworks and consumer fireworks is prohibited on property
where sale and/or storage is permitted.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 707. Fireworks 707-
3
(d) Smoking is prohibited within buildings where sales and/or storage of
consumer fireworks is permitted.
(e) A list of consumers fireworks kept on the premises shall be available
for inspection at all times.
(f) Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for all consumer fireworks kept
on the premises shall be available for inspection at all times.
(g) A minimum of two (2) water-type extinguishers, with minimum 2 ½
gallon capacity. One of these extinguishers shall be kept within 15
feet of any storage and display area(s).
(h) Samples of the consumer fireworks shall be made available to the Fire
Chief, or his designee, upon request for testing and training purposes
only.
(i) Other restrictions may be attached to the license as deemed necessary
by the City Manager and the Fire Chief.
(4) Storage. The licensee shall comply with all applicable provisions of the
State of Minnesota Building and Fire Codes. If there is a conflict between
the regulations of the State and the regulations of the City, the more
restrictive regulations shall apply. The following quantities of consumer
fireworks shall not be exceeded without the express written approval of
the Fire Chief, or his designee.
(a) In buildings without an approved automatic sprinkler system, a
maximum quantity of fifty (50) pounds net pyrotechnic composition or
two hundred (200) pounds gross weight, if the pyrotechnic
composition is not known, may be kept on the premises.
(b) In buildings with an approved automatic sprinkler system, a maximum
quantity of one hundred (100) pounds net pyrotechnic composition or
four hundred (400) pounds gross weight, if the pyrotechnic
composition is not known, may be kept on the premises.
(5) Inspections. The premises shall be inspected at least twice annually by the
Fire Chief, or his designee, to verify compliance with the terms and
conditions of the license.
(6) Exception for Private Use.
(a) No license is required for private use of consumer fireworks by
members of the general public on private property.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 708. Charitable Gambling 708-
1
708 Charitable Gambling
708.010 Definitions. As used herein, the following terms shall mean:
(A) “Active member” means a member who has paid all dues to the organization,
who is eighteen (18) years of age or older, who has equal voting rights with all
other members, who has equal opportunity to be an elected officer, who has
equal right and responsibilities of attendance at regularly scheduled meetings
of the organization, whose name and membership origination date appears,
knowingly and willingly, on a list of members of the organization, and who
has been a member of the organization for at least 6 months. If the
organization does not have a dues structure, the dues portion of this definition
will not apply.
(B) "Allowable expense" means reasonable sums that are necessarily and actually
expended for the following purposes:
Gambling supplies and equipment;
Rent;
Utilities used during gambling occasions;
Compensation paid to members for conducting gambling on a compensation
scheduled devised by the organization for its employees for the conduct of
lawful gambling;
Maintenance of devices used in lawful gambling;
Accounting services;
License renewal;
Bond for gambling manager;
Insurance on gambling activities;
Investigation fee;
One-third of the amount of increase in the annual premium of liability
insurance.
(C) "Gross profit" means the gross receipts collected from lawful gambling, less
reasonable sums necessarily and actually expended for prizes.
(D) "Gross receipts" means the total amount collected by an organization from
participants in lawful gambling. Gross receipts for bingo include any amounts
received by the organization that has been paid by a person at the bingo
occasion to play the game, without which the player could not play the game.
(E) "Lawful gambling" means the operation, conduct or sale of bingo, raffles,
paddlewheels, tipboards and/or pull-tabs.
(F) "Net profit" means gross profit less reasonable sums actually expended for
allowable expenses.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 708. Charitable Gambling 708-
2
(G) "Organization" means any fraternal, religious, veterans or other non-profit
organization.
(H) "Trade area" means the corporate boundaries of the City of Shoreview and
each city immediately contiguous to the City of Shoreview.
708.020 Organization License Required. Only organizations which have received a
license from the Minnesota Charitable Gambling Control Board are eligible for a
premises permit to conduct lawful gambling within the City in compliance with
the provisions of M.S. 349.11 to M.S. 349.60 and the regulations adopted by the
Minnesota Charitable Gambling Control Board.
708.030 Premises Permit and Fee. An applicant for a premises permit shall pay a nonrefundable
investigation fee of $100 to the City when an application is submitted
for City review.
708.040 Local Gambling Tax.
(A) Imposition. A local gambling tax is hereby imposed on all organizations
receiving City approval to conduct lawful gambling within the City of
Shoreview. The tax shall not exceed an amount equal to three percent (3%) of
the organization's gross profits from lawful gambling activities conducted
within the City of Shoreview. Proceeds of the tax shall only be used for the
purpose of regulation of the gambling activities of all organizations licensed
to conduct lawful gambling within the City of Shoreview. As used herein,
regulation includes administrative and enforcement costs.
(B) Estimated Tax. The City shall calculate the organization’s estimated annual
local gambling tax based upon the organization’s records or upon any other
reliable information available to the City. The estimated local gambling tax
payments shall be submitted to the City Manager in quarterly installments for
the period ending March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31. The
estimated payment, together with a copy of the organization’s Minnesota State
Tax Payment Records containing sufficient data to enable the City to verify
the manner in which the organization calculated the local gambling tax
payment, shall be submitted to the City Manager on or before the 20th day of
the month following the end of the quarter.
(C) Reconciliation. On or about January 20th of each year, the City shall
calculate its actual expenses incurred for the purpose of regulating gambling
activities with the City. In the event that the City's actual expense is less than
the local gambling tax paid by an organization, the City shall adjust the
succeeding quarterly gambling tax payment for such organization or refund
the difference to the organization, at the City's option.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 708. Charitable Gambling 708-
3
708.050 Lawful Gambling Fund.
(A) Payment Required. All organizations having a premises permit to conduct
lawful gambling within the City of Shoreview shall contribute ten percent
(10%) of the net profits derived by the organization from lawful gambling
activities conducted with the City of Shoreview to a special fund to be
administered by the Shoreview City Council for lawful purposes.
(B) Collection. The lawful gambling fund payment shall be submitted to the City
Manager in quarterly installments for the periods ending March 31, June 30,
September 30, and December 31. The lawful gambling fund payment,
together with a copy of the organization's Minnesota State Tax Payment
Records containing sufficient data to enable the City to verify the manner in
which the organization calculated the lawful gambling fund payment, shall be
submitted to the City Manager on or before the 20th day of the month
following the end of the quarter.
708.060 Trade Area and Restrictions. An organization, licensed to conduct lawful
gambling within the City of Shoreview, shall expend all of its net profit on lawful
purposes conducted or located within the trade area.
708.070 Prize Restrictions.
(A) Bingo. Except for a cover-all game, the maximum cash and/or merchandise
prize for a single bingo game shall not exceed $50.00. The maximum cash
and/or merchandise prize for a cover-all game shall not exceed $100.00. The
total of all cash and/or merchandise prizes awarded at a bingo occasion shall
not exceed $1,500.00. Merchandise prizes must be valued at their fair market
value.
(B) Paddlewheels and Tipboards. The maximum cash and/or merchandise prize
awarded for a single spin of a paddlewheel or a single tipboard shall not
exceed $50.00. The total of all cash and/or merchandise prizes awarded in a
single day for the operation of paddlewheels and/or tipboards shall not exceed
$500.00.
(C) Raffles. The total of all cash and/or merchandise prizes awarded in any
calendar year by an organization for a raffle shall not exceed $30,000.00.
Merchandise prizes must be valued at their fair market value.
(D)Pull-tabs. Prize and bet limitations for pull-tabs may not exceed the amounts
contained in the regulations adopted by the Minnesota Charitable Gambling
Control Board.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 709. Peddlers 709-
1
709 Peddlers
709.010 Definition. As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall mean:
(A) "Peddler" shall mean an individual traveling from place to place within the
City, by whatever means of transportation, for the purpose of selling, offering
for sale or taking orders for the sale of goods or services, of whatever kind,
for present or future delivery including any person who utilizes or occupies
any permanent or temporary building, structure or portions thereof, within
the City, for the purpose of sales, exhibiting samples or taking orders for
future delivery.
(B) "Solicitor" shall mean an individual traveling from place to place within the
City, by whatever means of transportation, for the purpose of approaching
another in their home to make a request for a donation of money or services.
709.020 Permit Exemptions. The permit provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the
following individuals but such individuals shall register with the City Manager as
hereinafter provided:
(A) Sales made to dealer or permanent merchants by commercial travelers selling
in the usual course of business;
(B) Sheriffs, constables, bona fide assignees, receivers or trustees in bankruptcy or
other public officers selling goods, wares and merchandise according to law;
(C) Bona fide residents of the State selling fruits, vegetables, dressed meats, fowl
or other farm products which were produced on land within the State under
the ownership or control of the vendor provided that such sales occur only in
areas permitted by the City's Development Regulations and only if such sales
can be conducted without creating traffic hazards;
(D) Sales made by bona fide non-profit organizations registered within the State
of Minnesota, or solicitations made by individuals or organizations.
709.030 Registration Required. Any peddler or solicitor who is exempt from the permit
requirements shall register with the City Manager. Registration shall be made on
forms provided by the City Manager and no registration fee shall be required.
Upon completion of the registration form, the City Manager shall issue a
Certificate of Registration to the applicant. Certificates of Registration shall be
non-transferable.
709.040 Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a
peddler/solicitor without first obtaining a permit from the City Manager.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 709. Peddlers 709-
2
(A) Application. Applications shall be verified and shall be submitted on forms
provided by the City Manager which shall include the following:
(1) The name and a description of the applicant;
(2) The permanent home address and full local address of the applicant;
(3) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold;
(4) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship;
(5) The length of time that applicant wishes to conduct business within the
City;
(6) The place where the goods proposed to be sold are manufactured, stored,
and the manner in which such goods shall be delivered to the customer;
(7) A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately
prior to the date of filing of the application, which picture shall be
approximately two (2) inches by two (2) inches showing the head and
shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner;
(8) A statement as to whether applicant has been charged with a violation of a
similar regulation and the status of such proceeding;
(9) A statement as to whether applicant, upon any sale or order, shall demand,
accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final
delivery;
(10) A description of any vehicle which applicant will use while engaged in the
business of a peddler within the City;
(11) The last five (5) municipalities wherein the applicant has worked before
coming to this City; and
(12) When application is filed, the applicant shall provide photographic proof
of an application in the form of a Minnesota Driver's License or other
photo identification acceptable to the City Manager.
(13) Such other relevant information as may be required by the City Manager.
(B) Procedure. Upon receipt of the completed application form, the receipt of the
permit fee, and a completed background check of the applicant, the City
Manager shall act on the approval or denial of the permit within five (5)
business days and shall notify the applicant of such decision. If the
application is approved, a permit shall be issued. The application may be
denied for the following reasons:
(1) The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the information
requested by the City as part of the application, or the failure to sign the
applicant, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time of application.
(2) The conviction of the applicant within the past five (5) years from the
date of application, for any violation of any federal or state statute or
regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the
person's ability to conduct the business for which a permit is being sought
in an honest and legal manner or that will not adversely affect the health,
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 709. Peddlers 709-
3
safety and welfare of the residents of the City. Such violations shall
include but not be limited to: burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud,
unlawful business practices, and any form of actual or threatened
physical harm against another person.
(3) The revocation within the past five (5) years of any permit or license
issued to the applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a
peddler.
(4) The applicant is determined to have a bad business reputation, evidence
of a bad business reputation shall include but not be limited to the
existence of more than two (2) complaints against the applicant with the
Better Business Bureau, the Attorney General's Office or other similar
business consumer rights office or agency, within the preceding twelve
(12) months, or five (5) such complaints against the applicant within the
preceding five (5) years.
(C) Contents of Permit. Each permit shall contain a signature and seal of the City
Manager or the Manager's designee and shall indicate the name, address and
photograph of the permittee, the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the date
of issuance, the term during which the permit shall be valid, the permit
number and a description of any vehicle(s) which will be used in connection
with such sales.
(D) Permit Fee. A fee, in an amount to be determined from time to time by City
Council resolution, shall be paid when the application is submitted.
(E) Record. The City Manager shall keep records of all permits issued under this
Chapter.
(F) Display. Every peddler shall display the City-issued permit upon the request
of any person.
(G) Duration. Every permit issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be
valid for the period of time stated therein but in no event shall any such permit
be issued for a period of time in excess of sixty (60) days.
(H) Revocation. Any permit issued under this section may be revoked at the
discretion of the City Manager for violation of any of the following:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements on the application form.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made during the course of the
permitted activity.
Rev. Date 8/19/19
Ord. # 975
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 709. Peddlers 709-
4
(3) Conviction of any offense for which granting a permit could have been
denied.
(4) Violation of any provision of this Chapter.
The revocation of any permit issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple
persons to conduct business as peddlers on behalf of the permittee, shall serve
as a revocation of each such authorized person's authority to conduct business
as a peddler on behalf of the permittee whose permit is revoked.
709.050 Prohibited Activities. No peddler shall conduct business in any of the following
manners:
(A) Entrance to Premises Restricted. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or
solicitor to enter upon any private premises when such premises are posted
with a sign stated "No Peddlers Allowed" or "No Solicitation Allowed" or
other words to such effect.
(B) Refusing to Leave. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to enter
upon premises owned, leased or rented by another and refuse to leave such
premises after having been notified by such owner or occupant to leave.
(C) Misrepresentation. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to make
false or fraudulent statements concerning the quality of the goods or services
which are being offered for sale.
(D) Hours of Operation. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to engage
in the business of peddling or soliciting within the City between the hours of
7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. the following morning, or at any time on Sundays,
except by specific appointment with or invitation from the prospective
customer.
(E) Use of Audio Devices. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to call
attention to their activity by means of blowing a horn or whistle, by ringing
any bell, by crying out, or by making any other noise in an unreasonable
manner.
(F) Obstructing Traffic. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to
obstruct the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any street,
alley, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way.
(G) Safety Hazard. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to conduct
business in such a way as to create a threat to the health, safety and welfare of
any individual or general public.
Ord. No. 975
Rev. 8/19/19
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700.
Licensing
Section 709. Peddlers 709-
5
(H) Proof of Permit. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to fail to
provide proof of permit or registration and identification when requested; or to
use the permit or registration of another person.
(I) False Statements. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to make
false or misleading statements about the product or services being sold,
including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler or solicitor shall
claim to have the endorsement of any City solely based on the City having
issued a permit or Certificate of Registration to that person.
(J) Harassment. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to remain on
property of another when requested to leave, or to otherwise conduct business
in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene, threatening, intimidating
or abusive.
709.055 Candidates for Public Office. Candidates for public office are exempt from the
provisions of this Chapter.
709.060 Severability. If any part or provision of this Chapter or the application thereof to
any person, entity, or circumstances shall be adjudged unconstitutional or invalid
by any Court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its
operation to the part of the provision or application which is directly involved in
the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered, and shall not
affect or impair the validity of the remainder of this Chapter or the application
thereof to the other persons, entities or circumstances.
709.070 Misdemeanor. Any violation of this Chapter shall be a misdemeanor. Each day
on which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 710. Transit Bench License 710-1
710 Transit Bench License
710.010 Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the placing and maintenance
of transit benches in public rights of ways in order to control location, appearance,
proliferation and traffic safety. The City Council has determined that it is more
efficient to issue one license which covers all transit bench locations in the City.
710.020 License Required. It is unlawful for a person to place a transit bench in the City
of Shoreview without first having been issued a license by the City Council. A
license issued under this Section shall expire three years after the date it is
approved by the City Council. Applications for the transit bench license must be
submitted no later than June 1 of the year it is to expire. Applications submitted
after that date shall not be accepted.
710.030 Permitted Locations. Transit benches may only be placed in public rights-ofway
at the locations designated on the Shoreview Transit Bench Location Map (a
copy of which will be available in the City Manager’s Office). The City Council,
from time to time, may revise designated locations based on public transportation
route changes. In determining acceptable locations, the City Council shall not
consider transit bench locations that are: 1) on public or private sidewalks, 2) in
an alley, 3) at any location more than 50 feet or less than 20 feet from the corner
of two improved streets, or 4) detrimental to public safety, including pedestrian
and vehicle traffic.
710.040 License Fee. The initial license fee shall be $3,000. Thereafter, the license fee
shall be as designated, from time to time, by City Council resolution.
710.050 License and Application. Application for licenses shall be made to the City
Manager. The application shall contain the following:
(A)A scale drawing showing the size and location of the transit bench relative to
all other objects on the property including the layout of applicable adjacent
roadways, intersections, traffic signage, sidewalks, trails, utility poles, fences
and other objects in the vicinity;
(B) Name, address, and phone number of applicant;
(C) Detailed plans and specifications of each proposed bench including the
general nature of the advertising matter, if any, to be posted thereon and total
surface area intended as signage not to exceed 12 square feet using the front,
or seating side surface of the bench back.
(D)Current general liability Certificate of Insurance from an insurance company,
rates “A” by A.M. Best Company and authorized to do business in the State of
Minnesota, naming the city as additional insured in the minimum amount of
$600,000 for any and all claims arising out of the use or existence of the
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 710. Transit Bench License 710-2
transit bench, and approved by the City Attorney. The certificate shall
provide for automatic notification of the City with a minimum 30 days
advance notice in the event of cancellation;
(E) A cash deposit or other form of security as approved by the City Attorney, in
an amount as determined by the City Engineer to be sufficient to remove the
transit benches upon license expiration or revocation by the City;
(F) An executed hold harmless agreement from the licensee, protecting the City
from any and all claims arising out of the use and existence of the transit
bench;
(G)Written permission from the road authority as defined in Minnesota State
Statutes Section 160.02, if the City of Shoreview is not the road authority for
right-of-way adjacent to the transit bench location;
(H)Such other information the City Manager may require.
710.060 City Council Review. The City Manager shall forward all completed license
applications to the City Council for review. Only one license shall be issued for
all locations illustrated on the Shoreview Transit Bench Location Map. The City
Council shall approve by three affirmative votes the issuance of a license.
710.070 Revocation of License. The City Council may revoke a license for failure to
comply with the conditions of the license by three (3) affirmative votes.
710.080 Installation and Maintenance. The licensee shall install benches in accordance
with the following criteria:
(A) Location. Transit benches shall be installed parallel with the curb, sidewalk or
trail, and setback at least 3 feet.
(B) Size. Size limitations on Transit Benches are as follows:
(1) Height – 42 inches maximum;
(2) Width – 30 inches maximum; and
(3) Length – seven feet maximum.
(C) Construction. A transit bench shall be installed and maintained on a durable
level surface including, but not limited to, concrete, bomanite or decorative
brick. The durable surface shall extend six inches on either end of the bench
and one and one-half feet in front. The transit bench shall be of sufficient
weight or shall be secured in a manner to minimize the potential of accidental
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 710. Transit Bench License 710-3
tipping or vandalism. No transit bench shall be fastened, secured, or anchored
to City property.
(D) Materials. A transit bench shall be constructed of durable materials including,
but not limited to concrete, wood, plastic, or combination thereof, with colors
limited to whites, earthtones of subdued greens, grays, browns, reddishbrowns,
and golds.
(E) License Display. Each transit bench shall display the license number in a
conspicuous place.
(F) Conditions. It is the responsibility of the licensee to maintain each bench in a
safe condition and to keep benches neat, clean and in usable condition. The
licensee shall keep the transit bench and bench base free of ice and snow and
accessible at all times.
(G) Advertising Matter. Advertising matter may be displayed only on the front
(roadway side) surface of the backrest of transit bench and shall not exceed 12
square feet in surface area. Advertisements for liquor or beer, tobacco,
political advertisements, obscene, immoral or illegal matter is prohibited on
all transit bench signs. No advertising matter on any transit bench may
display the words “Stop”, “Look”, “Drive In”, “Danger” or any other word,
phrase or symbol, reflective material, or illumination device, which might
interfere with, mislead or distract traffic.
710.090 Removal of Transit Bench
(A) Removal by Licensee. Licensee shall remove transit benches within ten (10)
days of license expiration or revocation.
(B) Removal by City Manager. If the licensee fails to remove the transit benches
as required above, the City Manager may remove the transit benches after (10)
days mailed notice to the licensee. The City may reimburse itself for the cost
of the removal from the security provided by the licensee at the time of
application.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 711. Massage Therapy Establishments and Massage Therapists 711-1
711 Massage Therapy Establishments and Massage Therapists
711.010 Purpose. The purpose and intent of this Ordinance is to regulate Massage
Therapy Establishments and Massage Therapists in order to protect and promote
the public health, safety and welfare by:
(A)providing standards for education and training of Massage Therapists.
(B) providing a clean, sanitary, healthy and safe environment in which Massage
Therapists can operate.
(C) requiring insurance coverage.
(D)recognizing massage therapy as a legitimate business occupation.
711.020 Definitions. As used herein the following terms shall mean:
(A)"Massage Therapy" shall mean any method of pressure on, or friction against,
or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the
external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any
mechanical or electrical apparatus, or other appliances or devices, with or
without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil,
powder, creme, lotion, ointment or other similar preparations.
(B) "Massage Therapist" shall mean any person who offers the service of massage
therapy as part of a commercial transaction.
(C) "Massage Therapy Establishment" shall mean any place wherein massage
therapy is conducted by a Massage Therapist.
(D)“Chair Massage” is a massage provided to a fully-clothed individual, and
limited to the neck, shoulders, arms, and back.
711.030 Prohibitions. Except as hereinafter provided, no person, party, firm or
corporation shall:
(A)Act in the capacity of a Massage Therapist without first obtaining a license as
hereinafter provided.
(B) Operate a Massage Therapist Establishment without first obtaining a license
as hereinafter provided.
(C) Submit an application for a Massage Therapist or Massage Therapy
Establishment License which contains false, inaccurate or misleading
information.
Rev. Date
3/3/08
Ord. 826
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 711. Massage Therapy Establishments and Massage Therapists 711-2
(D)Act in the capacity of a Massage Therapist or operate a Massage Therapy
Establishment contrary to the provisions of this Chapter.
(E) Perform massage therapy outside of a licensed massage therapy establishment.
711.040 Exemptions. The following people are exempt from compliance with the
provisions of this Chapter:
(A)Persons duly licensed in the State of Minnesota to practice medicine, surgery,
osteopathy, chiropractic and physical therapy, podiatry and nursing; and
individuals performing massage therapy under the direction of such persons,
provided that they are rendering massage therapy within their scope of
employment;
(B) Athletic directors and trainers certified by the National Athletic Trainers
Association, provided that they are rendering massage therapy within their
scope of employment and at their normal place of business;
(C) Beauty culturists and barbers, who do not give, or hold themselves out to give,
massage therapy as defined herein, other than as is customarily given in such
places of business for the purposes of beautification.
(D)A person or organization providing temporary massage services such as “chair
massage” if the following requirements are met:
(1) the massage is provided in a place of business where the massage can
easily be seen by any employee or visitor on the premises;
(2) the location does not hold a license to sell alcoholic beverages;
(3) massages are offered at the location no more than ten days per calendar
year;
(4) each recipient of a massage remains in an upright position, either sitting or
standing; and
(5) each recipient of a massage remains in the normal, daytime attire worn
when entering the business and does not remove any clothing except
outerwear such as a coat or jacket.
711.050 License Application and Fee. An application for a Massage Therapist or
Massage Therapy Establishment shall be submitted on forms provided by the City
Manager which shall be fully, truthfully and accurately completed. The license
fee, as determined from time to time by Council Resolution, shall be submitted
with the application. Licenses shall expire December 31st of each year.
Rev. Date
3/3/08
Ord. 826
Rev. Date
3/3/08
Ord. 826
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 711. Massage Therapy Establishments and Massage Therapists 711-3
711.060 Law Enforcement Review. Upon receipt, the City Manager shall forward copies
of all applications to the City's law enforcement agency. The City's law
enforcement agency shall report, in writing, to the City Manager, as to any police
record of the applicant which may reflect upon moral character or responsibility.
711.070 Requirements for Massage Therapist's License. A Massage Therapist shall:
Be eighteen (18) years of age or older, verified by a birth certificate or driver's
license.
Have received a Comprehensive Certificate of Massage from a school recognized
by the Minnesota Higher Education Board with a minimum of 500 class credit
hours and is a member in good standing of the Minnesota Therapeutic Massage
Network or the American Massage Therapy Association or other organizations
possessing the same or similar standards and having an enforcement code of
ethics.
711.080 Massage Therapy Establishment Restrictions. A Massage Therapy
Establishment shall comply with the following regulations:
(A)The premises shall comply with applicable Zoning, Fire, Health and Building
Codes.
(B) The premises and equipment shall be clean, sanitary and well maintained.
(C) The holding of a license hereunder does not negate the requirement to hold
other licenses or permits which may be applicable.
(D)No gambling shall be permitted on the licensed premises.
(E) No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed on or permitted to be brought onto
the licensed premises.
(F) No person who is visibly under the influence of alcoholic beverages or drugs
shall be allowed on the licensed premises.
(G)No person shall be permitted to engage in disorderly conduct on the licensed
premises and the licensee shall obey any reasonable order of the City's law
enforcement agency to terminate or prevent such disorderly conduct.
(H)Licensees shall comply with City, County, State or Federal laws, rules and
regulations which are applicable to the licensed premises.
(I) The licensed premises shall be closed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 711. Massage Therapy Establishments and Massage Therapists 711-4
(J) There shall be a waiting room for patrons which is separate from any area
wherein massage therapy is performed.
(K)Licensee shall permit inspections during regular business hours by the City's
law enforcement agency, building inspector, or appropriate fire or health
officials to determine compliance with the city regulations or other
appropriate state or county regulations.
711.090 Display of Permits. The license of the Massage Therapy Establishment and of
every Massage Therapist employed thereby, shall be displayed in an open and
conspicuous place on the premises and shown to law enforcement officers upon
request.
711.100 Changed Conditions. All licensees must notify the City Manager, in writing, as
soon as practicable, but in no event later than ten (10) days, of each and every
material change in circumstances with respect to material and information
contained in or a part of the license application.
711.110 Insurance. Massage Therapist Licensees must have and maintain in full force
and effect, during the license period, a policy of liability and malpractice
insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state of
Minnesota covering death, personal injury and property damage in the minimum
amount of Three Hundred Thousand ($300,000) Dollars per person and per
occurrence.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 712. Adult Entertainment 712-1
712 Adult Entertainment
712.010 Findings and Recitals.
(A)On March 16, 1998, the City Council enacted an interim ordinance
(Ordinance No. 679) creating a moratorium on the establishment of adult uses
within the City and directing the City Staff to conduct a study to determine
how best to regulate such uses. The scope of the study was to include, but not
be limited to, the following:
(1) The particular zoning districts in which adult establishments should be
allowed as either permitted or conditional uses;
(2) The density and concentration of adult uses; and,
(3) The effect of adult uses on other uses in the surrounding area.
Upon completion of the study, the matter was to be considered by the
Planning Commission for its review and recommendation to the City Council.
The study has been completed and the Planning Commission has reviewed the
study and has passed its recommendation to the City Council for review. The
City Council has also reviewed the staff's study and duly considered the
recommendation of the Planning Commission.
(B) The staff's study contained copies of certain reports specifically including a
report which was prepared by the State Attorney General entitled "Report of
the Attorney General's Working Group on Regulation of Sexually Oriented
Businesses", dated June 6, 1989 (the "Report"). The Report considered
evidence from studies conducted in Minneapolis, St. Paul, and many other
cities throughout the country relating to sexually oriented businesses. The City
Staff, Planning Commission, and City Council have reviewed the Report.
(C) The Report, based upon the above referenced studies and the testimony and
evidence it concluded, among other things, " . . . that sexually oriented
businesses are associated with high crime rates and depression of property
values. . . ." Prior to the issuance of the Report, the State Attorney General's
Working Group also heard testimony that " . . . the character of a
neighborhood can dramatically change when there is a concentration of
sexually oriented businesses adjacent to residential property." The Report
found and concluded that:
(1) Adult uses have an impact on the neighborhoods surrounding them, which
is distinct from the impact caused by other commercial uses;
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 712. Adult Entertainment 712-2
(2) Residential neighborhoods located within close proximity to adult
theaters, bookstores and other adult uses experience increase crime rates
(sex-related crimes in particular), lowered property values, increased
transiency, and decreased stability of ownership;
(3) The adverse impacts which adult uses have on surrounding areas diminish
as the distance from the adult uses increases;
(4) Studies of other cities have shown that among the crimes which tend to
increase either within or in the near vicinity of adult uses are rapes,
prostitution, child molestation, indecent exposure and other lewd and
lascivious behavior;
(5) The City of Phoenix, Arizona study confirmed that the sex crime rate was
on the average 500 percent higher in areas with sexually oriented
businesses;
(6) Many members of the public perceive areas within which adult uses are
located as less desirable than other areas which do not have such uses;
(7) Studies of other cities have shown that the values of both commercial and
residential properties either are diminished or fail to appreciate at the rate
of other comparable properties when located in proximity to adult uses;
and
(8) The Indianapolis, Indiana study established that professional real estate
appraisers believe that an adult bookstore would have a negative effect on
the value of both residential and commercial properties within a one to
three block area of the store.
(D)The Shoreview City Council finds the characteristics of Shoreview are
substantially similar to those of the cities cited by the Report when
considering the affects of adult uses.
(E) The Shoreview City Council finds, based upon the Report and the studies
cited therein, that adult uses may have adverse secondary effects upon certain
pre-existing land uses within the City, and that the public health, safety, and
general welfare will be promoted if the City adopts regulations regarding adult
uses.
(F) The Shoreview City Council finds that the adverse secondary effects tend to
diminish if adult uses in the City are regulated by locational and licensing
requirements.
(G)It is not the intent of the City to prohibit adult uses from having a reasonable
opportunity to locate within the City.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 712. Adult Entertainment 712-3
(H)The City's current zoning ordinance does not address such adult uses, which
have been found by other municipalities to cause similar adverse secondary
effects. Specifically, the City Council is concerned that the City's zoning
ordinance may be inadequate in its scope and in its restrictions to accomplish
the purpose for which it was intended.
(I) In addition to the proper zoning classification of such uses, there are a number
of significant planning and land use issues pertaining to the regulation of such
uses, including the following:
(1) The particular zoning districts in which such uses should be allowed as
either permitted or conditional uses.
(2) The concentration and density of such uses in the City and its
neighborhoods.
(3) The effect of such uses on other uses in the surrounding area.
712.020 Definitions. For the purposes of this ordinance, the following terms shall be
defined as set forth below:
(A) Adult Establishment. Adult Establishment means:
(1) Adult Patronage. Any business that is conducted exclusively for the
patronage of adults and that excludes minors from patronage, either by
operation of law or by the owners of the business;
(2) Receipts; Floor Area; Types of Merchandise. Any business that (i)
derives 25% or more of its gross receipts during any calendar month
from, or (ii) devotes 25% or more of its floor area (not including
storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any portion of the
business not open to the public) to items, merchandise, devices or other
materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material
depicting, exposing, describing, discussing, or relating to Specified
Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas; or
(3) Adult Usage. Any business that engages in any Adult Use.
(B) Adult Uses, Generally. "Adult Uses" are premises, enterprises, or
establishments, businesses or places open to some or all members of the
public at or in which there is an emphasis on the presentation, display,
depiction or description of Specified Sexual Activities or Specified
Anatomical Areas which are capable of being seen, heard, or smelled by
members of the public. Adult Uses include but are not limited to the
following:
Rev.Date
11/20/06
Ord. #808
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 712. Adult Entertainment 712-4
(1) Adult Body Painting Studio. An establishment or business which provides
the service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or
non-transparent, to or on the body of a patron when such body is wholly or
partially nude in terms of "Specified Anatomical Areas."
(2) Adult Bookstore. A building or portion of a building used for the barter,
rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter (specifically included,
but not limited to, greeting cards), pictures, slides, records, audio tape,
videotape or motion picture film if such building or portion of a building
is not open to the public generally but only to one or more classes of the
public excluding any minor by reason of age or if a substantial or
significant portion of such items are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the depiction or description of Specified Sexual Activities or
Specified Anatomical Areas.
(3) Adult Cabaret. A building or portion of a building used for providing
dancing or other live entertainment, if such building or portion of a
building excludes minors by virtue of age or if such dancing or other live
entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
presentation, display, depiction or description of Specified Sexual
Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(4) Adult Companionship Establishment. A companionship establishment
which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of
engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an
employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual
Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(5) Adult Conversation/Rap Parlor. A conversation/rap parlor which excludes
minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of engaging in or
listening to conversation, talk or discussion, if such service is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual
Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(6) Adult Health/Sport Club. A health/sport club which excludes minors by
reason of age, or if such club is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 712. Adult Entertainment 712-5
(7) Adult Hotel or Motel. Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel from
which minors are specifically excluded from patronage by reason of age
and wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to Specified
Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(8) Adult Massage Parlor, Health Club. A massage parlor or health club
which restricts minors by reason of age, or which provides the services of
massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(9) Adult Motion Picture Theater. A building or portion of a building used for
presenting material if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing
practice excludes minors by reason of age, or if such material is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual
Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas for observation by patrons
therein.
(10) Adult Modeling Studio. A modeling studio which restricts minors by
reason of age, or whose major business is the provision, to customers, of
figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual
stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers, or who engage in
Specified Sexual Activities or display Specified Anatomical Areas while
being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured,
photographed, or otherwise depicted by such customers.
(11) Adult Motion Picture Arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted
or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled or operated, still or motion picture machines,
projectors or other image-producing devices (including, but not limited to
images from CD-ROM and/or the Internet) are maintained to show images
to five or few persons per machine at any one time, and where the images
so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
depicting or describing Specified Sexual Activities or Specified
Anatomical Areas.
(12) Adult Novelty Business. An establishment or business engaged in the sale
of novelty items which:
(a) Restricts minors by reason of their age; or
(b) Has as its principal activity the sale of devices and other products
which:
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 712. Adult Entertainment 712-6
1. Stimulate human genitals or devices which are designed to create
sexual stimulation or excitement; or,
2. Are otherwise designed to stimulate or arouse sexual excitement
in any manner whatsoever, specifically including, but not limited
to, items such as inflatable dolls or similar devices; or,
3. Is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on Specified
Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(13) Adult Sauna. A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or which
provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of
pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing utilizing steam or hot air as a
cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual
Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(14) Adult Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility. A building or portion of building
used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose
of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a
cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent if such building or portion of a
building restricts minors by reason of age or if the service provided by the
steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(C) Specified Anatomical Areas. "Specified Anatomical Areas" are defined as
follows:
(1) Female. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals,
pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; and,
(2) Male. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
(D) Specified Sexual Activities. "Specified Sexual Activities" are defined as
follows:
(1) General Sexually Oriented Acts. Actual or simulated:
(a) Sexual intercourse;
(b) Oral copulation;
(c) Anal intercourse;
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 712. Adult Entertainment 712-7
(d) Oral-anal copulation;
(e) Bestiality;
(f) Direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals or the female breast;
(g) Flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship;
(h) The use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship;
or,
(i) Any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus,
buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia,
pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or
(2) Genitalia. Any clear depiction of human genitals in the state of sexual
stimulation, arousal or tumescence.
(3) Certain Uses and Activities. Use of human or animal ejaculation,
sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation.
(4) Touching. Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, public region,
buttocks, or female breast.
(5) Nature of Clothing, or Lack Thereof. Situations involving a person or
persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually
revealing costumes and who are engaged in activities involving the
flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any
such person.
(6) Animals. Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented
contact with an animal by a human being.
(7) Irrigation. Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal irrigation.
(8) Minor. An individual under eighteen (18) years of age.
712.030 Regulation.
(A)Location Restrictions. The restrictions set forth below shall apply to the
location of Adult Establishments.
(1) No Adult Establishment shall be operated or maintained except within the
C2 commercial zoning district pursuant to a Conditional Use Permit.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 712. Adult Entertainment 712-8
(2) No Adult Establishment shall be operated or maintained within 1000 feet
of any residential district, public or private school with students under the
age of 18, child day care center, or religious place of worship, or within
500 feet of another adult establishment. Distance shall be measured from
the closest point of the lot lines of subject uses.
(B) Sign Requirements. In addition to the requirements of sign regulations of the
Development Ordinance (and as subsequently amended), all businesses
regulated under this chapter shall comply with the following sign
requirements:
(1) All signs shall be wall signs.
(2) No merchandise or pictures of the products or entertainment on the
premises shall be displayed in window areas or in any area where they can
be viewed from a public street or sidewalk in front of the building.
(3) Window areas shall not be covered or made opaque in any way.
(4) No sign shall be placed in any window.
(5) A one square foot sign shall be placed on the door of the establishment to
state hours of operation and admittance is limited to adults only.
(6) Sign content shall be limited to text only. Text is limited to the name of
the business and its address.
(7) Where any provisions of this section conflict with Sign Ordinance, the
provision that is more stringent shall be applied.
(C)Physical Layout of Business. Any Adult Establishment having available for
customers, patrons or members, a booth, room or cubicle for the private
viewing of any Specified Anatomical Areas or Specified Sexual Activities
must comply with the following requirements:
(1) Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles
and public areas of the Adult Establishment and shall be unobstructed by
any door, lock or other control type devices.
(2) Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction
requirements:
(a) Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths,
rooms and cubicles and any non-public areas by a wall.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 712. Adult Entertainment 712-9
(b) Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so there is
an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying the area.
(c) All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extended from the
floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent,
smooth textured and easily cleanable.
(d) The floor must be light colored, non-absorbent, smooth textured and
easily cleanable.
(e) The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use shall
be a minimum of 10 foot candles at all times, as measured from the
floor.
(3) Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time.
No occupant of a booth, room or cubicle shall engage in any type of
sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth. No
individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth.
(D)License Required.
(1) From and after the effective date of this ordinance no Adult Establishment
shall be operated or maintained in the City of Shoreview without first
obtaining a license to operate issued by the City.
(2) A license may be issued for only one Adult Establishment located at a
fixed and certain place. Any person, partnership or corporation which
desires to operate more than one Adult Establishment shall have a separate
license for each such business.
(3) No license or interest in a license may be transferred to any person,
partnership, corporation, or other entity.
(4) Only one licensed adult establishment may be operated:
(a) Within a single building; or,
(b) Upon a single tax parcel.
(5) No liquor license shall be issued for an adult establishment.
(E) Application for License.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation desiring to secure a license shall
make application to the City Clerk.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 712. Adult Entertainment 712-10
(2) The application for a license shall be upon a form provided by the City.
(3) An applicant shall furnish the following information:
(a) Names, addresses and dates of birth of applicant and spouse if any.
(b) Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age.
(c) Address of the Adult Establishment to be operated by the applicant.
(d) The name of the City, County and State, if any, where the applicant
previously operated an Adult Establishment.
(e) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony involving
sexual conduct, the use or distribution of controlled substances or the
use or distribution of a dangerous weapon. If the answer to the last is
yes, state the jurisdiction in which the offense or offenses occurred.
The applicant may attach any explanation he or she deems
appropriate.
(f) If the applicant is a corporation (partnership/LLC/trust or other
business entity which is not a natural person), the name of the
corporation, the date and state of incorporation, the name and address
of the registered agent and the name and address of all shareholders
owning more than five percent of the stock in said corporation and all
officers and directors of the corporation.
(4) Within sixty days of receiving a completed application for a license, the
City Clerk shall submit the application to the City Council for approval or
denial.
(5) Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relative to the
investigation of the application shall constitute grounds for denial of the
license.
(F) Standards for Issuing Licenses.
(1) To receive a license to operate an Adult Establishment, an applicant must
meet the following standards:
(a) The applicant must be eighteen years of age or older.
(b) The applicant or his or her spouse has not been denied a similar
license by any other city, county or state within the preceding twelve
months or has not had such a license revoked or suspended within the
preceding twelve months.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 712. Adult Entertainment 712-11
(c) All current real estate taxes have been paid on the licensed premises.
(d) The licensed premises meets all the provisions of this Chapter as well
as all building and fire codes.
(e) The applicant or spouse has not been convicted of any felony
involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a
sexual nature or involving the use or distribution of a controlled
substance as defined by Minnesota laws, or the use or distribution of
a dangerous weapon. The fact that a conviction may be under appeal
shall not affect the disqualification of the applicant.
(f) All license and investigation fees required by this Chapter have been
paid.
(2) For the purposes of this section the term "applicant" shall include an
individual, all persons having a financial interest in a partnership or joint
venture, and, in the case of a corporation (partnership/LLC/trust or other
business entity which is not a natural person), all officers, directors and
stockholders required to be named in the application.
(3) All police, fire and building code investigations shall be completed
within twenty-one days after the date the completed application is filed
with the City Clerk. Upon a showing of good cause and reasonable
diligence on the part of an investigator, the City Council may extend the
investigation period for a reasonable time. Any investigation not
completed within the allotted time period shall be deemed to be waived.
(G)License Fees.
(1) The annual license fee to operate an Adult Establishment shall be
determined by the City Council by resolution.
(2) In addition to the annual license fee, an investigation fee in an amount
determined by the City Council by resolution shall be paid at the time of
the initial license application.
(3) All appropriate fees shall be submitted along with the application for a
new or renewal license.
(4) If an application is denied, the license fee, but not the investigation fee,
shall be refunded to the applicant.
(H)Display of License. The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous public
place in the Adult Establishment.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 712. Adult Entertainment 712-12
(I) Renewal of License.
(1) Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire at 12:00
midnight on December 31st of each year unless sooner revoked by the
City Council, and must be renewed before operation is allowed in the
following year.
(2) Applications for renewal must be submitted with the annual license fee to
the City Clerk not later than sixty days before the license expires.
(3) Renewal of a license may be issued by the City Clerk unless the Clerk
finds cause for not renewing the license in which case the Clerk shall
submit the renewal application to the City Council prior to the expiration
of the license.
(4) No license for which application for renewal has been timely made shall
be deemed to expire until the City Council has rendered its decision not to
renew a license. No application for renewal of a license may be denied by
the City Council until after the applicant has received ten days' written
notice of a public hearing before the Council. The applicant may appear
with or without counsel at that public meeting and may present such
evidence and witnesses, as he or she deems appropriate.
(J) Revocation of License.
(1) The City Council shall revoke a license for any of the following reasons:
(a) Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on
any initial or renewal application or material facts was omitted from
any such application.
(b) The operator or an employee of the operator violates any provisions of
this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted by the Council pursuant
to this Chapter, provided, however, that in the case of a first offense by
an operator where the conduct was solely that of an employee the
penalty shall not exceed a suspension of thirty days if the Council
finds that the operator had no actual or constructive knowledge of such
violation and could not by the exercise of due diligence have had such
actual or constructive knowledge.
(c) The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a license.
(d) Any cost or fee required to be paid by this ordinance is not paid.
(e) Any intoxicating liquor or cereal malt beverage is served or consumed
on the premises of the Adult Establishment.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 712. Adult Entertainment 712-13
(2) The Council, before revoking or suspending any license, shall give the
operator ten days written notice of the charges against him or her, and an
opportunity for a public hearing before the Council at which time the
operator may appear with or without counsel and may present such
evidence and witnesses as he or she deems appropriate.
(3) The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall automatically and
immediately revoke the license.
(4) Any operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to receive a
license for one year from the date of revocation. No location or premises
for which a license has been issued shall be used as an Adult
Establishment for six months from the date of revocation of the license.
(K)Responsibilities of Operator.
(1) Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's
negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator
shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the
operator committed the act or caused the omission.
(2) Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator for purposes of determining whether the operator's license shall
be revoked, suspended or renewed.
(3) No employee of an Adult Establishment shall allow any minor to loiter
around or to frequent the Adult Establishment or to allow any minor to
view Specified Anatomical Areas or Specified Sexual Activity at the
Adult Establishment.
(4) The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary manner at
all times.
(5) The operator shall maintain at least ten-foot candles of light in the public
portions of the establishment, including aisles, at all times. However, if a
lessor level of illumination in the aisles shall be necessary to enable a
patron to view the adult entertainment in a booth, room or cubicle
adjoining an aisle, a lesser amount of illumination may be maintained in
such aisles, provided, however, at no time shall there be less than 1 foot
candle of illumination in said aisles as measured from the floor.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 712. Adult Entertainment 712-14
(6) All business transactions shall occur within the licensed building.
(7) No employee shall have been convicted of any felony involving moral
turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature or
involving the use or distribution of a controlled substance as defined by
Minnesota laws, or the use or distribution of a dangerous weapon. The
fact that a conviction may be under appeal shall not affect the
disqualification of the employee.
(8) No minor may be employed by or work at an Adult Establishment.
The operator shall ensure and be responsible for the compliance of the
establishment and its patrons with the provisions of this Chapter.
(L) Exclusions. All public and private schools or churches located within the
City of Shoreview are exempt from obtaining a license hereunder when
instructing pupils in sex education as part of its curriculum.
(M) No Minors. No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted to be present in
an Adult Establishment.
(N)Hours of Operation. The hours of operation for any business licensed under
this Chapter shall be between 9:00 AM to midnight.
(O)Penalties.
(1) Any individual, partnership or corporation (partnership/LLC/trust or
other business entity which is not a natural person) who is found to have
violated the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall also be subject to revocation of any license.
(2) Each violation of this ordinance shall be considered a separate offense
and any violation continuing more than one day shall be considered a
separate offense.
(P) Enforcement. Members of the law enforcement agency providing service to
the City, the Fire Marshal, or designee, the Building Official or designee and
the Zoning Administrator or designee, shall have authority to enter any Adult
Establishment at all reasonable times to inspect the premises for the purposes
of enforcing this Chapter and all other applicable State laws, fire codes and
building codes.
712.035 Prohibited Uses. An Adult Use which is also classified as “obscene” by Minn.
Stat. Section 617.241, Subd.1A and/or as an “Adult Entertainment Establishment”
by Minn. Stat. Section 617.242, Subd. 1 is prohibited in the City of Shoreview.
Rev. Date
11/20/06
Ord. #808
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 712. Adult Entertainment 712-15
712.040 Means of Enforcement. The City may enforce any provision of this ordinance
by mandamus, injunction or any other appropriate civil remedy in any court of
competent jurisdiction. The ordinance may also be enforced by appropriate
criminal prosecution.
712.050 Separability. Every section, provision or part of this ordinance is declared
separable from every section, provision or part of this ordinance. If any section,
provision, or part of this ordinance is adjudged to be invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not invalidate any other section,
provision, or part of this ordinance.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 713. Filling Stations 713-1
713 Filling Stations
713.010 Definition. A gasoline filling station includes any place, building, pump or
device maintained or used for the main purpose of selling gasoline or other oils
for use in motor vehicles of any kind.
713.020 License Required. No person shall operate a gasoline filling station in the City
without obtaining a license to do so.
713.030 Restrictions. The City Council may impose any conditions or restrictions it
considers necessary or advisable in the public interest in the resolution granting a
license, including, but not limited to, conditions relating to the hours of operation,
the lighting of the station and the installation and maintenance of shrubbery,
fencing and grounds around the station. The City Council may also impose any
such conditions or restrictions by resolution at any time after the issuance of a
license. Failure to comply with such conditions or restrictions shall be a violation
of this code.
713.040 Maintenance and Inspection. Every gasoline filling station shall be maintained
and conducted in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with the laws
of the State of Minnesota. Every gasoline filling station shall be inspected at least
once every year by the Fire Chief to see that the premises are maintained in
compliance with state law and this code and to see that there is no dangerous
accumulation of waste or other combustible material on the premises. The Fire
Chief shall report to the City Council any violations or any dangerous conditions
or situations which he may discover during such inspections. Premises used as
gasoline stations must be kept clean, in good repair and free and clear of any
trash, rubbish, or debris.
713.050 Signs.
(A) Pump Signs. It shall be unlawful for any person to offer to sell at retail and
dispense or to sell at retail and dispense motor fuel into fuel supply tanks of
motor vehicles unless there is continuously and publicly posted and displayed
on each pump or other dispensing device the minimum octane rating and the
retail price per gallon including all Federal and State tax on the motor fuel
dispensed therefrom.
(1) On the computer mechanism of the dispensing device, which shall state
the minimum octane rating and the price per gallon including all Federal
and State tax and the total price of the quantity delivered, or
(2) On a separate sign not less than seven inches in height and eight inches in
width and not larger than twelve inches in height and width attached to the
dispensing device, which shall state clearly and legibly in figures the
minimum octane rating and in figures and fractions of uniform size and
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 713. Filling Stations 713-2
prominence the total price per gallon including the per gallon amount of
all tax to be collected in connection with the sale.
(B) Advertising Signs. Any signs or devices stating or relating to the minimum
octane rating or to the retail price of motor fuel or designed and calculated to
cause the public to believe that they state or relate to the minimum octane
rating or the retail price of motor fuel posted or displayed on or about
premises where motor fuel is sold at retail or on property adjacent thereto and
within view of any public highway, road, or street, shall clearly and legibly
state in figures the minimum octane rating and in figures and fractions of
uniform size and prominence the total price per gallon, including the per
gallon amount of all tax to be collected in connection with the sale. Nothing
contained in this section shall be deemed to prohibit any separate signs or
decals posted or displayed on or about premises where motor fuel is sold at
retail relating to premiums, trading stamps or other promotional devices, or
the per gallon amount of tax imposed upon the sale of motor fuel, provided
any sign pertaining to price of merchandise other than motor fuel clearly and
legibly states in letters of the same size as the figures and fractions stating
such price and the name or designation of such merchandise.
(C) Octane Rating. For the purposes of this section, octane rating shall be
determined in the manner described in the American Society for Testing and
Materials (ASTM) "Standard Specification for Gasoline," D439-71, or such
other manner as prescribed by the Director of Consumer Services by
regulations, adopted pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 714. Rental Licensing 714-1
Section 714 Rental Licensing
714.010 Purpose and Scope. It is the purpose of this Chapter to assure that rental housing
in the City is decent, safe and sanitary and is operated and maintained in
accordance with the City’s regulations. The implementation of a rental-licensing
program is a mechanism to ensure that rental housing will not become a nuisance
to the neighborhood; will not foster blight and deterioration; and/or will not create
a disincentive to reinvestment in the community. The operation of rental housing
entails certain responsibilities. Owners of rental housing are responsible to take
the reasonable necessary steps to ensure that the citizens who occupy rental
housing units may pursue the quiet enjoyment of the normal activities of life in
the surrounding area that are: safe, secure, and sanitary; free from crimes and
criminal activity, noise, nuisances or annoyances; free from unreasonable fears
about safety of persons and security of property; and suitable for raising children.
714.020 Definitions. For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms shall be defined
as set forth below.
(A) Agent. A person designated in writing by the Owner as the Owner’s
representative.
(B) Certificate of Compliance. A document issued by the City, stating that the
dwelling unit has been inspected and is in compliance with applicable
property maintenance codes and regulations.
(C) City Manager. The City Manager or the City Manager's designated agent.
(D) Dwelling. A building or one or more portions thereof occupied or intended
to be occupied for residential purposes; but not including rooms in motels,
hotels, nursing homes, boarding houses, tents and recreational vehicles.
(E) Dwelling Unit. A residential accommodation located within a dwelling that
includes permanently installed cooking and sanitation facilities, designed or
intended for use as living quarters for a single family.
(F) Dwelling Unit, General (“GDU”). A dwelling unit located in a building
containing dwelling units that may be detached, attached side-by-side,
stacked ceiling to floor and/or having a common entrance and do not have
common ownership.
(G) Dwelling Unit, Multi-Family (“MFD”). A community, complex or building
containing eleven (11) or more dwelling units that may be attached side-byside,
stacked ceiling to floor and/or have a common entrance and have a
common owner.
(H) Occupant. A person who lives or sleeps in a dwelling unit;
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 714. Rental Licensing 714-2
(I) Owner. A person who is the recorded or unrecorded owner of the dwelling
unit.
(J) Person. An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership or any
other legal entity.
(K) Rent. To permit occupancy of a dwelling unit by a person other than the
legal Owner thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten agreement, whether
or not a fee is required by the agreement.
(L) Rental Dwelling. A dwelling unit that has been rented, but excluding
accessory apartments and boarding rooms where the Owner of the dwelling
unit is an occupant.
714.030 General Licensing Provisions.
(A) License Required. No person shall rent a dwelling unit to another for
occupancy unless the City has issued either a GDU or MFD rental license
for the dwelling unit. The application for a dwelling unit rental license will
be reviewed by the City Manager in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter and other applicable regulations of the municipal code.
(B) License Application. The Owner of a dwelling unit may submit an
application for a GDU or a MFD rental license on forms provided by the
City Manager. A person who has been issued a GDU or a MFD rental
license shall give notice, in writing, to the City Manager, within five (5)
business days of any change in the information contained on the license
application.
(C) License Fees. Licensing fees shall be prescribed, from time to time, by
Council Resolution, and maintained on file in the office of the City
Manager. The required fees shall be submitted along with the application
for a new or renewal license. Applications for a renewal license submitted
after the license term expiration are subject to a penalty fee. Submitted
applications for a renewal license that have a delinquent utility account for
the dwelling are subject to a penalty fee.
(D) License Terms. All dwelling unit rental licenses shall expire on December
31st of each year except as otherwise provided herein or in cases of
suspension or revocation.
(E) Issuance of License. The City shall issue a dwelling unit rental license if
the dwelling unit is in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, and
the real estate taxes and municipal utility bills for the dwelling unit have
been paid. Real estate taxes will not be considered to be due and payable
Rev. Date:
4/18/05
Ord. #775
Rev. Date
2/10/10
Ord. #863
Rev. Date
6/17/13
Ord. #910
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 714. Rental Licensing 714-3
for the purposes of this Section while a proper and timely appeal of such
taxes is pending and is diligently pursued to completion by the licensee.
(F) Posting of License. MFD rental licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous
public corridor or hallway or lobby of the building in which the dwelling
unit is located if said area is present. The license shall be framed with a
clear covering.
(G) Renewal of License. A Licensee may continue to rent a dwelling unit after
the expiration date of the GDU or MFD rental license provided that the
Owner or its Agent has filed with the City Manager, on or before the
expiration date, the appropriate renewal license application and license fee.
(H) Transfer of License.
(1) GDU Rental License. A GDU rental license shall not be transferable
to another person or to another dwelling unit.
(2) MFD License. A MFD rental license is transferable for a fee, to any
person who has acquired legal ownership of the building in which the
dwelling unit is located. The transfer shall be effective for the
unexpired portion of the rental license period, provided that the
transfer application is filed with the City Manager prior to the actual
change of legal ownership and that the transferee is not disqualified
from holding the license due to prior revocation or suspension of a
license. Failure to submit the license transfer form and the transfer fee
may result in termination of the rental license.
(I) Resident Agent Required. Owners who do not reside within the counties of
Anoka, Carver, Chisago, Dakota, Hennepin, Ramsey, Scott, Washington
Counties (the “Metro Area”) must appoint an agent who does reside within
the Metropolitan area to be responsible for the maintenance of the dwelling
unit, receipt of service of notice of violation, receipt of compliance order,
institution or remedial action to effect such order, and acceptance of all
service of process pursuant to law, the City Manager shall be notified in
writing of any change in the identification of the agent within five (5)
business days of such change.
714.040 Conditions of License. Dwelling unit rental licenses shall be issued subject to
the following conditions:
(A) Conformance to Laws. No dwelling unit rental license shall be issued or
renewed unless the rental dwelling and its premises conform to all
applicable ordinances of the City, including but not limited to Section 211,
Property Maintenance, of the Municipal Code and Section 714.040(E),
Conduct on Licensed Premises of this Chapter. The City Manager is
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 714. Rental Licensing 714-4
authorized to conduct inspections of rental dwelling units to determine the
compliance of the applicable provisions of the municipal code including, but
not limited to, Chapter 211, Property Maintenance.
(B) Building Security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room
units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to
provide security for the occupants and property within.
(1) Main Entryways. Main entryways shall be equipped with a security
device designed to prevent entry to the building from unauthorized
individuals.
(2) Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or
housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a
deadbolt lock meeting specifications set forth herein. Such deadbolt
locks shall be operated only by the turning of a knob or a key and shall
have a lock throw of not less than 1-inch. For the purpose of this
section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt
lock. Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to
manufacturers specifications and maintained in good working order.
All deadbolt locks required by this section shall be designed and
installed in such a manner so as to be operable inside of the dwelling
unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit without the use of a key, tool,
combination thereof or any other special knowledge or effort.
(3) Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within 6 feet
(1828 mm) above ground level or a walking surface below that
provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit
that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash
locking devices, without a tool, key or any special knowledge.
(a) Replacement of existing windows shall conform to the egress
requirements of the Building Code.
(4) Basement Hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a
dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased
or let shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from
unauthorized entry.
(C) Inspections. No dwelling unit rental license shall be issued or renewed
unless the Owner of the rental unit(s) agrees in the application to permit
inspections of said unit. It shall be the responsibility of the operator or agent
to inform tenants of the scheduled inspections. The license holder and/or
designated resident agent shall be present for scheduled inspections. The
City reserves the right to perform or require additional inspections if deemed
necessary by the City or at the request of the tenant.
Rev. Date
6/17/13
Ord. #910
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 714. Rental Licensing 714-5
(1) Initial/Routine Inspections. Upon receipt of a complete application for
a dwelling unit rental license, an inspection of the premises shall be
conducted thereafter by the City Manager to ensure that the dwelling
unit and premises is in substantial compliance with all applicable City
regulations.
a. Prior to conducting an inspection, the City Manager shall mail
notification to the Owner or its Agent and provide reasonable
notice of the scheduled inspection date.
b. Licensed units be inspected by the City Manager in accordance
with the following:
1. General Dwelling Unit: All units every two years.
2. Multi-Family Dwelling Unit: One-third of all units annually.
(2) Complaint Activated Inspection. Inspections may be scheduled based
on complaints received by the City.
1. Written notification to inspect a property shall be mailed to the
owner and/or its agent of the property stating the proposed date
and time of the inspection. Such notification shall give a minimum
of seven (7) days advance notice and the reason for said inspection.
Notification shall be sent to the owner and/or its agent of the
property via registered and certified mail.
2. If the owner and/or agent of the property request a change in
proposed date of inspection, request must be made within (72) in
advance hours of proposed inspection date.
a. It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or manager to
notify the tenants of the property of the scheduled inspection.
b. Owner and/or its agent must be on site at the time of inspection
for entry and security purposes.
(D) Access to Premises. Every occupant of a rental dwelling unit shall, upon
reasonable notice, give the owner or agent and the City Manager or
authorized representative access to any part of the dwelling unit or its
associated properties at all reasonable times for the purpose of making
inspections, repairs, or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with
the provisions of this code. If any owner, occupant, or other person in
charge of the building refuses to permit free access and entry to the structure
or premises under his control for inspection pursuant to this Ordinance,
Rev. Date
5/1/06
Ord. #797
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 714. Rental Licensing 714-6
whereupon, the City Manager may seek a court order authorizing such
inspection.
(E) Tenant Register. The Owner or its Agent shall keep or cause to be kept, a
current register of occupancy for each dwelling unit which shall be made
available for viewing or copying by the City Manager as requested. Said
register shall provide, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) Address of dwelling unit;
(2) Number of Bedrooms in dwelling unit;
(3) Number of adults and children (under 18 years of age) currently
occupying the dwelling unit.
(F) Conduct on License Premises. Tenant leases for all licensed rental housing
units shall contain language applicable to occupants of the licensed premises
which prohibits the occupants from engaging in disorderly conduct. For
purposes of this section, an occupant will be considered disorderly if the
occupant violates:
(1) Section 209.010 relating to noise.
(2) Minnesota Statute 152.01 et seq. relating to the possession of
controlled substances.
(3) Minnesota Statutes 609.72 relating to disorderly conduct.
(4) Minnesota Statutes 340A.701, 340A.702 and 340A.703 relating to the
sale of intoxicating liquor.
(5) Minnesota Statutes 609.321, Subdivision 9, relating to prostitution or
acts of prostitution.
(6) Shoreview Code Section 604 relating to weapons.
(7) Minnesota Statutes 609.66 et seq. relating to the unlawful use or
possession of firearms.
(8) Minnesota Statute 609.2242 relating to assault.
(9) Minnesota Statute 260C, et seq. relating to contributing to the need for
protection or services or delinquency of a minor.
(10) Minnesota Statute 609.75 through 609.76 relating to gambling.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 714. Rental Licensing 714-7
(G) Fire Safety. The Owner or its Agent is responsible to comply with the
provisions of Section 212.030, Uniform Fire Code.
(H) Crime Free/Drug Free Lease Addendum. All tenant leases signed following
the enactment of this section, except for state-licensed residential facilities
and subject to all preemptory state and federal laws, shall contain the
following Crime Free Housing language or equivalent thereof in said lease
or in the form of an addendum:
(1) Resident, any members of the resident’s household or a guest or other
person under the resident’s control shall not engage in illegal activity,
including drug-related illegal activity, on or near the premises. “Drugrelated
illegal activity” means the illegal manufacture, sale,
distribution, purchase, use or possession with the intent to
manufacture, sell, distribute, or use of a controlled substance (as
defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substance Act (21 U.S.C.
802) or possession of drug paraphernalia.
(2) Resident, any members of the resident’s household or a guest or other
person under the resident’s control shall not engage in any act intended
to facilitate illegal activity, including drug-related illegal activity, on
or near the premises.
(3) Resident or members of the household will not permit the dwelling
unit to be used for, or to facilitate illegal activity, including drugrelated
illegal activity, regardless of whether the individual engaging
in such activity is a member of the household;
(4) Resident or members of the household shall not engage in the
manufacture, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs at any locations,
whether on or near the dwelling unit premises or otherwise.
(5) Resident, any member of the resident’s household or guest or other
person under the resident’s control shall not engage in acts of violence
or threats of violence, including but not limited to the unlawful
discharge of firearms, prostitution, criminal street gang activity,
intimidation, or any other breach of the rental agreement that
otherwise jeopardizes the health, safety and welfare of the landlord, his
agents or tenants.
(6) Violation of the above provisions shall be a material violation of the
lease and good cause for immediate termination of tenancy.
714.050 Compliance Order. If the initial, routine or complaint activated inspection or
tenant conduct incidents indicates that the Owner is not in compliance with the
Rev. Date
6/17/13
Ord. #910
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 714. Rental Licensing 714-8
Rental Licensing Regulations, the City shall send a compliance order to the
Owner.
(A) Content of Order. The Compliance Order shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Describe the location and nature of the violations of this code.
(3) Establish a reasonable time period for the correction of such violation.
(4) Be served upon the Owner or its Agent and/or the occupant, as the
case may require. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if
a copy thereof is:
(a) Personally served on Owner or its Agent;
(b) Sent by registered or certified mail to Owner’s or its Agent’s last
known address, or
(c) Upon failure to affect notice through (a) or (b) above, notice may
be posted at the main entrance to the dwelling unit.
(B) Tenant Conduct Violations. If the compliance order specifies tenant
conduct violations, the following additional regulations shall apply:
(1) Upon determination by the City Manager that a dwelling unit on the
licensed premises was used in a disorderly manner, as described in
Section 714.040(E) of this ordinance, the City Manager shall give
written notice via certified mail to the Owner or its Agent of the
violation as provided in Section 714.050(A)(4) and direct the
owner/licensee to take steps to prevent further violations. This shall
include a written report submitted by the licensee outlining the actions
taken, and proposed to be taken, by the Owner or its Agent to prevent
further disorderly use of the premises. This written report must be
submitted to the City Manager within five days of receipt of the notice
of disorderly use and must detail all actions taken by the licensee in
response to all notices of disorderly use of the premises.
(2) An action to deny, revoke, suspend, or not renew a license under this
section may be initiated by the City Manager who must give to the
Owner or its Agent written notice of a hearing before the City Council
to consider such denial, revocation, suspension or non-renewal per
Section 714.030(C) of this ordinance.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 714. Rental Licensing 714-9
714.060 License Suspension or Revocation. A dwelling unit rental license is subject to
suspension or revocation by the City Council for the reasons specified herein. Prior
to suspension or revocation, the Owner or its Agent shall be notified in writing at
least five (5) days prior to the City Council’s consideration of such action. In the
event that a dwelling unit rental license is suspended or revoked by the City
Council, it shall be unlawful for the Owner or its Agent to thereafter permit any
new occupancies for vacant, or thereafter vacated dwelling units, until the dwelling
unit rental license has been reinstated. Upon decision to suspend, revoke, deny or
not renew a license, no new application for the same facility will be accepted for a
period specified in the Council’s written decision, not exceeding one-year. Issuance
of a new dwelling unit rental license after suspension or revocation shall be made in
the manner provided for obtaining an initial license, except that the license fee shall
be equal to one hundred fifty (150) percent of the original license fee. A dwelling
unit rental license may be suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons:
(A) Failure of Owner or its Agent to operate or maintain the dwelling unit in
compliance with the provisions of the City’s regulations, including the failure
to correct deficiencies noted in a compliance order, within the time specified
in the notice.
(B) The license was procured by misrepresentation of material facts, by fraud, by
deceit or by bad faith.
(C) The Owner or its Agent made oral or written misrepresentations of material
facts in or accompanying the application.
(D) Failure to pay any license, penalty, reinspection or reinstatement fee required
by City Council Resolution.
(E) The Owner or its Agent has failed to comply with any condition set forth in
any other permits granted by the City.
(F) The activities of the Owner or its Agent create or have created a serious
danger to the public health, safety or welfare.
(G) The Owner or its Agent manage and operate the unit in a manner that permits
conditions that injure, annoy, or endanger the safety, health, morals, comfort
and repose of any member of the public.
(H) A determination that the licensed premises have been used in a disorderly
manner as described in Subdivision 714.040(E) shall be made upon
substantial evidence to support such a determination. It shall not be necessary
that criminal charges be brought in order to support a determination of
disorderly conduct, nor shall the fact of dismissal or acquittal of such a
criminal charge operate as a bar to adverse license action under this
subdivision.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 714. Rental Licensing 714-10
(I) Failure of the Owner or its Agent to allow access and entry to the structure or
premises under his control for inspection pursuant to this Ordinance.
714.070 Conduct Pending Eviction. No adverse license action shall be imposed where the
instance or disorderly use of a licensed premises occurred during the pendency of
eviction proceedings (unlawful detainer) or within thirty (30) days of notice given
by the Owner or its Agent to a tenant to vacate the premises, where the disorderly
use was related to conduct by the tenant or by other occupants or guests of the
tenant’s unit. Eviction proceedings shall not be a bar to adverse license action,
however, unless they are diligently pursued by the Owner or its Agent. Further, an
action to deny, revoke, suspend, or not renew a license based upon violations of this
section may be postponed or discontinued at any time it appears that the Owner or
its Agent has taken appropriate measures which will prevent further instances of
disorderly use.
714.080 Reinspection Fee. There is no fee for an initial inspection to determine the
existence of a housing maintenance code violation, nor any fee for the first
reinspection to determine compliance with an order to correct a code violation. A
fee shall be charged for all subsequent reinspections when the violation is not
corrected by the time specified in the written notice. The fee shall be established by
resolution from time to time of the City Council.
714.090 Posted to Prevent Occupancy. Whenever any dwelling or dwelling unit has not
obtained the required license, or has been denied a license or has had its dwelling
unit rental license suspended or revoked or is deemed unfit for human habitation, it
shall be posted with a placard by the City Manager to prevent further occupancy.
714.100 Failure to Obtain License. If it is determined that a rental dwelling unit is being
operated without a valid license, the City reserves the right to conduct an immediate
inspection with proper notice in accordance with 714.040(B) of this Section. It
shall be unlawful for an owner, designated agent or operator, after notice, to
continue operation of a rental dwelling unit without submitting an application for a
license under this Chapter, along with the necessary license fee. Once an
application has been made, it shall be unlawful for the owner, or his /her duly
authorized agent, to permit any new occupancies of vacant, or thereafter vacated
rental units until such time as the license is issued.
714.110 Liability. Neither the City nor its employees or agents shall be deemed liable for
damages to a third person or property by reason of this Chapter.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 715. Pawnbrokers 715-1
715 Pawnbrokers
715.010 Purpose and Scope. For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety,
morals and welfare, the Shoreview City Council has adopted regulations relating
to pawn transactions.
(A) The Shoreview City Council finds that pawnbroker’s services can provide
an opportunity for the commission of crimes and their concealment because
such businesses have the ability to receive and transfer stolen property easily
and quickly. Therefore, consumer protection regulations are warranted for
pawn transactions.
(B) The purpose of this chapter is to prevent pawn transactions from being used
to facilitate the commission of crimes; to assure that pawnbrokers comply
with basic consumer protection standards; and to help the City’s law
enforcement agency better regulate pawn transactions, decrease and stabilize
costs associated with the regulation of the pawn transactions, and increase
the identification of criminal activities associated with pawn transactions by
timely collection and sharing of pawn transaction information. This chapter
also implements and establishes the required use of the Automated Pawn
System (APS).
715.020 Definitions. For purposes of this chapter, the terms defined in this section shall
have the meanings ascribed to them.
(A) Interchange File Specification Format. The most current version of the City
of Minneapolis Automated Pawn System interchange file specification
format.
(B) Pawnbroker. Except as hereinafter provided, the term “Pawnbroker” means
a person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the
security of pledged goods left in pawn, or in the business of purchasing
tangible personal property to be left in pawn on the condition that it may be
redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period
of time. The following are exempt from the definition of “Pawnbroker”:
any bank regulated by the State of Minnesota, the comptroller of currency of
the United States, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the board of
governors of the Federal Reserve System, or any other federal or state
authority and their affiliates; any bank or savings association whose deposits
or accounts are eligible for insurance by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation or any successor to it and all affiliates of those banks and
savings associations; any state or federally chartered credit unions; and any
industrial loan and thrift company or regulated lender subject to licensing
and regulation by the Department of Commerce.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 715. Pawnbrokers 715-2
(C) Pawnshop. “Pawnshop” means the location at which or premises in which a
pawnbroker regularly conducts business.
(D) Pawn Transaction. “Pawn Transaction” means any loan on the security of
pledged goods or any purchase of pledged goods on the condition that the
pledged goods are left with the pawnbroker and may be redeemed or
repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time.
(E) Person. “Person” means an individual, partnership, corporation, limited
liability company, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity,
however organized.
(F) Pledged Goods. “Pledged Goods” mean tangible personal property other
than choses inaction, securities, bank drafts, or printed evidence of
indebtedness, that are purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually
delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in connection with a pawn
transaction.
715.030 License Required. No person may conduct, operate or engage in pawn
transactions without first obtaining a license. A separate license is required for
each pawnshop.
715.035 Completed Application. A completed application for a pawnbroker license shall
include the following:
(A) Application Form. The applicant shall complete an application form as
provided by the City Manager. If applicant is a natural person, the
application form must be signed and sworn to by the person; if applicant is a
corporation, the application must be signed and sworn into by an agent of
the corporation authorized to sign; and, if the applicant is a partnership, the
application must signed by a partner.
(B) License Fee. A license fee, as approved by the Shoreview City Council
Resolution, shall be submitted with the application and is non-refundable.
(C) Investigation Fee. An investigation fee, as approved by the Shoreview City
Council Resolution, shall be submitted with the application and is nonrefundable.
(D) Bond. A bond with corporate surety, cash, or a United States government
bond in the amount of $10,000.00 shall be submitted with the application.
The bond must be conditioned on the licensee obeying the laws and
ordinances governing the licensed business and paying all fees, taxes,
penalties and other charges associated with the business. The bond must
provide that it is forfeited to the City upon a violation of law or ordinance.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 715. Pawnbrokers 715-3
715.040 Investigation. Prior to submittal of the initial or the renewal pawnbroker license
application to the Shoreview City Council for review, the City’s law enforcement
agency shall conduct a preliminary background and financial investigation of the
applicant. Any person having a beneficial interest in the pawnbroker license must
be investigated. The City’s law enforcement agency must verify the facts stated
in the application and must report all convictions of state, federal or municipal
regulations involving the applicant, interested persons or the licensed premises,
while under the applicant’s proprietorship.
715.041 New Manager. When a licensee places a manager in charge of a business, or if
the named manager in charge of a licensed business changes, the licensee must
complete and submit the appropriate application on forms as provided by the City
Manager within fourteen (14) days. The application must include all appropriate
information as required.
715.045 Persons Ineligible for License. A pawnbroker license will not be issued to:
(A) A person not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien;
(B) A person under 18 years of age;
(C) A person who, within five years of the license application date, has been
convicted of receiving stolen property, sale of stolen property or a controlled
substance, burglary, robbery, damage or trespass to property, felony theft,
larceny, fraud, or any law or ordinance regulating the business of
pawnbroker.
(D) A person who, within five years of the license application date, had a
pawnbroker license revoked; or
(E) A person whom, the City Council determines is not of good moral character
and repute.
715.050 Places Ineligible for License. A pawnbroker license will not be issued or
renewed for a pawnshop:
(A) If taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the City of Shoreview, or
the County of Ramsey or the State of Minnesota on the pawnshop or on the
property on which the pawnshop is located are delinquent and unpaid;
(B) If applicant's present license was issued conditioned upon the applicant
making specified improvements to the pawnshop or the property of the
licensed premises which improvements have not been completed; or
(C) If the pawnshop is located within 1000 feet of any residential district, public
or private school with students under the age of 18, child day care center or
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 715. Pawnbrokers 715-4
religious place of worship; or is within 500 feet of another pawn shop.
Distances shall be measured from the closest point of the lot lines of the
subject uses.
715.055 License Restrictions. The pawnshop shall comply with the following
regulations:
(A) The pawnshop shall be closed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m.
(B) The pawnshop shall comply with all applicable zoning, fire, health and
building codes.
(C) No pawnshop shall be operated or maintained except within the C2, General
Commercial, Zoning District pursuant to a conditional use permit.
(D) A license issued authorizes the licensee to conduct pawn transactions only at
the location designated in the license.
(E) No off-site storage of pledged items is permitted.
(F) Pawnbrokers shall pay billable transaction fees.
715.060 City Council Review. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a completed
application for a pawnbroker license and the investigation report from the City’s
law enforcement agency, the City Clerk shall submit the application to the City
Council for review at a public hearing. City Council may extend the review
period if additional information is required. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
City Council must approve the application and issue the license; deny the
application; or approve the application and issue the license subject to conditions.
715.065 Expiration of License. All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire as of
midnight on December 31st of the year issued.
715.070 License Renewal. An application for renewal of an existing license shall be
made to the City Clerk at least 30, but no more than 60, days prior to the
expiration date of the license. Applications for renewal shall be submitted to the
City Council in the same manner as for a new license.
715.080 Restrictions on License Transfer. A pawnbroker’s license shall be issued to the
applicant only and is not transferable to another person or place.
715.090 Records. A pawnbroker, at the time of receipt of an item, must immediately
record in English, in ink or other indelible medium a pawn ticket in a book or
other hard copy, the following information:
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 715. Pawnbrokers 715-5
(A) A completely accurate description of the item including, but not limited to,
any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand
name, or other identifying mark on such item;
(B) A color photograph or color video recording of:
i. Each customer involved in a billable transaction.
ii. Each item pawned or sold that does not have a unique serial or
identification number permanently affixed or engraved.
iii. Individuals and items photographed or video taped must be accurately
depicted and be available in digital format.
(C) the purchase price;
(D) date, time and place of receipt;
(E) name, address, residence telephone number, and date of birth of the person
from whom the item was received;
(F) a description of the person from whom the item was received including
approximate height, sex and race;
(G) the identification number from any of the forms of identification of the seller:
i. valid picture driver's license; or
ii. a state issued photo identification card.
(H) the books as well as the goods received must be open for inspection by the
appropriate law enforcement agency during normal business hours. Records
required by this subsection must be stored and maintained by the licensee for
a period of at least three years.
(I) the maturity date of the pawn transaction and the amount due, and the monthly
and annual interest rates including all pawn fees and charges.
715.100 Records Retention.
(A) The pledgor or seller shall sign a pawn ticket and receive an exact copy
of the pawn ticket.
(B) The pawnbroker shall maintain on the premises a record of all transactions of
pledged or purchased goods for a period of three years. These records shall be
a correct copy of the entries made of the pawn transactions. A pawnbroker
shall upon request provide to the appropriate law enforcement agency a
complete and accurate record of pawn transactions. The pawnbroker shall
provide the records in a computerized format that complies with the
interchange file specification format.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 715. Pawnbrokers 715-6
715.110 Daily Reports. For the following items, regardless of resale price, pawnbroker
must provide records in a format approved by the appropriate law enforcement
agency, and send daily electronically to the appropriate law enforcement agency,
a legible description, including photographs or video tape of the goods received
during the preceding day, together with the time received and a description of the
person from whom the goods were received:
(A) items with a serial number identification, or "operation identification" symbol;
(B) cameras;
(C) electronic audio or video equipment;
(D) precious jewelry or gems, and precious metals;
(E) artist-signed or artist-attributed works of art;
(F) items not included in the above, except furniture and kitchen or laundry
appliances.
715.120 Stolen Goods. A licensed pawnbroker must report immediately to the City’s law
enforcement agency any article pledged or received, or sought to be pledged or
received, if the licensee has reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost.
715.130 Holding. An item received by a pawnbroker, for which a report to the City’s law
enforcement agency is required, may not be sold or otherwise transferred for a
period of sixty (60) days after the date of such report to the City’s law
enforcement agency. Pawned goods will be subject to a sixty (60) day
redemption period provided that a person may redeem an item pawned seventytwo
(72) hours after the item was received on deposit, excluding Sundays and
legal holidays.
715.140 Redemption Period. A person who pledges an item shall have at least sixty (60)
days to redeem the item before it may be sold.
715.150 Receipt. A pawnbroker must provide a receipt to the seller or consignor of any
items which includes:
(A) the address and phone number of the business;
(B) the date;
(C) a description of the item purchased; and
(D) the purchaser's signature.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 715. Pawnbrokers 715-7
715.160 Billable Transaction Fee. The billable transaction fee shall be established by
City Council Resolution. The billable transaction fee shall reflect the City’s cost
of processing transactions and other related regulatory expenses through the
Automated Pawn System.
715.170 Law Enforcement Agency. If the City’s law enforcement agency notifies a
pawnbroker not to sell an item, the item may not be sold or removed from the
pawnshop until authorized to be released by the City’s law enforcement agency.
715.180 Weapons. A licensed pawnbroker may not receive as a pledge any legal or
weapons or firearms.
715.190 Inspections. The City’s law enforcement agency or any properly designated
employee of the City, County or the State of Minnesota may enter, inspect and
search the pawnshop during business hours, without a warrant.
715.200 County License. Pawnbrokers dealing in precious metals and gems must be
licensed by Ramsey County.
715.210 Prohibited Acts.
(A)A minor may not sell or consign, or attempt to sell or consign, goods with a
pawnbroker. A pawnbroker may not receive pledged goods from a minor.
(B) A pawnbroker may not receive any goods from a person of unsound mind or
from an intoxicated person.
(C) A pawnbroker may not receive pledged goods unless the seller presents
identification in the form of a driver's license or other pictured identification.
(D)A pawnbroker may not receive pledged goods that possess an inaccurate,
altered or obliterated serial number or operation identification number or any
item of property that has had its serial number removed.
(E) A pawnbroker shall not lend money on a pledge at a rate of interest above that
allowed by law.
(F) A pawnbroker shall not knowingly posses stolen goods.
(G)A pawnbroker shall not engage in any transaction involving a motor vehicle as
defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 168.011.
(H)No person shall pledge property not their own; nor shall any person pledge the
property of another, whether with permission or without; nor shall any person
pledge any property in which another has a security interest.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 700. Licensing
Section 715. Pawnbrokers 715-8
(I) No gambling shall be permitted on the licensed premises.
715.220 License Denial, Suspension, or Revocation. A pawnbroker’s license may be
denied, suspended, or revoked by the City Council after a public hearing where
the licensee is granted the opportunity to be heard, for one or more of the
following reasons:
(A) the operation of a pawnshop is in conflict with any provision of the City Code;
(B) the operation of the pawnshop is in conflict with any health, building, building
maintenance, zoning, or any other provision of this Chapter or other
applicable law;
(C) the licensee has failed to comply any of the provisions of this Chapter or any
statute, rule or ordinance pertaining to pawn transactions;
(D) the licensee has committed fraud, misrepresentation or bribery in securing the
pawnbroker’s license;
(E) the licensee has committed fraud, misrepresentation or made false statements
in the course of a pawn transaction; and
(F) the licensee has been convicted of a violation of any state or federal law
relating to theft, damage, or trespass to property, or the sale of a controlled
substance or stolen goods.
715.225 Notice to Law Enforcement Agency. The City shall notify its law enforcement
agency when a license application has been denied; or when a license has expired
or been surrendered, suspended, or revoked.
715.230 Penalties. Violation of the provisions of this Chapter is a misdemeanor.
715.240 Adoption of Pawnbroker Regulation Act. The provisions of the Pawnbroker
Regulation Act, codified as Minn. Stat. §325J are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein and made a part of this Chapter as completely as if set out in
full. Where there is a conflict between the provisions of this Chapter and the
provisions of Minnesota Statutes 325J, the more restrictive provisions shall
control.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 800. Liquor and Beer
Section 801. Licensing 801- 1
800 Liquor and Beer
801 Licensing
801.010 Definitions.
(1) Bona Fide Club. "Bona fide club" means a club organized for social or business
purposes, for intellectual improvement, or for the promotion of sports, where the
serving of 3.2% malt liquor is incidental to and not the main purpose of the club.
(2) Club. "Club" means any corporation duly organized under the laws of the State of
Minnesota for civic, fraternal, social or business purposes, for intellectual
improvement, or for the promotion of sports; or a congressionally chartered
veterans' organization if it meets the following conditions:
(a) It shall have more than fifty members.
(b) For more than one year, it shall have owned, hired, or leased a building or space
in a building of such extent and character as may be suitable and adequate for
the reasonable and comfortable accommodation of its members.
(c) Its affairs and management shall be conducted by a Board of Directors,
Executive Committee, or other similar body chosen by the members at a meeting
held for that purpose.
(d) None of its members, officers, agents or employees shall be paid directly or
indirectly any compensation by way of profit from the distribution or sale of
beverages to the members of the club, or to its guests, beyond the amount of
such reasonable salary or wages as may be fixed and voted each year by the
governing body of the club.
(3) Exclusive Liquor Store. "Exclusive liquor store" means an establishment under the
control of an individual owner or manager which is used exclusively for the retail
sale of intoxicating liquor off-sale and, as an incident thereof, may also sell tobacco
products, soft drinks, and various confections for use off of the premises.
(4) Intoxicating Liquor. "Intoxicating liquor" means ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented,
spirituous, vinous, and malt beverages containing in excess of 3.2 percent of alcohol
by weight.
(5)Intoxicating Malt Liquor. "Intoxicating Malt Liquor" means any beer, ale, or other
beverage made from malt by fermentation and containing more than 3.2% of alcohol
by weight.
(6) Hotel. "Hotel" means an establishment where food and lodging are regularly
furnished to transients and which has:
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 800. Liquor and Beer
Section 801. Licensing 801- 2
(a) A dining room serving the general public at tables and having facilities for
seating thirty (30) guests at one time; and
(b) At least thirty (30) guest rooms.
(7) License Year. "License year" means the period from July 1 through and including
June 30.
(8) Manufacturer. "Manufacturer" means any person who, by any process of
manufacture, fermenting, brewing, distilling, refining, rectifying, blending, or by the
combination of different materials, prepares or produces intoxicating or 3.2% malt
liquors for sale.
(9) 3.2% Malt Liquor. "3.2% malt liquor" means any fermented, potable malt beverage
containing not less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume or more than 3.2
percent alcohol by weight.
(10) On-Sale. "On-sale" means the sale of intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor by the
glass or by the drink for consumption on the premises only.
(11) Off-Sale. "Off-sale" means the sale of intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in the
original package for consumption off or away from the premises where sold.
(12) Package or Original Package. "Package or original package" means any corked or
sealed container or receptacle holding intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor.
(13) Restaurant. "Restaurant" means any establishment, other than a hotel, having
appropriate facilities for the serving of meals to not less than forty(40) guests at one
time if applying for an intoxicating on-sale license, a 3.2 on-sale license or wine onsale
license. Except as hereinafter provided, an establishment shall satisfy the
following criteria in order to qualify as a restaurant:
(a) Meals shall be regularly furnished at tables to the general public, in
consideration of payment therefor.
(b) An adequate staff shall be employed to provide the usual and suitable services to
its guests. This criteria shall not apply to golf course clubhouses.
(c) The principal part of the business shall be the serving of foods. This criteria
shall not apply to golf course clubhouses.
(d) An individual must be designated as the person who will be responsible for the
management of the restaurant.
Rev. Date
7/9/07
Ord. #818
Rev. Date
12/21/15
Ord. 937
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 800. Liquor and Beer
Section 801. Licensing 801- 3
(14) Sale, Sell and Sold. "Sale, sell and sold" mean all barters, and all manners or means
of furnishing intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor.
(15) Wholesale. "Wholesale" means any sale for purposes of resale.
(16) Wholesaler. "Wholesaler" means any person engaged in the business of selling
intoxicating liquor from stock maintained in a warehouse within the State of
Minnesota to retail dealers.
801.020 License Required. No person, except wholesalers or manufacturers, to the extent
authorized by law, may directly or indirectly, on any pretense, or by any device, sell,
barter, keep for sale or otherwise dispose of intoxicating liquor, as part of a commercial
transaction, unless licensed as provided herein.
801.030 Types and Numbers of Liquor Licenses. A person may make application for the
following types of liquor licenses:
(A) Intoxicating Liquor On-Sale. This license shall be issued only to hotels, restaurants,
and certain clubs as hereinafter provided. No more than ten intoxicating liquor onsale
licenses may be issued at any time to hotels and restaurants. Additional
intoxicating liquor on-sale licenses may be granted if approved by the Minnesota
Commissioner of Public Safety, to incorporate congressionally chartered veterans'
organizations which have been in existence for ten years or to clubs which have
been in existence for fifteen years.
(B) Intoxicating Liquor On-Sale Wine. This license shall only be issued to hotels,
restaurants, and certain clubs as hereinafter provided. The intoxicating liquor onsale
wine license shall permit the sale of wine not exceeding fourteen percent
alcohol by volume for consumption on the licensed premises and only in
conjunction with the sale of food; and shall permit a licensee who also has a 3.2%
malt liquor on-sale license and whose gross receipts are at least 60% attributable to
the sale of food, to sell intoxicating malt liquor for consumption on the premises
only in conjunction with the sale of food.
(C) Intoxicating Liquor Off-Sale. This license shall be issued only to exclusive liquor
stores. No more than 1 license per 5,000 people can be issued at any one time.
(D) Intoxicating Liquor Sunday Sales. This license may be issued to hotels, restaurants,
or clubs which have been issued intoxicating liquor on-sale licenses or to
establishments which have been issued intoxicating liquor on-sale wine licenses. It
shall allow hotels, restaurants and clubs to serve intoxicating liquor in conjunction
with the serving of food. It shall allow establishments which have been issued
intoxicating liquor on-sale wine licenses to serve wine not exceeding fourteen
percent alcohol by volume in conjunction with the serving of food.
Rev. Date
5/1/06
Ord. #795
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 800. Liquor and Beer
Section 801. Licensing 801- 4
(E) 3.2% Malt Liquor On-Sale License. This license shall only be issued to restaurants,
hotels, and to golf course clubhouses. A license issued to a golf course clubhouse
shall also allow the sale of 3.2% malt liquor on the golf course.
(F) 3.2% Malt Liquor Off-Sale License. This license shall be issued to exclusive liquor
stores and retail food stores.
(G) 3.2% Malt Liquor Special Events License. A special event 3.2% license shall
permit the retail sale of 3.2% malt liquor for consumption on the premises and
during the time of the special event. A special event license may be issued to a club
or charitable, religious, or non-profit organization or to an organization contributing
all of the profits of the sale of 3.2% malt liquor to a charity. The license shall
specify the date, time, place and premises of the special event. A special event 3.2%
malt liquor license is not transferable.
(H) Intoxicating Liquor Banquet. The City may authorize the holder of an intoxicating
liquor on sale license issued by the City of Shoreview or a municipality adjacent to
the City of Shoreview and will allow the licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor at
any convention, banquet, conference, meeting, or social affair conducted on the
premises of a sports, convention or cultural facility owned by the City of Shoreview.
The licensee must be engaged to dispense intoxicating liquor at an event held by a
person or organization permitted to use the premises and may dispense intoxicating
liquor only to persons attending the event. The licensee may not dispense
intoxicating liquor to any person attending or participating in an amateur athletic
event held on the premises.
(I) Intoxicating Liquor Special Event. This license shall only be issued to a club,
charitable, religious, or other non-profit organization which has been in existence
for at least three (3) years. The license shall permit the licensee to sell intoxicating
liquor on sale in connection with a social event sponsored by the licensee within the
City of Shoreview. The license may authorize the sale of intoxicating liquor on sale
for not more than three consecutive days and may authorize the sale of intoxicating
liquor on sale on premises other than premises the licensee owns or permanently
occupies. The license may provide that the licensee may contract for intoxicating
liquor catering services with the holder of a full year on-sale intoxicating liquor
license issued by any municipality within the State of Minnesota. Licenses issued
under this section are not valid unless first approved by the Commissioner of Public
Safety.
801.040 License Application. Any person requesting an intoxicating or 3.2% malt liquor
license shall submit the following materials to the City Manager at the time of a license
application. The license application shall not be considered complete unless all of the
following materials have been submitted:
(A) Except as herein provided, all liquor license applications except those relating to
intoxicating liquor on sale licenses, shall be submitted with an investigation fee of
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 800. Liquor and Beer
Section 801. Licensing 801- 5
$200.00. If the application is for an intoxicating liquor on-sale license, the
minimum investigation fee shall be $200.00 and the maximum investigation fee
shall be based upon the City's investigative costs not to exceed $500.00 if the
investigation is conducted within the State of Minnesota or not to exceed $10,000.00
if all or a portion of the investigation is conducted outside of the State of Minnesota.
Upon request, the City Council may waive all or a portion of the investigation fee if
the application is for a 3.2% malt liquor special event license, an intoxicating liquor
banquet license, or an intoxicating liquor special event license.
(B) A completed and verified license application form as prescribed by the Minnesota
Commissioner of Public Safety.
(C) A completed and verified supplemental application form as prescribed by the City
Manager which shall include the following:
(1) Applicant's name, address, occupation and telephone number. If applicant is a
corporation, the names, addresses, occupations and telephone numbers of the
stockholders and officers of the corporation shall be submitted.
(2) A legal description and post office address of the property on which liquor will
be sold.
(3) A written description of the type of business which will be conducted, services
to be offered, and items to be sold on the licensed premises.
(D) A drawing to scale showing the floor plan of the premises proposed for licensing
and its relationship to the boundaries of the property on which the premises is
located.
(E)The full amount of the annual license fee, as provided herein, for the type of liquor
license being requested, or a portion thereof prorated on a monthly basis (including
each month or fraction thereof as a whole month) when the application is made
during the license year. The annual license fee or prorated portion thereof shall be
refunded if the application is rejected.
(F) Except as hereinafter provided, when the application is for an intoxicating liquor onsale
license, an intoxicating liquor on-sale wine license, or an intoxicating liquor
off-sale license, or a 3.2% malt liquor special event license, the applicant shall
provide a liability insurance policy providing coverage for damages arising out of
the sale of intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor.
(1) The liability insurance policy shall provide the following minimum coverages:
(a) $50,000 due to bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence, and,
subject to the limit for one person, in the amount of $100,000 due to bodily
injury to two or more persons in any one occurrence, and in the amount of
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 800. Liquor and Beer
Section 801. Licensing 801- 6
$10,000 due to injury to or destruction of property of others in any one
occurrence; and
(b) $50,000 for loss of means of support of any one person in any one
occurrence, and, subject to the limit for one person, $100,000 for loss of
means of support of two or more persons in any one occurrence.
(c) $50,000 for other pecuniary loss of any one person in any one occurrence,
and $100,000 for other pecuniary loss of two or more persons in any one
occurrence.
(2) The liability insurance policy shall provide that it may not be cancelled for any
cause, either by the insured or by the insurance company without first giving ten
days' notice to the City, addressed to the City Manager, 4600 North Victoria
Street, Shoreview, Minnesota 55126.
(3) The operation of an intoxicating liquor business without having on file at all
times a valid liability insurance policy shall be grounds for immediate
revocation of the license.
(4) The liability insurance provisions of 801.040(I) shall not apply to an applicant
for a 3.2% malt liquor on-sale license, a 3.2% malt liquor off-sale license, a
3.2% malt liquor special event license, or an intoxicating liquor on-sale wine
license where such licensees have sales of less than $10,000 of 3.2% malt liquor
or wine per license year. Such licensees shall provide the City with a verified
statement indicating the total dollar amount of 3.2% malt liquor or wine sales in
the previous license year.
801.050 License Fees. Annual liquor license fees shall be as prescribed, from time to time, by
City Council resolution on file with the City Manager. The annual fee for On-Sale
Intoxicating Liquor may be reduced as designated by such resolution if the applicant
provides evidence satisfactory to the City Manager which indicates that applicant has
adopted and is enforcing an alcoholic awareness training program for applicant and
applicant's employees.
801.060 Investigation. Upon receipt of a completed application, the City Manager shall
investigate all facts set out in the application and obtain a report from the Ramsey
County Sheriff's Department.
801.070 Public Hearing. Except as provided herein, applications for intoxicating or 3.2% malt
liquor licenses shall be reviewed by the City Council at a public hearing which shall be
preceded by ten (10) days published notice and ten (10) days mailed notice to all record
owners of property within 350 feet of the boundaries of the property on which the
licensed premises will be located. Liquor license renewals for the same premises, liquor
license transfers from one entity or person to another at the same premises, new liquor
license applications for an existing licensed premises; or applications for intoxicating
Ord. 872
Rev. 9/7/10
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 800. Liquor and Beer
Section 801. Licensing 801- 7
liquor banquet licenses, intoxicating liquor special event licenses, or non-intoxicating
liquor special event licenses shall not be subject to public hearing requirements unless
directed by the City Council.
801.080 Granting of License. All liquor licenses, except 3.2% malt liquor special event
licenses, shall expire on the 30th day of June following the date of issuance and shall be
issued for a period of one year unless a portion of the license year has elapsed when the
application is submitted, in which event, the license shall be issued for the remainder of
the license year. A 3.2% malt liquor special event license shall expire according to its
terms.
801.090 Notice to Commissioner of Public Safety. Within ten days after the issuance of an
intoxicating liquor on-sale license, the City Manager shall submit to the Commissioner
of Public Safety the full name and address of each person granted a license, the
tradename of the business, the effective license date, and the date of expiration. During
the license year, the City Manager shall submit to the Commissioner of Public Safety all
information received regarding licensee's change of address, license transfer or the
cancellation or revocation of an intoxicating on-sale liquor license.
801.100 Transfer of License. No license may be transferred to another person or to another
place without consent of the City Council. If licensee is a corporation, the transfer of
corporate stock shall be considered a transfer from person to person. Application for
transfer shall be made on forms prescribed by the City Manager and shall be submitted
with a non-refundable transfer fee of $200. Upon receipt of a completed transfer
application, the City Manager shall investigate all facts set forth in the application and
shall obtain a recommendation from the Ramsey County Sheriff's Department before
submitting the application to the City Council for review.
If the application is for the transfer of a liquor license to another place, the applicant
shall also submit a currently certified licensed abstractor's certificate containing the
names and post office addresses of all record property owners within three hundred fifty
feet of the boundaries of the lot to which the transfer is proposed. Application for
transfer to another place shall be reviewed by the City Council at a public hearing
preceded by ten days' published notice and ten days' mailed notice to all record property
owners within three hundred fifty feet of the boundaries of the property on which the
building is located or is proposed to be located and to which the transfer is proposed.
801.110 License Renewals. Applications for renewal of an existing liquor license shall be filed
with the City Manager along with the annual license fee on or before June 1 of each
license year.
801.120 License Eligibility Persons.
(A) No liquor license shall be issued to any person:
(1) Who is under twenty one years of age.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 800. Liquor and Beer
Section 801. Licensing 801- 8
(2) Who is not of good moral character or repute.
(3) Who, within five years prior to the application for such license, has been
convicted of a willful violation of any Federal, State, or local law or regulation
relating to the manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession for sale or
distribution, of intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor, or whose liquor license
has been revoked for a willful violation of such laws or regulations.
(4) Who would have a direct or indirect financial interest in more than two other
establishments in the City to which a liquor license has been issued.
(5) Who, in the case of a 3.2% malt liquor license, is not the proprietor of an
establishment for which the 3.2% malt liquor license is being requested.
(B) No license for the sale of 3.2% malt liquor shall be issued to any person who is also
the owner and holder of a Federal retail liquor dealers' special tax stamp for the sale
of intoxicating liquor at any place unless there has also been issued to such person a
license to sell intoxicating liquor pursuant to the laws of the State of Minnesota at
such place.
(C) No manufacturer or wholesaler shall directly or indirectly own or control or have
any financial interest in any retail business selling intoxicating liquor.
(D) No license shall be issued to any person with connection with the premises of
another to whom no license could be issued under the provisions of this chapter;
provided, that this provision shall not prevent the granting of a license to a proper
lessee by reason of the fact that he shall lease the premises of a minor or a person
who has been convicted of a crime other than the violation of this chapter or the
Minnesota State Intoxicating Liquor Act.
801.130 License Eligibility - Premises.
(A) No license shall be issued for a premise upon which taxes, assessments or other
financial claims of the City are delinquent and unpaid.
(B) Except as hereinafter provided, intoxicating liquor licenses shall only be issued for
premises located within a commercially zoned district. An intoxicating liquor onsale
license and an intoxicating liquor Sunday sale license may be issued to
congressionally chartered veterans' organizations for premises located in R-2 zoning
districts.
(C) No liquor license shall be effective beyond the compact and contiguous space
identified within the license application as the licensed premises.
801.140 Conditions of License.
Rev. Date
12/21/15
Ord. 937
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 800. Liquor and Beer
Section 801. Licensing 801- 9
(A) Posting. All liquor licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises
for which they have been issued.
(B) Licensee Responsibility. Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of his
place of business and for conditions of sobriety and order therein.
(C) Gambling. No licensee shall keep, possess, or operate, or permit the keeping,
possession, or operation of, on the licensed premises, or in any room adjoining the
licensed premises, any gambling device or apparatus, nor permit any gambling
therein, unless an appropriate license has been obtained.
(D) Prostitution. No licensee shall permit the licensed premises or any room in the
licensed premises, or in any adjoining building, directly or indirectly under its
control to be used as a resort for prostitutes or other disorderly persons.
(E) Underaged Persons.
(1) Employment. No person under eighteen years of age shall be employed in any
rooms constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors are sold on-sale at
retail, except that persons under eighteen years of age may be employed as
musicians or to perform the duties of a bus boy or dishwashing services in places
defined as a restaurant or hotel serving food and rooms in which intoxicating
liquors are sold on-sale at retail.
(2) Consumption. No person, except a licensed pharmacist, shall sell, give, bargain,
furnish, deliver, or dispose of in any manner either directly or indirectly any
intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor to any person under twenty one years of
age. No licensee or his employee shall permit any person under twenty one
years of age to consume any intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor on the
licensed premises.
(F) Intoxicated Persons. No person shall sell, give, bargain, furnish, deliver, or dispose
of in any manner either directly or indirectly any intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt
liquor to any obviously intoxicated person.
(G) Tampering. No licensee shall directly or through an agent, employee, or other
person, dilute or in any manner tamper with the contents of any original package or
bottle so as to change its composition or alcoholic content while in the original
package or bottle.
(H) Off-Sale. No intoxicating liquor off-sale licensee shall sell intoxicating liquor "onsale"
or permit the consumption of any liquor on the licensed premises.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 800. Liquor and Beer
Section 801. Licensing 801- 10
(I) Ethyl Alcohol. No liquor licensee shall keep ethyl alcohol or neutral spirits on the
licensed premises, or permit their use on the licensed premises, either alone or
mixed with any other beverage.
(J) Zoning. Any person accepting a liquor license automatically waives any rights or
benefits which might otherwise have accrued under any zoning law whereby the use
of land may be continued after the enactment of such a zoning law under which has
become non-conforming.
(K) Public Sale. All liquor sales shall be made in full view of the public.
801.150 Hours.
(A) Intoxicating Liquor On-Sale. Accept as hereinafter provided, no sale of intoxicating
liquor for consumption on the licensed premises may be made during the following
hours:
(1) Between 1 a.m. and 8 a.m. on the days of Monday through Saturday.
(2) After 1 a.m. on Sunday.
(3) Between 8 p.m. on December 24 and 8 a.m. on December 25.
Licensees who have been issued Intoxicating Liquor Sunday Sale licenses may sell
the type of intoxicating liquor authorized by such license, for consumption on the
premises in connection with the sale of food, between the hours of 8 a.m. on Sunday
and 1 a.m. on Monday provided that the licensee is in conformance with the
Minnesota Clean Air Act.
(B) Intoxicating Liquor Off-Sale. No sale of intoxicating liquor may be made by an offsale
licensee:
(1) On Sundays except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.;
(2) Before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday;
(3) After 8:00 p.m. on Monday through Thursday and after 10:00 p.m. on Friday and
Saturday, provided that an establishment may sell intoxicating liquor off-sale
until 10:00 p.m. on December 31st and July 3rd and on the day preceding
Thanksgiving Day unless otherwise prohibited under Section 801.150(B)(1);
(4) On Thanksgiving Day;
(5) On Christmas Day, December 25; or
(6) After 8:00 p.m. on Christmas Eve, December 24.
Rev. Date
5/1/06
Ord. #795
Rev. Date
12/21/15
Ord. 937
Rev. Date 7/1/17
Ord. #955
Rev. Date
7/1/17
Ord. 955
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 800. Liquor and Beer
Section 801. Licensing 801- 11
(7) No delivery of alcohol to an off-sale licensee may be made by a wholesaler or
accepted by an off-sale licensee on a Sunday. No order solicitation or
merchandising may be made by a wholesaler on a Sunday.
(C) 3.2% Malt Liquor On-Sale or Off-Sale. No sale of 3.2% malt liquor either on- or
off-sale shall be made between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday
through Saturday, inclusive, nor on any Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
12:00 noon.
(D) Consumption. No licensee shall allow any person to consume any intoxicating
liquor or 3.2% malt liquor on the licensed premises, except within the hours when
the sale of such liquor is permitted or for a period of time not to exceed one-half
hour after the sale of such liquor is prohibited.
(E) Evacuation. No licensee shall allow any person to remain on the licensed premises
for more than one-half hour after the time when the sale of such liquor is prohibited.
This provision shall not apply to a licensee or to its employees who are engaged in
the exercise of their employment.
(F) Display. No on-sale liquor establishment shall display liquor when open to the
public during hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.
(G) Other Products. No tobacco products, soft drinks, or confections shall be sold in
any exclusive liquor store during the hours when the sale of intoxicating liquor is
prohibited.
801.160 (Reserved for Future Use)
801.170 Compliance Checks. The City shall conduct compliance checks at least twice each
calendar year at each location where alcohol is sold to test compliance with Minnesota
Statutes Section 340A.503. Compliance checks shall utilize minors over the age of 18
but under the age of 21, who will attempt to purchase alcohol under the direct
supervision of a law enforcement officer or an employee of the licensing authority.
801.180 Suspension and Revocation and Administrative Penalties.
(A) Generally. The City Council may suspend for a period not to exceed sixty days,
revoke any license, or impose an administrative penalty up to $2,000, or any
combination thereof for violation of any condition or provision of this code, or
applicable statute or regulation. No suspension or revocation shall take effect until
the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a public hearing in accordance
with Minnesota Statutes Section 14.57 to 14.70. The hearing notice shall be given
at least 10 days prior to the hearing, including notice of the time and place of
hearing and state the nature of the charges against the licensee. The licensee shall be
entitled to representation at the hearing. Licensees whose licenses have been
Rev. Date 7/1/17
Ord. #955
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 800. Liquor and Beer
Section 801. Licensing 801- 12
revoked, shall not be entitled for another liquor license for one (1) year from the
date of license revocation.
(B) Insurance. Upon the expiration or cancellation of the insurance policy required
under Section 801.040(I), a license shall be suspended or revoked in accordance
with 801.180(A).
(C)Administrative Penalties. The purpose of this section is to establish administrative
penalties for the sale of alcoholic beverages to underage persons; sale of alcoholic
beverages to obviously intoxicated person; after hours sales/display/consumption of
alcoholic beverages; or illegal gambling on premises committed by the license
holder or its employees.
(1) For on-sale and off-sale license holders who participate in optional manager and
server training and prove the person who sold or served alcohol had received
city approved beverage server training within the previous year:
a. For a first violation, the license holder will be given a warning letter and one
(1) additional compliance check.
b. For a second violation, in thirty-six (36) months, the minimum penalty shall
be a five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine, a one-day suspension, and one (1)
additional compliance check.
c. For a third violation in thirty-six (36) months, the minimum penalty shall be
a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fine, a three (3) day suspension and one
(1) additional compliance check.
d. For a fourth violation in thirty-six (36) months, the minimum penalty shall
be fifteen hundred dollar ($1,500.00) fine, a five (5) day suspension and one
(1) additional compliance check.
e. For a fifth violation in thirty-six (36) months, the license shall be revoked.
(2) For on-sale and off-sale license holders who do not participate in optional
manager and server training:
a. For a first violation, the minimum penalty shall be a five hundred dollar
($500.00) fine and one (1) additional compliance check.
b. For a second violation in thirty-six (36) months, the minimum penalty shall
be a five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine, three (3) day suspension and one (1)
additional compliance check.
c. For a third violation in thirty-six (36) months, the minimum penalty shall be
a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fine, a five (5) day suspension and one (1)
additional compliance check.
d. For a fourth violation in thirty-six (36) months, the minimum penalty shall
be a fifteen hundred dollar ($1,500.00) fine, a ten (10) day suspension and
one (1) additional compliance check.
e. For a fifth violation in thirty-six (36) months, the license shall be revoked.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 800. Liquor and Beer
Section 801. Licensing 801- 13
(D) Administrative Penalties Procedures. The following procedure should generally be
followed for Council review of liquor license violations that are subject to the
administrative penalties established in 801.180(C):
(1) The City Manager or designee will contact the license holder asking if the
licensee will sign an admission of the facts of the alleged violation and an
acceptance of the administrative penalty listed in Section 801.180(C). The
licensee may choose to admit the facts but not accept the administrative penalty.
License holders have the right to request a hearing before the City Council if not
in agreement with the violation or the administrative penalty. The City Manager
may also schedule a hearing before the Council if he/she believes there is a valid
reason to deviate from the administrative penalty.
(2) If a hearing is requested, it will be conducted in accordance with the
Administrative Procedure Act, Minn. Stat. 14.57 to 14.70. The Council will
issue written findings on the alleged violation and an order imposing sanctions,
if any.
(3) If the licensee and the City Manager agree on the violation and the
administrative penalty, a written admission will be provided to the Council with
a proposed order. For first and second violations, the matter will be scheduled
as part of the consent agenda, and it is expected that the Council will generally
issue the proposed order without discussion. Nevertheless, the Council may
choose to schedule the matter for special Council review and action. The City
must provide at least ten (10) days notice to the licensee before this review is
conducted. Any violations beyond the second violation must be scheduled for a
hearing before the Council.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 900. Traffic
Section 901. Local Road Authority 901-1
900 Traffic
901 Local Road Authority
901.010 Definitions. Minnesota Statutes Chapters 168B, 169 and 169A are incorporated
as part of the Shoreview City Code. The terms defined in those chapters of the
Minnesota Statutes shall apply in the interpretation of the Shoreview Code
Chapter 901. The following terms have the meanings ascribed to them:
(A) “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except in devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracts.
(B) “Motor vehicle” means every vehicle which is self propelled and every
vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley
wires. Motor vehicle does not include an electric personal assisted mobility
device or a vehicle moved solely by human power.
(C) “Trailer” means any vehicle designed for carrying property or passengers on
its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, but does not
include a trailer drawn by a truck-trailer semi-trailer combination or in an
auxiliary axle on a motor vehicle which carries a portion of the weight of the
motor vehicle to which it is attached.
901.020 Load Limits. Whenever a city street may be seriously damaged or destroyed by
reason of deterioration, rain, snow, or other climatic conditions, the City Manager
may impose restrictions as to the weight of vehicles which may use such streets.
Where necessary, the City Manager may prohibit the use of such streets. The City
Manager shall cause appropriate signs to be erected and maintained clearly
indicating the weight restrictions or the prohibition of use. The signs shall be
erected at each end of any streets affected. No person shall operate a motor
vehicle on any street in violation of the restrictions so imposed. Violation of this
section shall be a misdemeanor. In addition, the City may commence a civil
proceeding to recover damages to the city streets caused by operation of a motor
vehicle in violation of this section.
901.030 Parking Regulations. Except as herein provided, the following parking
regulations shall apply to all public streets and properties in the City.
(A) Observance of posted parking restrictions. No person shall park a motor
vehicle and/or trailer in violation of posted parking restrictions.
(B) Time Limit. No motor vehicle and/or trailer shall be parked or left standing
on any street between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless
administratively waived by the Director of Public Works.
Rev. Date
3/6/06
Ord. #791
Rev.Date
9/5/06
Ord. 805
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 900. Traffic
Section 901. Local Road Authority 901-2
(C) Obstructing Traffic. No motor vehicle or trailer shall be parked or left
standing on any street so as to interfere with the passage of other vehicles.
(D) Parking Permits. Property owners may apply for waiver of parking
restrictions.
(1) The application shall be submitted on forms provided by the City
Manager and shall include the following information:
(a) Dates of requested waiver.
(b) Streets impacted.
(c) Indemnification of the City for claims arising from permitted
parking.
(2) Applications shall be submitted to the City at least 48 hours in advance
of the requested waiver.
(3) Applications shall be reviewed by the Director of Public Works for
potential traffic and/or pedestrian safety impacts.
(4) If a parking permit is issued/approved, the City shall forward
information to Ramsey County Sheriff’s Office for enforcement
purposes.
(E) On-Street Parking Permit Zones. The City Council may, by Resolution,
designate parking permit zones on the local city street system and permitted
parking times and the fee for the permit. The Director of Public Works shall
mark each area with the appropriate signage and/or pavement markings. It
is unlawful for any vehicle to be parked in a parking permit zone during
restricted hours without an authorized parking permit tag displayed and
visible in the front window.
901.040 Snow Removal.
(A) Snow Emergency. When the City Manager determines that on-street
parking interferes with the City’s snow removal operation(s), he may
declare a snow emergency. The City Manager shall cause an announcement
to be made of the snow emergency, by radio or television broadcast,
newspaper announcement, public posting, or any combination or methods as
he or she determines will best inform the public. The announcement shall
specify the date and time the snow emergency shall commence. Unless
terminated by the City Manager, a snow emergency shall continue in effect,
and all on-street parking shall be prohibited.
Rev. Date
2/2/15
Ord. #927
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 900. Traffic
Section 901. Local Road Authority 901-3
(B) Parking Prohibited. No vehicle shall be parked on any unplowed area of
any street, or within twenty-five feet of either end of an unplowed area.
(C) Plowing Completed. The prohibitions of Section 901.090(B), shall not
apply on any block after snowplowing operations are completed on that
block.
(D) Enforcement. Any authorized City employee or agent may, in order to
facilitate snow removal, summarily remove or cause to be removed any
vehicle parked in violation of Section 901.090(B), or may require the driver
or owner to remove the vehicle from the street.
901.050 Towing.
(A) Trailers.
(1) Authorized. Any City employee or law enforcement agency may tow
any trailer parked in violation of this section. Such trailer shall be
stored at the location designated by the City Council.
(2) Notice. As soon as practicable after an authorized City employee or
agent removes a trailer parked in violation of the provisions of this
section, the City Manager shall advise in writing the person shown to
be the owner of such vehicle by the registration thereof, of the
following facts:
(a) A general description of the trailer, together with the license
number thereof.
(b) The approximate time and reason for removal and the place to
which the trailer has been removed.
(c) The charge for such removal and daily storage shall be as
provided by the contract between the City and the independent
contractor who has contracted to provide these services for the
City. The provisions of this section do not apply to those
situations where trailers have been towed by private trailer
towing firms which are not under contract with the City.
(d) The notice shall be addressed to the registered owner and shall be
deposited with postage prepaid in the United States mail as soon
as practicable after the removal of the trailer. Before the trailer
shall be reclaimed, the owner or other claimant shall
satisfactorily identify himself, establish his right, title or interest
to the trailer and the right of possession thereof, and shall pay, in
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 900. Traffic
Section 901. Local Road Authority 901-4
addition to any fine which may be assessed, all costs and charges
in connection with the removal and storage of such trailer.
(B) Motor Vehicles. Motor vehicles may be towed pursuant to the provisions of
MS 169.041 and its subdivisions.
(C) Costs and Penalties. Payment of the impoundment costs and charges shall
not relieve the owner or other person responsible for the violation from
payment of any fine or penalty for violation of this or any other applicable
ordinance, statute, or regulation. No person shall reclaim an impounded
vehicle without first paying all of the towing costs and storage charges in
addition to any fine which may be assessed.
901.060 Prima Facie Violation. The presence of any trailer or motor vehicle on a street
when standing or parked in violation of this section is prima facie evidence that
the registered owner of the trailer or motor vehicle committed or authorized the
commission of the violation.
901.070 Fines. Specific fines for violations of Chapter 901 shall be adopted by City
ordinance.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 900. Traffic
Section 902. Water Surface Regulations 902-1
902 Water Surface Regulations
902.010 Lake Owasso. Portions of Lake Owasso are located within the City and the City
of Roseville. Due to the amount of watercraft traffic on Lake Owasso, the City
Councils of the City and Roseville, by adoption of a joint powers agreement, have
determined that the regulation of watercraft speed on Lake Owasso is necessary in
order to protect the safety and welfare of those people who use the waters of Lake
Owasso or reside on property adjacent to the shoreline of Lake Owasso.
(A) Maximum Speed. Motorboat speed on Lake Owasso shall not exceed forty
miles per hour (40 mph) which speed limit shall be in effect 24 hours per day.
902.020 Island Lake. Due to the size and configuration of Island Lake, the following
restrictions are necessary to protect the safety and welfare of the persons using the
lake, as well as adjacent shoreland and trees:
(A)An emergency Slow-No Wake speed restriction shall apply to the entire lake
when water elevation reaches 947.0 feet (NGVD, 1929), with the exception of
permitted watercraft activity associated with a special event, provided that
adequate shoreland erosion protection practices are implemented during the
event. Special events shall not be permitted when water elevations exceed
947.4 feet (NGVD, 1929).
(B) No person shall operate a motorboat on Island Lake which:
(1) Utilizes a tank or bladder that is fully or partially filled with water (or
other liquid) to artificially increase the wake of the boat for any
purpose. Exceptions to this restriction are:
(a) a live well designed for holding live bait or live fish, or
(b) an installed or portable fuel tank conforming to the fuel system
standards of the American Boat and Yacht Council.
(2) Is weighed down with any additional ballast (other than the normal
fuel or passenger load), or utilizes any device to artificially increase
the wake of the boat for any purpose, or
(3) Is operated so as to create a wake that endangers, harasses, or
unnecessarily interferes with any other person or property.
902.025 All Lakes. In order to protect the safety and welfare of those people who use the
waters of all the lakes within the City or who reside on property adjacent to the
shoreline of the lakes, the following regulations shall apply to motorboats:
(A) Slow No-Wake. Within 150 feet of the shore of any lake in the City, no
person shall operate a motorboat or be towed on water skis or a similar device
Rev.
Date
3/25/09
Ord. 843
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 900. Traffic
Section 902. Water Surface Regulations 902-2
at a greater than “slow-no wake” rate of speed, as defined in Minnesota
Statute 86B.005, Subd. 16a, with the following exceptions:
(1) Straight-out departure and straight-in return from and to the shore.
(2) Motorized watercraft activity associated with a special event.
(B) Separation Distances. Persons operating a motorboat, and those being towed
on water skis or a similar device shall, at all times, maintain an adequate
distance (considering speed and conditions) from other watercraft swimmers,
swim rafts, and docks, as to avoid an accident. When a swimmer is present,
motorboats or persons being towed on water skis or a similar device shall not
pass between a swim raft and the nearest shore with the following exemptions:
(1) Authorized resource management emergency and enforcement personnel,
when acting in the performance of their duties.
(2) A temporary exemption from these restrictions for a special event may be
granted upon the issuance of permit by the Ramsey County Sheriff’s
Department.
(C) Racing Prohibited. No motor boat shall engage in any form of race, game of
tag, game of follow-the-leader, or any other stunting and exhibition, except in
the case of a properly-sponsored boat race or water show or exhibition.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 900. Traffic
Section 903. Snowmobiles and Recreational Motor Vehicles 903-1
903 Snowmobiles and Recreational Motor Vehicles
903.010 Incorporation of State Statute. Any person operating a snowmobile or a
recreational motor vehicle within the City of Shoreview, unless provided
otherwise herein, shall be subject to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes Section
84.81 through 84.90, inclusive, as amended, and the regulations of the
Commissioner of Natural Resources adopted pursuant thereto.
903.020 Definitions. For purposes of this chapter:
(A) "Snowmobile" means a self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or
ice steered by skis or runners.
(B) "Recreational Motor Vehicle" means any self-propelled vehicle and any
vehicle propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle used for recreational
purposes, including but not limited to snowmobile, trail bike or other allterrain
vehicle, hovercraft, or motor vehicle licensed for highway operation
which is being used for off-road recreational purposes.
903.030 Limitation of Operations. Snowmobiles and recreational motor vehicles may be
operated only in the following locations within the City of Shoreview:
(A) On the operator's property subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(B) On privately owned property if the operator has in possession written
permission from the property owner; or, on privately owned property if the
property owner has posted a clearly visible notice indicating "Snowmobiles
Allowed" or "Recreational Motor Vehicles Allowed" or words substantially
similar.
(C) On public trails specifically designated by City Council resolution or on lakes
which are subject to the jurisdiction of the City of Shoreview.
(D) In the event of an emergency declared by the Mayor of the City of Shoreview,
riders may ride on improved City streets in the most right-hand lane then
available for traffic or as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of
the improved roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle
stopped in that lane or proceeding in the same direction.
(E) On trunk highways, county state aid roads or county roads as regulated by the
State of Minnesota or the County of Ramsey.
903.040 Hours of Operation. No person shall operate a snowmobile, a recreational motor
vehicle which is not licensed for highway use, or, a recreational motor vehicle
licensed for highway use when operating on private property, within the City of
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 900. Traffic
Section 903. Snowmobiles and Recreational Motor Vehicles 903-2
Shoreview from 10:00 p.m. until 8:00 a.m. prevailing time in Ramsey County,
Minnesota.
903.050 Speed. No person shall operate a snowmobile or a recreational motor vehicle
within the City of Shoreview at a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper
under all the surrounding circumstances. No person shall operate a snowmobile
or a recreational motor vehicle within the City of Shoreview at a rate of speed in
excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour within 150 feet of any fisherman, fish house,
pedestrian, skier, skater, skating rink, sliding area, ski tow area, residential
dwelling, or other area where such operation would conflict with or endanger
other persons or property.
903.060 Lakeshore Speed Distance Requirements. No person shall operate a
snowmobile or a recreational motor vehicle within 150 feet of any residential
shoreline on lakes which are subject to the jurisdiction of the City of Shoreview
except at a speed of fifteen (15) miles per hour or less for the purposes of access
to or egress from such lake or for the purpose of parking the snowmobile or
recreational motor vehicle near the shoreline.
903.070 Destruction of Signs. It is unlawful for any person to post upon, mutilate or
remove any notice or sign provided for in this chapter from any lands or waters.
903.080 Passage Through Gates or Wires. No person shall enter or leave the lands of
another with a snowmobile or a recreational motor vehicle, or pass from one
portion of such lands to another portion, through a closed gate, without returning
the gate to its original position. No person shall enter or leave the land of another
with a snowmobile or a recreational motor vehicle by cutting any wire or tearing
down or destroying any fence.
903.090 Separability. The provisions of this chapter shall be separable, and the invalidity
of any section, paragraph, subdivision or other part thereof shall not make void,
impair, or invalidate or affect the remainder thereof.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 900. Traffic
Section 904. Administrative Citations 904-1
904 Administrative Citations
904.010 Purpose. Shoreview authorized by resolution the use of administrative
citations for specific traffic offenses, as permitted by the Legislature in Minn.
Stat. § 169.999. The City is required by that statute to establish and maintain
procedures through which motorists receiving administrative citations may
obtain an independent hearing or judicial review of a citation. The City
Council finds that establishing a voluntary administrative citation procedure
ensures the availability of an independent hearing and retains full opportunity
to obtain judicial review of a citation.
904.020 Definitions. As used in this chapter, except as otherwise provided, the
following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
(A) Citation. An administrative citation issued to a motorist for a Designated
Traffic Offense occurring within the City.
(B) Designated Traffic Offense. Those traffic offenses eligible for
administrative citation as designated by Minn. Stat. § 169.999, subd.
1(b)(1), (2) and (3), as it may be amended from time to time.
(C) Issuing Officer. The licensed peace officer employed by or under
contract with the City who issues any particular administrative
citation.
(D) Flyer. A document which informs a person receiving an administrative
citation of:
(1) the recipient's right to challenge the citation or opt for a standard
criminal citation;
(2) the City's process for handling challenges to administrative traffic
citations;
(3) the process for paying a traffic citation; and
(4) the effect of an administrative traffic citation on a recipient's driving
record.
(E) Recipient. The person who receives an administrative citation under this
chapter.
(F) Manager. The Shoreview City Manager or Manager’s designee.
904.030 Authorization. Licensed peace officers employed or under contract with the
City may issue administrative citations for Designated Traffic Offenses
occurring within the City. The fine for committing a Designated Traffic
Offense shall be the amount stated in Minn. Stat. § 169.999, subd. 5, as it may
be amended from time to time.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 900. Traffic
Section 904. Administrative Citations 904-2
(A) Form of Citation. An issuing officer must use the uniform administrative
traffic citation form approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
The officer shall also serve upon the recipient the current version of the
City's response form. The response form shall reference the response
options stated at Section 904.030 (C); and shall provide directions for
returning the response form.
(B) Delivery to City. The issuing officer shall deliver a copy of the
administrative traffic citation to the City Manager within a reasonable
time of the date of issuance.
(C) Response to Citation. A recipient shall respond to the citation within 14
days of receipt. The recipient may:
(1) Admit the violation stated in the citation and agree to pay the fine;
(2) Deny the violation stated in the citation and request a hearing; or
(3) Request that the administrative citation be converted to a standard
traffic citation and filed for processing by the Violations Bureau of
the Ramsey County District Court.
(D) Standard Citation Issued If No Response. If the City Manager receives
no written response to a citation within the 14-day response period, the
City Manager shall request that the peace officer who issued the citation
convert the allegations into a standard traffic citation, file that regular
citation at the District Court and mail a copy to the recipient.
904.040 Hearing Officers. The City shall maintain a list of hearing officers available
to conduct hearings on the merits of an administrative citation, if requested by
a recipient. Hearing officers shall have executed a contract to provide hearing
officer services with the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department. The hearing
officer shall have executed a contract to provide hearing officer services with
the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department or, with one of the cities that receive
law enforcement services from the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department.
(A) Request For Hearing. If the recipient responds by requesting a hearing,
the City Manager shall assign the case to a hearing officer on the list.
The Manager shall notify the hearing officer, the recipient and the
issuing officer of the assignment in writing. The hearing officer shall
schedule a hearing within a reasonable date of receiving the notice. Any
delays in holding the hearing shall be reported to the City Manager by
the hearing officer.
(B) Citation Materials. At assignment, the City Manager shall transmit a
copy of the citation to the hearing officer. Within five days of
assignment, the issuing officer or the officer's department shall transmit
copies of all materials relating to the citation to the hearing officer,
including but not limited to: additional written reports; certificates of
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 900. Traffic
Section 904. Administrative Citations 904-3
calibration, logs, and other documentation required to support the
evidentiary use of speed detection equipment under Minn. Stat. §
169.14; relevant certificates of training for the citing officer; and any
pictures showing the alleged offense. The hearing officer shall transmit a
copy of any materials received to the recipient at the earliest opportunity
but at least three days in advance of the hearing.
(C) Hearing. At the hearing, the hearing officer shall receive the testimony
of any witnesses, witness statements, and comments presented by the
person cited. The hearing officer will consider these items alongside the
materials submitted by the issuing officer, and may weigh the evidence
and make credibility determinations to the best of the hearing officer's
ability. The hearing officer is not required to apply the rules of evidence
in making determinations about the evidence presented. The issuing
officer is not required to attend the hearing.
(D) Decision, Findings. After considering all of the evidence submitted, the
hearing officer shall determine, by a preponderance of the evidence,
whether the person cited did or did not violate the statute or statutes
identified in the citation. The hearing officer shall make written findings
supporting the determination and transmit them to the cited person and
the City Manager within five days of closing the hearing.
(E) Payment Following Finding Of Violation. If the hearing officer finds a
violation, the fine for the Designated Traffic Offense is due within 30
days of the date the findings are sent to the recipient. The hearing officer
may not alter or reduce the fine for any offense or combine multiple
offenses into a single fine. Payment of fines due shall be made to the
City Manager.
(F) Standard Citation Issued If No Payment. If payment is not made within
the 30 days, the Manager shall request that the issuing officer or the
officer's department issue a standard traffic citation for the offenses in
the administrative citation, mail a copy of the citation to the individual,
and file the citation along with the hearing officer's written findings with
the Ramsey County District Court.
904.050 Designated Administrative Traffic Citation Program Manager. Pursuant
to Resolution No. 10-09, the City Council has designated the Ramsey County
Sheriff’s Department and its licensed peace officers to administer the City’s
administrative traffic citation program and to perform the duties of the City
and the City Manager as specified therein.
904.060 Severability. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other provision of
this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or of
any part thereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 1000. Harassment
1000-1
1000 Harassment
1000.010 Harassing Conduct Prohibited. A person who commits harassment against
another, after being notified not to do so by the intended target of the harassment
or by the City's Law Enforcement Agency, is guilty of a misdemeanor. As used
herein, the term "harassment" means either a willful repeated course of conduct
consisting of acts, words or gestures which, the perpetrator knows or reasonably
should know, will alarm, anger or disturb the intended target of the harassment; or
willful repeated, intrusive, or unwanted acts, words or gestures which, the
perpetrator knows or reasonably should know, will adversely affect the safety,
security or privacy of the intended target of the harassment.
1000.020 Targeted Residential Picketing.
(A) Purpose. The City of Shoreview has an interest in safeguarding the right of
Shoreview residents to enjoy, in their home and dwelling, a feeling of wellbeing,
tranquility and privacy. Repeated picketing has and may result in
complaints from the residents. Law enforcement officers have been called
into the neighborhoods on numerous occasions, preventing the officers from
carrying out their other duties. The Shoreview City Council finds that
targeted residential picketing on or about a residential dwelling and repeated
picketing in the same residential neighborhood causes emotional distress to
the occupants of the residential dwellings; obstructs and interferes with the
free use of the public right-of-way; and residents of areas subjected to targeted
residential picketing and other repeated picketing feel singled out and
harassed. The Shoreview City Council further finds that, without resorting to
targeted residential picketing or repeated picketing, ample opportunities exist
for those otherwise engaged in targeted residential picketing or repeated
picketing to exercise constitutionally protected freedom of speech and
expression.
(B) Definition. As used herein, the term "targeted residential picketing" includes
one or more of the following activities:
(1) Marching, standing or patrolling by one or more persons carrying written
material, within 100 feet of a residential dwelling, which identifies the
occupant(s) of such residential dwelling by name, occupation, photograph
or in some other manner.
(2) Marching, standing, or patrolling by one or more persons within 100 feet
of a residential dwelling, who are shouting or otherwise verbalizing
protests which identify the occupant(s) of such residential dwelling by
name, occupation, or in some other manner.
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 1000. Harassment
1000-2
(3) Marching, standing, or patrolling by one or more persons which interferes
with the ability of the occupant(s) of a residential dwelling from gaining
access to or egress from the property on which such residential dwelling
unit is located.
(4) Marching, standing, or patrolling by one or more persons within 100 feet
of a residential dwelling for a continuous period of five (5) minutes or
more.
(C) Restricted Picketing Zone. As used in this section relating to the investigation
and establishment of a Restricted Picketing Zone, the term "Picketing" means
marching, standing or patrolling by one or more persons for purpose of
demonstration or protest.
(1) Investigation. The City Council shall investigate any request from a
Shoreview resident to establish a Restricted Picketing Zone because
repeated picketing is occurring in the resident's neighborhood. The City
Council's investigation of the request shall include a review of the
following circumstances:
(a) Area in which picketing has occurred.
(b) Number of prior picketing events.
(c) Date, time and duration of picketing events.
(d) Estimated number of picketers per picketing event.
(e) Estimated number of law enforcement officials responding to
picketing events.
(f) Description of conduct occurring at picketing events.
(g) Proposed focus of picketing activity.
(h) Results of a neighborhood survey in regard to the impact of picketing
activity on the resident's sense of well-being, tranquility, privacy, and
enjoyment of their home.
(2) Establishment. Upon completion of its investigation, the City Council
may, by three affirmative votes, deny the request or adopt a resolution
which establishes a Restricted Picketing Zone. The resolution shall define
the restrictions which will apply within the Restricted Picketing Zone and
shall comply with the following standards:
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 1000. Harassment
1000-3
(a) The length of the Restricted Picketing Zone may not exceed the
combined width of one lot on either side of the focus of the picketing
activity plus the width of the lot occupied by the focus of the picketing
activity; or, the combined distance of 100 feet on either side of the lot
occupied by the focus of the picketing activity plus the width of the lot
occupied by the focus of the picketing activity, whichever combined
linear dimension is less.
(b) At least ten picketers shall be allowed in the Restricted Picketing Zone
on approved dates and during approved hours.
(c) Picketing shall be allowed in the Restricted Picketing Zone for a
minimum of two hours in each two week period. One hour of
picketing shall be allowed after 6:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday
or on either Saturday or Sunday.
(d) No sound enhancing equipment shall be used by picketers or by those
who are observing picketers.
(e) The Restricted Picketing Zone may not continue for more than two
years.
(f) A Restricted Picketing Zone may not be reestablished for at least one
month following the termination of prior restricted zone for the same
general area.
(3) Notice of Zone Establishment. Upon adoption of a resolution which
establishes a Restricted Picketing Zone, advisory signs shall be erected at
the beginning and end of the zone which indicate:
(a) That a Restricted Picketing Zone has been established.
(b) The maximum number of picketers allowed within the Restricted
Picketing Zone at one time.
(c) The days of the week and hours of the day during which picketing will
be allowed within the Restricted Picketing Zone.
(d) That the use of sound enhancing devices in the Restricted Picketing
Zone is prohibited.
(e) The beginning and termination dates for the Restricted Picketing Zone.
(f) That prior to picketing within the Restricted Picketing Zone, a person
or a representative of a group of people shall give notice to the City
Manager on forms provided by the City Manager. The notice shall be
City of Shoreview Municipal Code Chapter 1000. Harassment
1000-4
submitted during normal business hours at Shoreview City Hall at least
three (3) business days before but not more than five (5) business days
before the proposed picketing activity.
(4) City Manager Notification. Prior to picketing within the Restricted
Picketing Zone, a person or a representative of a group of people shall
give notice to the City Manager on forms provided by the City Manager.
The notice shall be submitted during normal business hours at Shoreview
City Hall at least three (3) business days before but not more than five (5)
business days before the proposed picketing activity. The City Manager
shall notify its law enforcement agency and residents who occupy property
adjacent to the Restricted Picketing Zone of the proposed Picketing Event.
(5) Prohibited Activities. No person shall engage in targeted residential
picketing within the City of Shoreview. No person shall engage in
picketing within a Restricted Picketing Zone in a manner contrary to the
advisory signs that identify the Restricted Picketing Zone. A violation of
this section shall be a misdemeanor.
Version 6/27/19
EXHIBIT B
ADMINISTRATIVE FEE SCHEDULE
CITY OF SHOREVIEW, MINNESOTA
Published April 19, 2017
Updated June 27, 2019
Item Ordinance Fee Comments
Address Map Book $50
Animal: Chickens 838 $30 2 Year License
Animal: Beekeeping 954 $30 2 Year License
Animal: Dog/Cat License 834 $10 Valid Length of Rabies Shot
Duplicate Dog/Cat License $2
Dangerous Dog Registration $250 Annual
Potentially Dangerous Dog
Registration
$100 Annual
Wild Animal License $30 2 Year License
Wild Animal License Investigation $120 New License
Cable Franchise Application 929 $7500
False Alarms No
charge
1st and 2nd
False Alarms in 365 days $50 3rd&4th (per incident)
$150 5th+(per incident)
Filling Station $50 First 2 pumps
$15 Each additional pump
Fireworks License $100 In addition to other items
$350 Fireworks only
Liquor License – New License $200 Investigation Fee
Intoxicating Liquor On-Sale $5000
Intoxicating Liquor On-Sale $4000 With Training
Intoxicating Liquor On-Sale Wine $1000
Intoxicating On-Sale Vet. Org. $300
Intoxicating Liquor Off-Sale $200
Intoxicating Liquor On-Sale $200 Sunday Sale
Intoxicating Liquor Banquet $25
3.2 Percent Liquor On Sale $150
3.2 Percent Liquor Off Sale $50
Intoxicating or 3.2 % Liquor $10 Special Event
License Transfer Fee $200 Investigation Fee
Massage License $50 Massage Therapist
$100 Massage Therapy Establishment
Pawnbrokers 841 $3000 Annual License Fee
$1000 Investigation Fee
$2 Billable Transaction Fee
Version 6/27/19
Item Ordinance Fee Comments
Peddler/Solicitor Permit 846 $100 Valid for 60 days
Photocopies 815
-One sided .25 +tax
-Two sided .50 +tax
-Color .75 +tax
-Color two sided 1.50 +tax
-Wide format 1.50 +tax
Registration of Domestic Partners 855 $25
Rental Housing License 846 $75 General Dwelling Unit
$100 Multi-Family Unit Base Fee
910 $75 Late renewal fee
$50 Reinspection fee
Rubbish Hauler License $150 Annual
Sign Impoundment Release Fee $25
Tree Trimmer License $50 Annual
Tobacco License $250
Videos/DVDs 816 $25
MUNICIPAL WATER AND SEWER FEES and RIGHT OF WAY PERMIT
Connection Permit-Water $60
Connection Permit-Sanitary Sewer $60
Hydrant Meter Deposit $288 5/8” Garden Hose Size
$500 2” Fire Hose Size
Hydrant Meter Use Fee $30 Monthly Rental
Water Use per 1,000 gallons TBD Tier 2 of current quarterly utility rate
Non-Compliance surcharge $150 Water or Sanitary Sewer
Right of Way Permit $50
Sanitary Sewer Connection Charge $275 Single Family Residence
The categories listed below pay per unit or per acre, whichever is greater.
Townhouse $275 Or $825 per acre
Two Family Dwelling $275 Or $825 per acre
Multi-Family Dwelling $275 Or $825 per acre
Motel Rental Unit $275 Or $825 per acre
Mobile Homes & Trailer Lots $275 Or $825 per acre
The categories listed below pay both per unit and per acre.
Version 6/27/19
Commercial, Industrial and others that are not single family
Item Ordinance Fee Comments
Sewer Availability Charge TBD Set annually by MET Council
Small Cell Wireless Facility
Rent To Occupy Space in Right Of
Way
956 $150 Per Year
Maintenance Associated with
Space
956 $25 Per Year
Radio Node 100 Max Watts Or
Less
956 $73 Per Radio Node
Radio Node Over 100 Max Watts 956 $182 Per Radio Node
Escrow Deposit 956 Min.
$500
Based on Scope of Project
Water Use Restrictions $0 1st Violation – Warning Letter
$25 2nd Violation – Administrative Fine
$50 3rd Violation – Administrative Fine
TBD 4th Violation – Submission to City
Attorney
Trunk Water Facility Charge $7.75 Amount equal to rate multiplied by
the front foot of street
Water Connection Charge $275 Single Family Residence
The categories listed below pay per unit or per acre, whichever is greater.
Townhouse $275 Or $825 per acre
Two Family Dwelling $275 Or $825 per acre
Multi-Family Dwelling $275 Or $825 per acre
Motel Rental Unit $275 Or $825 per acre
Mobile Homes & Trailer Lots $275 Or $825 per acre
The categories listed below pay both per unit and per acre.
Commercial, Industrial and others that are not single family
Water Meter Fees TBD Fees set annually by Public Works
Water Service Charge $50 Regular Call Out
$100 Emergency Call Out
PLANNING AND LAND USE APPLICATION FEES
Accessory Apartment Permit $75
Amendments $500 Text Amendment
$600 Comprehensive Guide Plan
Amendment
$100 Natural or Residential
$500 Rezoning
$100 Rezoning: UND to Residential
$10 Zoning Map
Version 6/27/19
Appeals $100
Item Ordinance Fee Comments
Comprehensive Sign Plan $200
Conditional Use Permit $400 Non-Flood Plain/Flood Plain
Home Occupation Permit $75
LGU Fees – Wetland Applications $500
$2500
Letter of Zoning Compliance $0 Single Family Residential
$50 All other Uses
Mining Permit $400 Conditional Use Permit
Subdivision-Major 4 Lots or more $600+ $25/lot Pre-Plat
$400+ $20/lot Final Stage
Subdivision-Minor 3 lots or less $250
Planned Unit Development $300 Concept
$600+ $25/lot Development Stage
$300 Final Stage
Projects where a development
agreement or grading
certification are not required and
the site will be disturbed for a
duration of 14 days or less
852 $40 Inspection Fee
$500 Soil Erosion Control Escrow Deposit
Projects where a development
agreement or grading
certification are not required and
the site will be disturbed for a
duration of 15 days or more
852 $150 Inspection Fee
$1000 Soil Erosion Control Escrow Deposit
Projects without a development
agreement that require grading
certification
852 $350 Inspection Fee
$1000 Grading Certification Escrow Deposit
$2000 Soil Erosion Control Escrow Deposit
Projects with a development
agreement
852 TBD Inspection fee based on a rate of
$200 per month of site
disturbance.
TBD Grading Certification Escrow equal to
10% of the estimated site grading
costs as determined by the Public
Works Director, but a minimum of
$1000
$3000 Per acre Soil Erosion Control
Escrow
Relocated Structure Permit $250
Version 6/27/19
Residential Design Review $150
Riparian Lot-Detached Accessory
Structure Permit
$50
Item Ordinance Fee Comments
Relocated Structure Permit $250
Residential Design Review $150
Sign Permit $50 Minimum or $3 per square foot
Temporary Sign Permit $30
Site and Building Plan Review $500
Special Purpose Fence $100
Standard Variance $200 Residential
$400 Commercial
Temporary Sales/Event Permit $50
Transit Bench License $3000
Standard Variance $200 Residential
Tower/Antenna Permits $75 Private Antenna/Tower
$1000 Broadcast Tower
$1000 Wireless Telecommunication
Tower/Antenna
TBD Wireless Telecommunication
Escrow Deposit Minimum $2500
Vacation Filing Fee $200
Added mailing fee $1 Per address. For added mailed
notices required due to actions by
the applicant.
City Code Violation: General $50 First Offense
$75 Second Offense
$100 Third and every subsequent,
related offense
Refuse Container Storage 211.020 No
Charge
First Offense
$25 Second Offense in 12 months
$50 Third and every subsequent
offense in 12 months
Nuisance 211.010 $25 First Offense
$50 Second Offense in 12 months
Version 6/27/19
$75 Third and subsequent offense in 12
months
Item Ordinance Fee Comments
Property Maintenance: General 211 $25 First Offense
$50 Second Offense
$75 Third and subsequent offenses
Investigation, work without
permit
$40 Minimum fee, or cost of required
permit, whichever is greater
C-1
EXHIBIT C
Building Permits and Fees
Total Valuation Fee
A. $1.00 to $500.00 $28.00
B. $501.00 to $2,000.00 $28.000 for the first $500.00 plus
$3.70 for each additional $100.00, or
fraction thereof, to and including
$2,000.00
C. $2,001.00 to $25,000.00 $83.50 for the first $2,000.00 plus
$16.55 for each additional $1,000.00,
or fraction thereof, to and including
$25,000.00
D. $25,001.00 to $50,000.00 $464.15 for the first $25,000.00 plus
$12.00 for each additional $1,000.00,
or fraction thereof, to and including
$50,000.00
E. $50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $764.15 for the first $50,000.00 plus
$8.45 for each additional $1,000.00,
or fraction thereof, to and including
$100,000.00
F. $100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $1,186.65 for the first $100,000.00
plus $6.75 for each additional
$1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and
including $500,000.00
G. $500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00 $3,886.65 for the first $500,000.00
plus $5.50 for each additional
$1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and
including $1,000.000.00
H. $1,000,001.00 and up $6,636.65 for the first $1,000,000.00
plus $4.50 for each additional
$1,000.00, or fraction thereof
Driveways and Sidewalks $28.00
Fences $28.000
C-2
Oil or Gas Appliances, Heating, Air Conditioning, Refrigeration and Ventilation
Systems
A. The permit fee for each oil or gas burning appliance shall be $20.00 except that a
$30.00 minimum fee shall be required if less than two appliances are being inspected.
B. The permit fee for each oil or gas burning furnace or boiler, including appurtenances
attached thereto (where each dwelling unit has an individual system) shall be $35.00.
C. The permit fee for each air conditioning and refrigeration unit (where each dwelling
unit has an individual system) shall be $30.00 per unit.
D. Steam, warm air or hot water heating systems (where each dwelling unit has an
individual system) shall be $35.00 for each such system.
E. The permit fee for the installation of commercial, industrial, or institutional Heating,
Ventilation and Air Conditioning equipment shall be one and one-half percent (1.5%)
of the total market value of the installation.
Plumbing
A. For the installation of plumbing fixtures, devices and connection, the permit charge
shall be $25.00 for the base permit fee plus $10.00 for each plumbing fixture, device
or connection to the sewer or plumbing system.
B. For any alteration, repair or extension to an existing plumbing system, where the
work is of such a nature that the permit fee charge cannot be determined from the
above schedule, the permit fee charge shall be $35.00 for the first $500.00 or fraction
thereof, plus $10.00 for each additional $500.00 or fraction thereof of the total market
value of such alteration, repair or extension.
Grading, Excavation
Fee
A. 50 cubic yard or less $23.50
B. 51 to 100 cubic yards $37.00
C. 101 to 1,000 cubic yards $37.00 for the first 100
cubic yards plus $17.50 for
each additional 100 cubic
yards or fraction thereof
C-3
D. 1,001 to 10,000 cubic yards $194.50 for the first 1,000
cubic yards plus $14.50 for
each additional 1000 cubic
yards or fraction thereof
E. 10,001 to 100,000 cubic yards $325.00 for the first 10,000
cubic yards plus $66.00 for
each additional 10,000 cubic
yards or fraction thereof
F. 100,001 cubic yard or more $919.00 for the first 100,000
cubic yards plus $36.50 for
each additional 10,000 cubic
yards or fraction thereof
Demolition of Buildings $28.00
Plan Review Fee 65% of Building Permit Fee
except for residential projects
requiring plan review that do not
exceed $15,000 valuation
Electric
A. Minimum fee for each separate inspection of an installation, replacement,
alteration or repair is limited to one inspection only: $40.00
B. The fee to change a service panel in the same location is $100. The fee to
change a sub panel in the same location is $40.00. The fee for new service
or power supply is:
0 to 300 amp ampere capacity $50.00
400 amp $58.00
For each additional 100 ampere capacity or fraction thereof $14.00
C. Circuits, installation of additions, alterations, or repairs of each circuit or
sub-feeder shall be computed separately, including circuits fed from subfeeders
and including the equipment served, except as provided for in (D)
through (K):
0 to and including 30 ampere capacity $ 8.00
31 to and including 100 ampere capacity $10.00
For each additional 100 ampere capacity or fraction thereof $ 5.00
D. Maximum fee for single-family dwellings and townhouses with or without
separate services shall not exceed $175.00 if not over 200-ampere capacity.
This includes service, feeders, circuits, fixtures and equipment. This
C-4
includes up to three inspections. Additional inspections are at the reinspection
rate.
E. Maximum fee on an apartment building shall not exceed $70.00 per
dwelling unit. The unit feeders, service and house panels are extra. A twounit
dwelling (duplex) maximum fee per unit shall be charged same as per
single-family dwelling.
F. The maximum number of 0 to 30 ampere circuits to be paid on any one
athletic field lighting standard is ten.
G. In addition to the above fees:
1) A charge of $4.00 will be made for each street lighting standard.
2) A charge of $7.00 will be made for each traffic signal standard.
Circuits originating within the standard will not be used when
computing fees.
H. The fee for transformers and generators is $10.00 0 to 11 KVA, $40.00 for
12 KVA to 75 KVA, $60.00 for 76 KVA to 299 KVA, and $150.00 for 300
KVA and above.
I. In addition to the above fees, all transformers for signs and outline lighting
shall be computed at $8.00 for the first 500 VA or fraction thereof per unit,
plus $.70 for each additional 100 VA or fraction thereof.
J. In addition to the above fees, unless included in the maximum fee filed by
the initial installer, remote control, signal circuits and circuits of less than
50 volts shall be computed at $.75 per opening or device of each system.
K. In addition to the above fees, the inspection fee for each separate inspection
of a swimming pool shall be computed at $40.00 plus circuits. Reinforcing
steel for swimming pools requires a rough-in inspection.
L. For the review of plans and specifications of proposed installations, there
shall be a minimum fee of $150.00 up to and including $30,000 of
electrical estimate, plus 1/10 of 1% on any amount in excess of $30,000 to
be paid by persons or firms requesting the review.
C-5
M. When re-inspection is necessary to determine whether unsafe conditions
have been corrected and such conditions are not subject to an appeal
pending before any Court, a re-inspection fee of $40.00 will be assessed in
writing by the Inspector.
N. For inspections not covered herein, or for requested special inspections or
services, the fee shall be $80.00 per man hour, including travel time, plus
$.25 per mile traveled, plus the reasonable cost of equipment or material
consumed. This section is also applicable to inspection of empty conduits
and such jobs as determined by the City.
O. For inspection of transient projects, including but not limited to, carnivals
and circuses, the inspection fees shall be computed as follows:
Power supply units according to fee schedule. A like fee will be
required on power supply units at each engagement during the
season, and a fee of $80.00 per hour. Rides, devises or concessions
shall be inspected at their first appearance of the season and the
inspection fee shall be $40.00 per unit.
P. The fee may be doubled if the work starts before the permit is issued.
Q. Refunds must be requested in writing. Refunds will not be issued for minimum fee
permits, expired permits or state surcharge fee. Refunds are minus the city handling
fee of 25% or $50, whichever is less.
License Verification Fees
A. Building Contractors required to be licensed with the State of Minnesota shall be
assessed a verification fee of $5.00 on each building permit issued.
B. When verification of a license referenced in 702.010 the contractor shall be assessed a
$5.00 license verification fee.
C. When verification of lead certification as required by the State of Minnesota, the
contractor shall be assessed a $5.00 verification fee.
Electrical Permit Fees
A. Minimum fee for each separate inspection of an installation, replacement, alteration or
repair is limited to one inspection only: $45.00
B. New service or Power Supply:
Services, changes of service, temporary services, additions, alterations or repairs. The
fee is $110.00 to replace a service panel in the same location.
$45.00 for a sub panel.
C-6
0 to 300 amp: $55.00
For each additional 100 amp or fraction thereof: $16.00
C. Circuits, installation of additions, alterations, or repairs of each circuit or sub-feeder shall
be computed separately, including circuits fed from sub-feeders and including the
equipment served, except as provided for in (D) through (J):
0 to and including 100 ampere capacity$ 9.00
For each additional 100 ampere capacity or fraction thereof $6.00
D. Maximum fee for single-family dwellings, duplex, and townhouse with or without
separate services shall not exceed $190.00 if not over 200-ampere capacity (No max
if service is over 200 Amps). This includes service, feeders, circuits, fixtures and
equipment. The maximum fee provides for not more than 2 Rough In’s and 1 Final
inspection. Additional inspections are at the re-inspection rate.
E. Maximum fee on an apartment building shall be $80.00 per dwelling unit this does not
include the service, unit feeders or house panels.
F. In addition to the above fees:
1.) A charge of $5.00 will be made for each street lighting standard.
2.) A charge of $8.00 will be made for each traffic signal standard.
Circuits originating within the standard will not be used when computing fees.
G. In addition to the above fees, all transformers generators and energy storage systems shall
be computed
up to 10KVA $5
11KVA to74KVA $40.00
75KVA to 299KVA is $60.00
over 299KVA is $165.00.
H. In addition to the above fees, all transformers and drivers for signs shall be computed at
$9.00/each.
I. In addition to the above fees, lighting retrofits, low voltage fire alarm, low voltage heating
and air conditioning control wiring shall be computed at $.85 cents per opening or
device of each system.
J. In addition to the above fees, the inspection fee for each separate inspection of a swimming
pool and hot tub shall be computed at $45.00 plus circuits at $9.00/each.
K. When re-inspection is necessary to determine whether unsafe conditions have been
corrected, a re-inspection fee of $45.00 will be assessed in writing by the inspector.
L. For inspections not covered herein, or for requested special inspections or services, the fee
shall be $80.00 per man hour.
C-7
M. For inspection of transient projects, including but not limited to, carnivals and circuses,
the inspection fees shall be computed as follows:
Power supply units according to the transformer fee schedule. A like fee will
be required on power supply units at each engagement during the season, plus
a fee of $90.00 per hour. Rides, Devices or Concessions: Shall be inspected at
their first appearance of the season and the inspection fee shall be $45.00
per unit.
N. The fee is doubled if the work starts before the permit is issued.
O. Solar fees:
0kw to 5kw = $90
5.1kw to 10kw =$150
10.1kw to 20kw = $225
20.1kw to 30kw = $300
30.1kw to 40kw = $375
40.1KW and larger is $375 plus $25 for each additional 10kw
P. Refunds must be requested in writing. No refunds on minimum fee permits, expired
permits or state surcharge fee. Refunds are minus the city handling fee of 20%.
Q. Electronic inspection for select items pre-approved by electrical inspector is $40.
EXHIBIT D
COMMUNITY CENTER RATE SCHEDULE
CITY OF SHOREVIEW, MINNESOTA
Resident Daily Passes** 2020 Rate Military Rate
Adult $10.00 $9.25
Youth $8.75
Family $36.00 $34.00
Senior $8.75 $8.25
Regular Daily Passes** 2020 Rate Military Rate
Adult $11.25 $10.25
Youth $10.25
Family $43 $41
Senior $10.25 $9.75
Resident Coupon Books** 2020 Rate
Adult $90.00
Youth $78.75
Playground $54.00
Regular Coupon Books** 2020 Rate
Adult $101.25
Youth $92.25
Playground $54.00
Resident Sr. Track** 2020 Rate
Per Visit $4.75
Punch Card $42.75
Regular Sr. Track** 2020 Rate
Per Visit $5.75
Punch Card $51.75
Indoor Playground $6.00
** Rates Include Tax for Daily Rates
Membership Fees** 2020 Rate Military Rate
Resident Annual Memberships
Family $700 $680
Dual $625 $600
Adult $410 $395
Youth/Senior $350 $340
Regular Annual Memberships 2020 Rate Military Rate
Family $880 $840
Dual $760 $720
Adult $525 $495
Youth/Senior $425 $405
Resident Annual Memberships Billed Monthly 2020 Rate Military Rate
Family $68 $65
Dual $60 $57
Adult $40 $38
Youth/Senior $34 $32
Regular Annual Memberships Billed Monthly 2020 Rate Military Rate
Family $81 $78
Dual $69 $66
Adult $49 $47
Youth/Senior $43 $41
Resident Seasonal Membership 2020 Rate
Family $267
Dual $247
Adult $175
Youth/Senior $145
Regular Seasonal Membership 2020 Rate
Family $335
Dual $315
Adult $225
Youth/Senior $175
** Rates Include Tax for Membership Fees
Room Rental Fees 2020 Rate
Resident Shoreview Room
Sunday – Thursday $800
Friday $1,200
Saturday $1,450
Regular Shoreview Room
Sunday – Thursday $900
Friday $1,300
Saturday $1,550
Resident Wedell Community Room
Full Room
Sunday – Thursday $550
Friday $875
Saturday $1,075
Half Room
Sunday – Thursday $350
Friday – Saturday N/A
Regular Wedell Community Room
Full Room
Sunday – Thursday $625
Friday $975
Saturday $1,175
Half Room
Sunday – Thursday $380
Friday – Saturday N/A
Haffeman Pavilion
Resident $300
Regular $325
Water Charges:
Single, multi-family, town home, condo, apartment, mobile home
Water availability charge $ 2 5.00 per unit
Water usage charge:
Tier 1 - 5,000 gallons of water per unit $ 1.67 per 1,000 gallons
Tier 2 - 5,000 gallons of water per unit $ 2.68 per 1,000 gallons
Tier 3 - 20,000 gallons of water per unit $ 3.71 per 1,000 gallons
Tier 4 - All remaining water $ 6.11 per 1,000 gallons
Water standby - service available but not in use
Water availability charge $ 2 5.00 per unit
Commercial, industrial, hotel, motel, public institution,
religious/charitable, residential irrigation-only accounts
Water availability charge $ 2 5.00 per account
Water usage charge:
Tier 1 - First 50,000 gallons of water $ 2.68 per 1,000 gallons
Tier 2 - Next 1,150,000 gallons of water $ 3.71 per 1,000 gallons
Tier 3 - All remaining water $ 6.11 per 1,000 gallons
Automatic sprinkler system inspection charge
Fireline $ 6 .00 per account
Sewer Charges:
Single, multi-family, town home, condo, apartment
Sewer availability charge $ 46.18 per unit
Sewer usage charge (based on winter water consumption per unit):
Tier 1 - Up to 5 thousand gallons per unit $ 19.52 per unit
Tier 2 - Between 5,001 and 10,000 gallons per unit $ 33.59 per unit
Tier 3 - Between 10,001 and 20,000 gallons per unit $ 51.52 per unit
Tier 4 - Between 20,001 and 30,000 gallons per unit $ 70.06 per unit
Tier 5 - More than 30,000 gallons per unit $ 91.01 per unit
Note: Winter readings are billed in February, March and April.
Winter consumption is divided by units for multiple-unit buildings.
Sewer standby - service available but not in use
Sewer availability charge per unit $ 46.18 per unit
Sewer only single-family and mobile home (availability and use charge combined)
Sewer usage charge (middle residential tier) $ 97.70 per unit
Commercial, industrial, hotel, motel, public institution, religious/charitable
Sewer availability charge $ 46.18 per account
Sewer usage charge (based on current water consumption):
All remaining water consumed $ 4 .94 per 1,000 gallons
EXHIBIT A
2020 UTILITY FEE SCHEDULE
QUARTERLY UTILITY RATES
CITY OF SHOREVIEW, MINNESOTA
Surface Water Management Charges:
Single-family
Surface water charge: $ 32.30 per unit
Multi family, town home
Surface water charge: $ 34.21 per unit
Condominium, apartment, mobile home, hotel, motel,
commercial, industrial, public institution, religious/charitable
Surface water charge: $ 270.02 per acre
Parks
Surface water charge: $ - per acre
Street Lighting System Charges:
Single, multi-family, town home
Street lighting system charge $ 1 4.31 per unit
Condominium, apartment, mobile home
Street lighting system charge $ 10.73 per unit
Hotel, motel, commercial, industrial, public institution, religious/charitable
Street lighting system charge $ 42.96 per acre
Parks
Street lighting system charge $ - per acre