CHAPTER I
Section 100-How to use the Code,
Separability, Penalties and Venue in Criminal Cases
Section 100:00. Name and Citation of Codification. This codification of the ordinances of the
City of St. Cloud will be known as "The 2007 Code of Ordinances of the City of St. Cloud" and
may be referred to by that name in all proceedings and actions and may be referred to within the
Code or by other users as "this Code", or "the Code", or "the Ordinance Code". Any reference to
a portion name and citation may be by chapter, section, subsection, or subdivision by using the
following symbols:
For Chapter: Chap. I - by use of Roman Numerals.
For Section: Sec. 100 - by use of Arabic Numerals.
For Subsection: Sec. 100:01 - by use of Arabic Numerals for the section number
and Arabic Numerals after the colon to indicate subsection.
For subdivision: Sec. 100:01, Subd. 1.
References or citations made in form other than the foregoing will not defeat the legislative intent
of the Council nor the clear intent of other users of this Code. Use of Arabic Numerals for
Roman, or use of Roman for Arabic, will not invalidate any reference or citation to this code or
portions thereof if the intent of the user is otherwise clear. Use of the word "section" will not
expand the meaning of the citation if the meaning clearly refers to one or more subsections.
Section 100:10. Chapter, Section and Subdivision Headings. All chapter, section, subsection and
subdivision headings of this code are to be construed as not a part of the subject matter of the code, but
are intended for convenience only and not as comprehensive titles.
Section 100:20. Legislative History. The legislative history is written at the end of each subsection,
which specifies the year and the ordinance that amended or repealed the subsection.
Section 100:30. Separability. Every section, provision or part of the 2007 Code of Ordinances of the
City of St. Cloud is declared separable from every other section, provision or part, and if any section,
provision or part of said code will be held invalid, it will not affect any other section, provision or part
thereof.
Section 100:40. Penalty for Violations. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Code will be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction may be punished by a fine of not more than One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for not to exceed 90 days, or both; provided,
however, that if a petty misdemeanor or other different punishment be prescribed for violation of a
specific portion of this code, such provisions will govern the punishment for such violations.
Section 100:50. Revocation of Licenses. Violation by a licensee of any provision of this code
prescribing conditions or requirements relative to licenses held by such a licensee will be grounds for
revocation of such license.
Section 100:60 Venue In Criminal Cases
Subd. 1. Benton County Offenses. Criminal Offenses that occur within that portion of the City of St.
Cloud that lies within Benton County and over which the Benton County Attorney is the prosecuting
authority shall be venued in Benton County.
Subd. 2. Sherburne County Offenses. Criminal offenses that occur within that portion of the City of
St. Cloud that lies within Sherburne County and over which the Sherburne County Attorney is the
prosecuting authority shall be venued in Sherburne County.
History: Ord. 2491 1-24-11
Section 101 – Definitions of this Code
Section 101:00. "Person(s)” means and includes a natural person of either sex, persons,
partnerships, corporations, and associations of persons, and shall include the manager or agent of
the aforesaid. The singular shall include the plural and all pronouns shall include the masculine,
feminine and neuter.
Section 101:10. "City" and "Municipality", unless otherwise specified herein, means the City of
St. Cloud, whose City Hall is located in the City of St. Cloud, County of Stearns, State of
Minnesota.
Section 101:20. “Ordinance" used in this Code shall refer to the chapter or section in which it
appears and related sections, subsections and subdivisions under the same chapter or section.
Section 101:30. "Penal Offense” means the violation of an ordinance, code, or other legislative
action of the Council for which either fines or imprisonment, or both, are prescribed and shall
include misdemeanors and petty misdemeanors.
Section 101:40. "Misdemeanor" is defined in accordance with Minn.Stat. § 609.02 Subd. 3.
Section 101:50. "Petty misdemeanor" is defined in accordance with Minn.Stat. § 609.02 Subd.
4(a).
Section 101:55. “Council or City Council” is the City Council of the City of St. Cloud.
Section 101:60. The term "et seq." following a section or subsection shall mean the sections or
subsections designated together with such sections or subsections following thereafter as shall
pertain to the same subject matter or otherwise shall be so related that they shall be considered
together for a proper expression of intent or purpose.
Section 102-Criminal History Background for Applicants for
City Employment and City Licenses
Section 102:10. Employment Background Checks
Subd. 1. Applicants for City Employment:
A. Purpose. The purpose and intent of this Section is to establish regulations that will
allow Law Enforcement access to Minnesota’s Computerized Criminal History
information for specified non-criminal purposes of employment background checks
for the positions described in Section 1.B.(1).
B. Criminal History Employment Background Investigations. The St. Cloud Police
Department is hereby required, as the exclusive entity within the City, to do a
criminal history background investigation on the applicants for the following
positions within the City, unless the City’s hiring authority concludes that a
background investigation is not needed:
1. Employment positions: all regular part-time and full-time employees, interns, and
volunteers of the City of St. Cloud, including positions that work with children or
vulnerable adults.
2. In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen
employment applicants, the St. Cloud Police Department is authorized to access
data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions
Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance with Minnesota
Statutes Section 299C.72. Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be
maintained at the St. Cloud Police Department under the care and custody of the
chief law enforcement official or his or her designee. A summary of the results of
the Criminal History data may be released by the St. Cloud Police Department to
the hiring authority, including the City Council, the City Administrator, or other
St. Cloud City Staff or consultants involved in the hiring process.
3. Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the St. Cloud
Police Department by written consent to undertake the investigation. The written
consent must fully comply with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 13
regarding the collection, maintenance and use of the information. Except for the
positions set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 364.09, the City will not reject
an applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction
unless the crime is directly related to the position of employment sought and the
conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail
sentence. If the City rejects the applicant’s request on this basis, the City shall
notify the applicant in writing of the following:
a. The grounds and reasons for the denial.
b. The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minnesota
Statutes Section 364.06.
c. The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment.
d. That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
Section 102:20 License Background Checks.
Subd. 1. Applicants for City Licenses:
A. Purpose. The purpose and intent of this Section is to establish regulations that will
allow Law Enforcement access to Minnesota’s Computerized Criminal History
information for specified non-criminal purposes of licensing background checks.
B. Criminal History License Background Investigations. The St. Cloud Police
Department is hereby required, as the exclusive entity within the City, to do a
criminal history background investigation on the applicants for the following licenses
within the City:
1. City Licenses:
Gambling License (Ordinance Section 410)
Tobacco Sales License (Ordinance Section 424)
Massage Facilities License (Ordinance Section 447)
Pawnbroker License (Ordinance Section 457)
Taxicab License (Ordinance Section 472)
Peddlers/Transient Merchant License (Ordinance Section 475)
Liquor License (Ordinance Section 810)
Dance Establishment (Ordinance Section 405)
2. In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen
license applicants, the St. Cloud Police Department is authorized to access data
maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions Computerized
Criminal History information system in accordance with Minnesota Statutes
Section 299C.72 . Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at
the St. Cloud Police Department under the care and custody of the chief law
enforcement or his or her designee. A summary of the results of the
Computerized Criminal History data may be released by the St. Cloud Police
Department to the licensing authority, including the City Council, the City
Administrator, or other City Staff or consultants involved in the license approval
process.
3. Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the St. Cloud
Police Department by written consent to undertake the investigation. The written
consent must fully comply with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 13
regarding the collection, maintenance and use of the information. Except for the
positions set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 364.09, the City will not reject
an applicant for a license on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction unless
the crime is directly related to the license sought and the conviction is for a
felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the City
rejects the applicant’s request on this basis, the City shall notify the applicant in
writing of the following:
a. The grounds and reasons for the denial.
b. The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minnesota
Statutes Section 364.06.
c. The earliest date the applicant may reapply for the license.
d. That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
Section 102:30. Utilization of BCA Services. The City may, in the alternative, utilize
the BCA to conduct criminal history background checks for either employment or
licensing purposes.
History: Ord. 2601 11-24-15;
Section 105 - Administrative Code
Section 105:00. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to clearly define the authority and
responsibilities of all officers and employees, to provide for the proper coordination and control
of activities, and to create proper lines of communication within the administrative service of
the City.
THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR
Section 105:03. Office of City Administrator, Established Duties.
Subd. 1. In accordance with Sections 2.40 and 3.50 of the City Charter, there will be the
office of "City Administrator" of the City of St. Cloud. The City Administrator will be
appointed by the Mayor with approval of a majority of the City Council and will have the
duties stated in this section.
Subd. 2. Under direction of the Mayor, the City Administrator will Mayor exercise
control and supervision over all administrative affairs of the City government and to that
end may investigate, examine, or inquire into the affairs or operation of any section,
department, division, office or other units of the city administration.
Subd. 3. The City Administrator will issue administrative manuals, orders, rules,
directives and regulations not inconsistent with the Charter, the ordinances of the City
and State law, when approved by the Mayor. Such rules, manuals, orders, directives, and
regulations will outline the general and specific procedures for the administration of the
City's activities.
Subd. 4. The City Administrator will recommend to the Mayor such measures and
policies as the Administrator may determine necessary or expedient for the best interests
of the City.
Subd. 5. The City Administrator will keep the Mayor advised of the financial condition
and needs of the City and prepare and submit annually to the Mayor an administrative
budget which will be compiled from the various section and departmental budget
requests.
Subd. 6. The City Administrator may temporarily reassign personnel.
Subd. 7. The City Administrator will perform such additional duties as may be assigned
by the Mayor or by ordinance.
Subd. 8. The City Administrator may assign work projects to a section or department.
THE ORGANIZATION
Section 105:06. Sections Enumerated.
Subd. 1. In order to provide for the economic, efficient and prompt discharge of the
administrative functions of the City, the administrative service of the City government
will be divided into six sections.
Subd. 2. The Public Services Section will consist of the Departments of Engineering,
Public Utilities, Public Works, Airport and Parks.
Subd. 3. The Finance Section will consist of the Departments of Accounting, City Clerk,
Assessing and Information Technology.
Subd. 4. The Law Enforcement Services Section will consist of the Police Department.
Subd. 5. The Fire and Emergency Services Section will consist of the Fire Department
and the Department of Emergency Management.
Subd. 6. The Community Development Section will consist of the Departments of
Planning and Zoning, Health and Inspections, Economic Development, and Building
Inspections.
Subd. 7. The Community Services and Facilities Section will consist of the Civic
Center Department, Municipal Athletic Complex Department, Department of Aging
Services, Recreation Department and the Paramount Department.
Section 105:09. Officers Enumerated. Those filling the following offices within the
administrative service will be officers of the City: Mayor, City Administrator, City Attorney,
City Clerk, City Treasurer, City Assessor, City Engineer, and such others as the Council may
designate by ordinance or resolution.
Section 105:12. Oath of Office.
Subd. 1. The following officers and employees in the administrative service will be
required to take an oath of office before entering upon the discharge of their duties, which
oath will be subscribed by the person taking it and will be filed and preserved in the
Office of the City Clerk.
Subd. 2. The Mayor and all other officers of the City within the administrative service;
Subd. 3. Every member of the Police Department including private, special, temporary
or substitute police officer;
Subd. 4. Every member of the Fire Department;
Subd. 5. Such other officers or employees who may be designated by resolution of the
City Council.
.
Section 105:15. Duties and Supervision of Officers, General. Each officer will perform all
duties required by their office by State law, the City Charter, this code, and ordinances of the
City. Additionally each officer will perform such other duties as may be requested by the City
Administrator subject to the direction of the Mayor and may from time to time serve as the
head of one or more sections, departments or divisions of the administrative service.
.
Section 105:18. Duties of Certain Officers, Specific.
Subd. 1. At the direction of the City Administrator, the heads of sections will have the
following duties;
Subd. 2. Be immediately responsible to the City Administrator for the effective
administration of their respective sections and subordinate departments. Section and
department heads have the power to establish work rules and to initiate disciplinary
proceedings in accordance with established Civil Service rules.
Subd. 3. Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and will
implement, with the approval of the City Administrator, such new practices as appear to be
of benefit to the service and to the public.
Subd. 4. Submit reports of the activities of their departments to the City Administrator as
requested.
Subd. 5. Establish and maintain a system of records and reports in sufficient detail to
furnish all information necessary for proper control of section activities and to form a basis
for the periodic reports to the City Administrator.
Subd. 6. Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all City property and equipment
used in their sections.
Subd. 7. Cooperate with each other and furnish, upon the request of the City
Administrator or the Mayor, any other section or department such service, labor and
materials as may be requisitioned by the head of such section or department, and as its own
facilities permit through the same procedure and subject to the same audit and control as
other expenditures are incurred.
Subd. 8. Be responsible for recommending to the Mayor and City Administrator changes
in codes, ordinances, and internal organizations which will improve the operations of their
sections.
Subd. 9. Be responsible for submitting an annual budget request to the City Administrator
which will include proposed additions or deletions in staff, adjustments in salary schedules
and additions to plant and equipment.
Subd. 10. Have responsibility for keeping the City Administration advised as to the
programs and policies of other governmental agencies which might affect the City's
operations within their area of responsibility.
Subd. 11. Have authority to hire subject to the approval of the Mayor and established Civil
Service rules all part-time and temporary employees for their sections and departments.
Subd. 12. Have the authority to recommend subject to the approval of the Mayor the heads
of all departments and divisions within their sections where such appointments are not
provided for in this code or elsewhere.
THE INDEPENDENT DEPARTMENTS
Section 105:21. Independent Departments. The Departments of Legal Services, Human
Resources and Human Rights will be independent of all sections and will report directly to the
Office of the City Administrator.
Subd. 1. The Legal Services Department will be headed by the City Attorney with
responsibilities for:
(a) Appearing for the city in all cases or hearings in which it is a party;
(b) Advising the Council, its committees, or any City officer on all legal
questions arising in the conduct of the City's business;
(c) Preparing or revising ordinances when so requested by the Council, its
committees, or by the City Administrator;
(d) Prosecuting all penal offenses committed within the City;
(e) Reviewing the Police Training Program in cooperation with the Police
Chief;
(f) Performing such additional legal duties as may be necessary upon request
by the Council, its committees, the Mayor, or the City Administrator.
Subd. 2. The Human Resources Department will be headed by the Human Resources
Director with the following duties and responsibilities:
(a) May serve as secretary to the Civil Service Board and perform such duties as
may be assigned by the Board:
(b) Perform various personnel management duties under direction of the City
Administrator including such matters as pay and fringe benefit studies,
employee grievance procedures and job classification studies;
(c) Perform related work as required.
Subd. 3. The Human Rights Department will be headed by the Human Rights Director
with responsibilities for promoting human rights, diversity, and fair treatment of all
persons through education, individual assessment, information and referral.
THE SIX SECTIONS
Section 105:24 Finance. The Finance Section will be headed by the Director of Finance who will
have responsibilities for financial planning and management, budgeting preparation and debt
management, staff services to the Mayor and City Administrator and such additional duties as
assigned. The Director of Finance also has the responsibility of investment of City funds as City
Treasurer. The Finance Section will consist of the following departments:
Subd. 1. The City Clerk's Department will be headed by the City Clerk with
responsibilities for the, issuance of licenses and permits, recording and custody of official
documents, legal publication, the administration of elections, insurance, and such
additional duties as may be properly assigned. There will be an Assistant City Clerk
appointed by the Mayor who will perform the duties of the City Clerk in cases of the City
Clerk's absence or disability and such other duties as may be properly assigned.
Subd. 2. The Assessor’s Department will be headed by the City Assessor with
responsibilities for the valuation and classification of real and personal property in the City
and the management of the City’s assessment records.
Subd. 3. The Accounting/Budgeting Department will be headed by the Accounting
Supervisor with responsibilities for the control of receipts, accounts payable, fixed assets,
special assessments, budgeting, and financial reporting of all City funds.
Subd. 4. The Information Technology Department will be headed by the Information
Technology Director with responsibility for the hardware, software, operating systems and
network for all City facilities. In addition, the IT Division is responsible for the
maintenance and governance of the City’s telecommunication and wireless networks.
Section 105:27 Community Services and Facilities. The Community Services and Facilities
Section will have supervisory responsibility over the Departments of Aging Services, Civic
Center, Municipal Athletic Complex, Paramount and Recreation. This department will be headed
by a Director who will be responsible to the City Administrator and the Mayor for the efficient
operation of the departments under the Director’s jurisdiction. The Community Services and
Facilities Section will consist of the following departments:
Subd. 1. The Aging Services Department will be headed by the Director of Aging
Services with responsibilities for program operations at Whitney Senior Center,
volunteer services and in partnership with other city services and community agencies
addressing the needs of the city’s aging population through advocacy, programming and
education. Volunteer services include responsibilities for engaging older citizens in
community service and helping to mobilize other volunteer resources to address human
needs.
Subd. 2. The Civic Center Department will be headed by the Civic Center Director
with responsibilities for the operation of the Civic/Convention Center Complex;
scheduling the use of the facilities ; preparing reports and plans for utilization and
promotion of the facilities.
Subd. 3. The Municipal Athletic Complex Department will be headed by the Municipal
Athletic Complex Director with responsibilities for the operation of the Municipal
Athletic Complex; scheduling the use of the facilities ; preparing reports and plans for
utilization and promotion of the facilities.
Subd. 4. The Paramount Department will be headed by the Paramount Director with
responsibilities for the operation of the Paramount Theatre and Arts Complex;
scheduling the use of the facilities; preparing reports and plans for utilization and
promotion of the facilities.
Subd. 5. The Recreation Department will be headed by the Recreation Director with
responsibilities: to plan, promote, organize and supervise a comprehensive recreation
program for the benefits of the residents of the City of St. Cloud; to supervise the use of
all City recreational facilities; to conduct and supervise any form of recreation, cultural or
social activity which will employ the leisure time of the citizens in a wholesomely
constructive manner.
Section 105:30 Public Services. The Public Services Section will have supervisory responsibility
over the Departments of Public Works, Engineering,, Parks, Public Utilities and Airports. This
section will be headed by a Director who will be responsible to the City Administrator and the
Mayor for the efficient operation of the departments under the Director’s jurisdiction. The
Director will also regulate and control the purchase and use of goods and equipment and the hiring
and assignment of personnel in such a manner as to achieve the maximum economy. The Public
Services Section will consist of the following departments.
Subd. 1. The Engineering Department will be headed by the City Engineer who will be a
registered engineer under the laws of Minnesota with responsibilities for all project
engineering, traffic engineering, and subdivision services, related code enforcement,
engineering studies and records maintenance.
Subd. 2. The Public Works Department will be headed by the Public Works Director with
responsibilities for matters relating to construction, maintenance, management, and
operation of the physical property of the City assigned to the department. The Public
Works Department will consist of the following divisions: Central Maintenance, Streets,
Sanitation, Parking, Equipment Maintenance and Traffic System Services.
Subd. 3. The Parks Department will be headed by the Parks Director who will have
responsibilities for the acquisition and development of the City's park system, maintenance
of all City-owned or leased land and buildings not assigned to some other department, and
the care of trees on street right-of-ways and on park property.
Subd. 4. The Airport Department will be headed by the Director of Airports with
responsibilities for planning, organizing, and directing the activities of the St. Cloud
Regional Airport.
Subd. 5. The Public Utilities Department will be headed by the Director of Public
Utilities with responsibilities for planning, organizing, and directing the activities of the St.
Cloud Public Utilities System, including sewerage collection, sewerage treatment,
industrial pretreatment, water distribution, water treatment, water meters, electrical
generation, electrical distribution, stormwater management and related operations. Public
Utilities Department will consist of the following divisions:
(a) Wastewater Treatment Services will be headed by the Wastewater Services
Manager with responsibilities for the wastewater treatment systems.
(b) Water Treatment Services will be headed by the Water Services Manager with
responsibilities for the water supply and treatment systems.
(c) Water Distribution, Water Meters and Wastewater Collection Services will be
headed by the Infrastructure Services Manager with responsibilities for the
sewerage collection and water distribution systems.
(d) Hydroelectric Production will be headed by the Hydroelectric Production
Manager with responsibilities for the hydroelectric facility.
(e) Stormwater Services will be headed by the Stormwater Services Manager with
responsibilities for the stormwater system.
Section 105:33. Law Enforcement. The Law Enforcement Services Section will consist of the
Police Department. The Police Department will be headed by the Police Chief with
responsibilities for assuring the efficient operation of the Police Department, seeing that order is
maintained, that laws and ordinances are enforced and taking the necessary measures to prevent
crime and to protect lives and property. The Chief of Police will be responsible for training,
assignment, supervision, and discipline of all department personnel.
Section 105:36. Fire Services. The Fire and Emergency Services Section will consist of the Fire
Department and the Emergency Management Department.
Subd. 1. The Fire Department will be headed by the Fire Chief with responsibilities for
assuring the efficient operation of the Fire Department, efforts towards the prevention of
fires and the protection of life and property against fires or other disasters, either natural or
man made. The Fire Chief will be responsible for training, assignment, supervision, and
discipline, of all department personnel.
Subd. 2. The Emergency Management Department will be headed by the Fire Chief
with responsibilities for the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City in
emergency situations resulting from manmade or natural disasters.
Section 105:39. Community Development. The Community Development Section will have
supervisory responsibility over the Departments of Planning and Zoning, Health and Inspections,
Economic Development and Building Safety. This section will be headed by a Director who will
be responsible to the City Administrator and the Mayor for the efficient operation of the
departments under the Director’s jurisdiction. The Director will also regulate and control the
purchase and use of goods and equipment and the hiring and assignment of personnel in such a
manner as to achieve the maximum economy. The Community Development Section will consist
of the following departments.
Subd. 1. The Planning and Zoning Department will be headed by the Planning and Zoning
Director with responsibilities for:
(a) Enforcing compliance with the City’s Land Development Code and the
Comprehensive Plan;
(b) Reviewing and recommending revisions of the above;
(c) May serve as secretary to the Planning Commission, Heritage Preservation
Commission, and Zoning Board of Appeals;
(d) Preparing reports and plans for the development of the City relative to growth,
subdivisions, zoning, environmental review, capital improvements, annexations
and other related problems;
(e) Performing such additional duties as may be properly assigned.
Subd. 2. The Health and Inspections Department will be headed by the Health Director
who will have current Minnesota Department of Health, Environmental Health/Sanitarian
Registration responsibility for the enforcement of all laws and ordinances relating to the
protection and preservation of the public health. The Health and Inspections Department
will consist of the following divisions: Environmental Health, Animal Control, and
Housing and Code Enforcement.
(a) The Environmental Health Division will be responsible for the enforcement of
all laws and ordinances relating to environmental health.
(b) The Animal Control Division will be responsible for the enforcement of all
laws and ordinances relating to animals.
(c) The Housing and Code Enforcement Division will be responsible for the
enforcement of all the laws and ordinances relating to housing, nuisances, and
portions of the City’s Land Development Code.
Subd. 3. The Building Safety Department will be headed by the Chief Building Official
who will have responsibilities for the enforcement of all laws and ordinances relating to
the construction of buildings.
Subd. 4. The Economic Development Department will be headed by the Economic
Development Director who will have the responsibilities for:
(a) leading the City's business recruitment, retention, and expansion initiatives;
(b) serving as primary staff to the City's Economic Development Authority as
established by the City of St. Cloud; and
(c) administering development and redevelopment incentive programs.
History: Ord. 2358 6-18-07; Ord. 2452 3-8-10; Ord. 2461 5-10-10
Section 110 - Fees and Compensation of
City Officers and Employees
Section 110:00. Compensation. The compensation of officers and employees of the City will be
a fixed and definite sum, as now or hereafter may be fixed by the proper authority.
Section 110:05. Fees. All fees collected by any officer or employee will become the property of
the City and will be turned over to the City Treasurer immediately, but in no event after the 5th
day of the next succeeding calendar month.
Section 115 - Workers Compensation
for Elected Officials and Appointed Officers
Section 115:00. Workers Compensation for Elected Officials and Appointed Officers. Pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes 176.011, Subd. 9, clause 6, the elected officials of the City and those municipal
officers appointed for regular term of office are included in the coverage of the Minnesota Workers
Compensation Act.
Section 120 – Compensation of the Mayor
Section 120:00. Compensation of the Mayor. Pursuant to Section 310 of the Home Rule Charter
of the City of St. Cloud, and Minnesota Statutes 415.11, the salary of the Mayor of the City of St.
Cloud shall be $50,000 per year for which the Mayor shall devote his or her skills to the
management of the Office of the Mayor and shall not engage in any other occupation,
employment, business or activity that shall in any way interfere with the performance of his or
her duties as Mayor.
Section 120:10. Insurance Benefits. The Mayor shall be permitted to select from the same health,
dental, and life insurance options that are made available to unclassified employees of the City.
The City shall contribute toward the cost of the premiums for the plan selected by the Mayor, the
same percent of the total cost of premiums paid on behalf of unclassified employees for health
insurance, life and dental insurance. The Mayor shall be responsible for all costs for insurance in
excess of the City's contribution. That amount shall be directly deducted from the Mayor's
compensation.
Section 120:20. Automobile Allowance. The Mayor shall be given an automobile allowance in
the amount of $420.00 per month.
Section 120:30. Periodic Review. A non-biased panel of experts, appointed by the mayor, shall
meet every four years to make recommendations regarding the salary of the mayor beginning in
2008. The City Council shall review and act on the recommendations of this panel during the
month of September prior to each mayoral election. Any adjustments to the mayor’s salary will
be implemented on January 1, following the election.
Ord. 2680 9-26-16
Section 125 – Compensation of Council Members
Section 125:00. Compensation of Council Members. Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 415.11, the
salary of a Council member of the City of St. Cloud will be as follows:
Council President $14,000 per year
All other members of the Council $12,500 per year
Section 125:10. Insurance Benefits. Members of the City Council are not eligible for health
insurance benefits. Those Council members that had been receiving the equivalent benefit of a
full-time unclassified employee may elect to retain that benefit until the end of their current term
of office. All Council members re-elected or taking office after December 31, 2010, will not be
eligible for health benefits.
Section 125:20. Periodic Review. A non-biased panel of experts, appointed by the Mayor, shall
meet every four years to make recommendations regarding the salary of the Council members
beginning in 2016. The City Council shall review and act on the recommendations of this panel
during the month of September prior to each mayoral election. Any adjustments to the Council
members’ salary will be implemented on January 1, following the election.
History: Ord. 2468, 5-24-10; Ord. 2679, 9-26-16
Section 130 - Use of Motor Vehicles
on Public Property Prohibited
Section 130:00. Definitions.
Subd. 1. The word "vehicle" as used in this ordinance means every device in, upon or by
which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn, except devices moved by
human power.
Subd. 2. Publicly owned land will include all lands owned or leased by the City of St.
Cloud or by any other public agency within the City limits, including parks, playgrounds,
and golf courses.
Section 130:05. Prohibited Operation; Exceptions. It will be unlawful and a penal offense for any
person to use, operate or park any vehicle on publicly owned land in the City of St. Cloud, except:
(1) Upon streets, highways or alleys designated as such for the purpose of vehicular
travel or parking; or
(2) Upon any land designated by the Mayor for vehicular use for special events or
programs recommended by the Park and Recreation Board.
(3) Upon public parking lots or parking structures designated as such by the Director
of Public Works or the City Council.
Section 130:10. Towing Cars in Violation. The City may tow away or cause to be towed away by
its employees or any other person, any vehicle found upon publicly owned land in violation of this
ordinance. The vehicle will be impounded in accordance with this ordinance.
Section 130:15. Procedure for Impounding Cars in Violation. If any vehicle is found unlawfully
parked, or left parked, such vehicle may be towed away or caused to be towed away by the City and
impounded until the owner pays the towing costs, and the required fees for storage and other
expense (in accordance with M.S. §169.041 and §168B.04). Any person removing or tampering
with an impounded vehicle without the permission of the City or of the employee of the City in
charge of the impounded vehicle will be guilty of a penal offense. Any person desiring to release
any impounded vehicle must produce evidence showing him to be the owner of the impounded
vehicle.
Section 130:20. Owner Identification. Upon the impounding of any vehicle hereunder, the person
in charge of such vehicle will immediately notify the Chief of Police of the impoundment, who will
make every reasonable effort to ascertain the name and address of the person owning the vehicle,
and, if ascertained, the Chief will immediately advise the owner by letter, duly addressed to the
owner, and deposited in the United States Post Office of St. Cloud. In the letter, the Chief will:
(1) Give the general description of the vehicle, and the license number thereon if there
be one.
(2) Give the approximate time of its removal and the reason therefor, and the place
where it is stored.
(3) State the towing charge and the daily storage charge in those instances where the
vehicle has been towed and impounded by the City or its employees.
(4) Advise the owner that to release the vehicle, the owner must produce reasonably
satisfactory evidence showing that person to be the owner of the vehicle.
Section 130:25. Money to be Delivered to Treasurer. Any employee receiving any money for the
release of an impounded vehicle will within 24 hours deliver such money to the City Treasurer,
together with a statement identifying the released vehicle and the amount of money required.
Section 145 - Unclassified Service, Certain Designations
145:00. Unclassified positions of employment. The following positions of employment with the
City of St. Cloud are hereby placed in the unclassified service, pursuant to Section 7.30 of the
Home Rule Charter:
Administrative Secretary
Purchasing Officer
Administrative Aide
Administrative Assistant-Air Service Project
Air Service Project Manager
Municipal Athletic Complex Manager
Assistant City Engineer
Plant Superintendent/Chemist
Traffic Engineer
City Clerk
City Attorney
Parks Director
Assistant Parks Director
Recreation Director
Assistant Recreation Director
Emergency Management Director
Director of Public Utilities
Director of Public Works/City Engineer
Human Resources Director
Planning and Community Development Director
Assistant Public Utilities Director
City Administrator
Assistant City Attorney I & II
Health Director
Finance Director
Paralegal
Human Rights Director
Aging Services Program Coordinator
Aging Services Director
Assistant Director of Operations & Maintenance
Assistant to Finance Director
Civic Facilities Director
Civic Center Operations Manager
Retired and Senior Volunteer Program (RSVP) Director
Retired Senior Volunteer Program (RSVP) Coordinator
Marketing and Events Coordinator
Utilities Water Quality Coordinator
Water Services Manager
Wastewater Services Manager
Building Inspection Program Coordinator
Civil Engineer
Director of Airports
Information Technology Director
Administrative Assistant - Mayor's Office
Accounting Supervisor
Community Services Director
Director of Public Services
Traffic Signal Manager
Assistant City Attorney
Traffic System Manager
Senior Planner
Information Technology Coordinator
Senior Registered Civil Engineer
SECTION 151: WARD AND PRECINCT BOUNDARIES
Section 151:00. Ward and Precinct Boundaries. The area of the City as now or hereinafter established
shall be divided into wards and precincts as designated on the City’s official ward and precinct map
which is hereby incorporated by reference.
History: Ord. 2524 3-26-12
CHAPTER II
Section 200 - Airports
Section 200:00. Definitions.
Subd. 1. St. Cloud Regional Airport. The St. Cloud Regional Airport means all land and
rights thereto including water, improvements, and personal property thereon which is
designated as the St. Cloud Regional Airport located at 1550 - 45th Avenue Southeast, St.
Cloud, Minnesota.
Subd. 2. Director. The Director is the Director of Public Works with responsibilities for
the following divisions: Engineer, Central Maintenance, Street and Sanitation, Parking,
Traffic Control, Equipment Maintenance and Airport.
Subd. 3. Airport Manager. The Airport Manager is the manager of the St. Cloud Regional
Airport for the City of St. Cloud.
Subd. 4. Business use. Business use for aeronautical purposes means the use of the airport
facilities in such a way that the airport is indispensable to the user's usual and customary
business operation, such as, but not necessarily limited to: flight instruction, aircraft sales,
airframe and/or power plant repair, aircraft rental, hanger rental, aircraft fuel, and all
dispensing service, air taxi service, aerial applications, flying clubs, and air freight service.
The use of the airport by businesses and individuals when the use is not indispensably
related to an aeronautical industry shall be deemed a private use.
Section 200:05. Event Scheduling. The Director shall have discretionary authority to schedule
events and all other uses of the St. Cloud Regional Airport. Priority will be given to aeronautical
events.
Section 200:10. Rental Fees. Rental fees and charges for use of the St. Cloud Regional Airport
are stated in Sections 570:00 of this code. A rental fee and deposit shall be paid prior to receipt of
the permit and obtained pursuant to this section.
Section 200:15. Permits Required. Any use of the St. Cloud Regional Airport which is not
authorized by a permit as provided herein shall be a violation of this ordinance.
Section 200:20. Permits. The City Clerk is authorized to issue permits for the business use of the
St. Cloud Regional Airport when the intended use conforms to standards adopted by the City
Council; the airport manager shall prepare suitable forms for applications; the required annual
license fee shall be paid at the time of filing the application; all permits shall be for a period of one
year, shall not be transferable or refundable; a permit shall be cancelled if the permit holder fails
to conform to the standards.
Section 200:25. Standards. The Airport Manager is authorized and directed to develop minimum
standards for use of the St. Cloud Regional Airport and to present such standards to the Council
within a reasonable time after November 9, 1970; such standards shall include mandatory lease
clauses, standards of conduct, insurance requirements, and any other pertinent material deemed
essential to the operation of the airport; such standards shall be considered by the Council, and
when adopted, shall provide the basis by which the City Clerk shall issue permits.
Section 200:30. Application.
Subd. 1. A person seeking issuance of a permit shall file an application with designated
staff at the Airport Administration Offices. The application shall state the information as
follows:
Subd. 2. Name and address of applicant.
Subd. 3. Name and address of the person(s) sponsoring the activity.
Subd. 4. The day and hour for which the permit is desired.
Subd. 5. An estimate of attendance.
Subd. 6. What type of activities are going to be conducted.
Subd. 7. Any other information which the Airport Manager shall find reasonably necessary
for fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued.
Section 200:35. Standards of Issuance. The Airport Manager shall issue a permit when all of
the requirements of the following subdivisions have been met:
Subd. 1. The proposed activity or use of the St. Cloud Regional Airport will not
unreasonably interfere with or detract from the normal daily activities of the airport.
Subd. 2. The proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to invite violence, crime
or disorderly conduct.
Subd. 3. The proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome
expenses or police operation by the City.
Subd. 4. The area desired has not been reserved for other use at the day and hour requested
in the application.
Subd. 5. The application is refused, the Airport Manager shall make known in writing to
the applicant the reason or reasons for refusal.
Subd. 6. No permit shall be issued for a period of time in excess of five consecutive days.
Section 200:40. Effect of Permit. The permit holder is bound by all St. Cloud Regional Airport
rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances of the City.
Section 200:45. Hold Harmless. Any person(s) to whom the permit is issued shall indemnify and
hold harmless the City and any of its officers, employees or agents for any loss, damage, injury or
death from any act or omission of the person(s) to whom the permit is issued, said persons,
invitees, licensees, employees or agents, while on or near the Airport premises.
Section 200:50. Revocation. The Airport Manager the authority to revoke a permit for good
cause or upon a violation of any rule or ordinance.
Section 200:60. Private Use. Private use of the St. Cloud Regional Airport by the public is
authorized and encouraged so long as that use is not in conflict with the public interest. Private
use shall not require a permit.
Section 200:65. Business Use. Business use of the St. Cloud Regional Airport for aeronautical
purposes is authorized and encouraged, but only by the permit holder.
Section 201 - Airport Advisory Board
Section 201:00. Purpose. The Airport Advisory Board will act in an advisory and review
capacity to the Mayor regarding operation and construction on the airport.
Section 201:10. Membership.
Subd. 1. The Airport Advisory Board must consist of seven voting members and a
minimum of six ex-officio non-voting members. Appointments of the Board must be
made by the Mayor and must represent a cross-section of aviation interest.
Subd. 2. The fixed base operator(s) or designated representative must serve in an exofficio
capacity. The remaining ex-officio non-voting members must be appointed one
each by the Benton County Board, the Sherburne County Board, the Stearns County
Board, the Haven Township Board of Supervisors, and one for each Commuter Service
Company.
Section 201:15. Terms and Appointment. The original appointments of voting members must
be for the following terms: Two members appointed for one year terms; two members appointed
for two year terms; one member appointed for a three year term. Thereafter, appointments of
voting members will be made each year for three year terms. At the first meeting of each
calendar year, the Board must select a Chair, a Vice-Chair, and a Secretary, each to serve
throughout the year and until a successor is chosen. Vacancies must be filled for the remaining
term in the same manner as original appointments.
Section 201:20. The Chair. The Board must meet at the call of the Chair with a minimum of
four meetings per year. Additionally, the Chair must arrange meetings with interested citizens
who are seeking assistance from the Board, assign duties to Board members, communicate with
officials of the Public Works Department, report pertinent information and provide leadership to
the Board. In the absence, or at the request of the Chair, any or all of these duties will be
performed by the Vice-Chair.
Section 201:25. The Secretary. The Secretary will maintain permanent records of the
proceedings of the Board meetings and must read the minutes of those proceedings at each
successive meeting at the request of the Chairman. The Secretary will serve as the Board’s
correspondent.
Section 201:30. Quorum. A quorum, of at least four voting members, is necessary for the
transaction of business at any meeting.
Section 201:35. Compensation. Members of the Board will serve without compensation.
Section 201:40. Procedure. The committee's final action on any proposal must be in the form of
a recommendation of approval or disapproval directed to the Mayor.
Section 205 – Health and Inspections Department
Section 205:00. Health and Housing Advisory and Appeals Committee.
Subd. 1. Composition: A Health and Housing Advisory and Appeals Committee of the
City of St. Cloud is established and will consist of eleven members as follows: The Health
Director; a member of the City Council to be designated by the President of the Council; a
doctor of veterinary medicine licensed to practice in Minnesota; a representative of the St.
Cloud Hospital, of administrative level; a resident doctor of dentistry licensed to practice in
Minnesota; a resident pharmacist licensed to practice in Minnesota; a registered nurse; an
individual who owns apartment buildings to the extent that it could be considered his/her
part-time employment; an individual who owns or is employed by a company who is
engaged full time in the professional management of rental property; a taxpayer who is not
engaged in rental property, but owns real estate within the city; and a taxpayer who is not a
real estate owner.
Subd. 2. Appointment: All members except the Health Director and the representative of
the City Council, will be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council.
The Health Director and the City Council member will be ex-officio non-voting members.
Subd. 3. Terms: The terms of the appointive members will be five years, except that the
terms of the appointees required to be of an administrative level will terminate if they will
cease to hold such a position. No person will serve more than two consecutive terms.
Subd. 4. Unexpired Terms: Any vacancy in the unexpired term of a member will be filled
by the Mayor, with the approval of the Council, for the balance of the term in which the
vacancy occurred.
Subd. 5. The Mayor may remove any member of the Committee.
Subd. 6. Members of the Committee will serve without compensation.
Subd. 7. Meetings: The Committee will meet monthly at the call of the Chairperson or of
any two members
Subd. 8. Officers: The Committee will, at its first meeting in January of each year, elect a
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson. No person will serve more than two consecutive terms
as Chairperson or Vice Chairperson.
(a) Chairperson: The Chairperson will preside and maintain order at all Committee
meetings in accordance with Subd. 10 of this section and will make such reports
as required by law and as deemed necessary by the Committee to the Mayor and
City Council.
(b) Vice Chairperson: The Vice Chairperson will fulfill the duties of the
Chairperson in the absence of the Chair, including the calling of Committee
meetings and will assist the Chairperson with administrative duties.
(c) Secretary: The Secretary will assist the Chairperson and Vice Chairperson in the
administrative duties of the Commission. The Recording Secretary will be
responsible for the preparation of the minutes of all meetings of the Committee.
Subd. 9. Reporting: The Committee, with the assistance of the staff, will make a regular
report of its activities to the Mayor and the Council each year, and will submit the report in
writing annually before June 1. The report will include the number of Committee meetings
held, the names of those in attendance; the activities sub-committees; and such other
information as the Committee deems appropriate.
Subd. 10. Procedure: Committee business will be conducted in accordance with Robert's
Rules of Parliamentary Procedure except as Robert's Rules may be in conflict with this
ordinance, in which case this ordinance will govern.
Subd. 11. Public: All meetings of the Committee, records and minutes will be open to the
public except as otherwise may be provided by applicable law.
Section 205:05. Duties of Health and Housing Advisory and Appeals Committee. The Health and
Housing Advisory and Appeals Committee will serve in an advisory capacity to the Health Director
in making recommendations concerning the general public health and housing program. Any
proposed changes or adoptions of new ordinances, recommendations or codes involving
environmental sanitation, food and beverage establishment inspection, public housing facilities,
pollution control, or any other field of public health must be referred by the City Council to the
Committee for its consideration and recommendations. It will be the duty of the Committee to
study city ordinances and codes concerning public health and housing. The committee will make
recommendations for new ordinances whenever the Committee determines that changes or
adoptions of new ordinances would improve health and housing services and to conform with State
Board of Health laws, rules and regulations. The Committee will also fulfill the functions of the
Advisory and Appeals Board as required in the Uniform Housing Code.
1
Section 210 Emergency Management
210:00. Policy and Purpose. Due to the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters in the
form of natural, technological, and human caused incidents an emergency management program
is needed to ensure for the preparedness, response, recovery, mitigation efforts within the City of
St. Cloud.
Subd. 1. Establish a City emergency management organizational structure responsible
for planning and preparation for emergency government operations in time of disasters;
Subd. 2. Provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and disasters;
Subd. 3. Provide for the coordination of mutual aid between the City and other political
subdivisions with respect to the carrying out of emergency preparedness functions;
Subd. 4. Comply with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, chapter 12.
210:03. Definitions.
Subd. 1. Emergency Management. Emergency Management is responsible for the
coordination of preparedness, response, recovery, and mitigation measures to provide for
the protection of residents, the environment, and property. In response to large scale
disasters the functional areas of emergency operations include, without limitation:
warning and notification, direction and control, emergency public information, search
and rescue, public health and medical, evacuation and traffic control, fire protection,
damage assessment, congregate care, debris management, utilities restoration, hazardous
materials, transportation, mass fatalities, legal resources, finance and administration,
logistical support, donations management, emergency animal services, planning and
documentation, and communications support.
Subd. 2. Incident. Emergency situation with limited impact that can be addressed with
local response resources.
Subd. 3. Emergency. Event larger in scale than an incident involving a larger area and
more of the population. Likely will require the assistance of mutual aid.
Subd. 4. Disaster. Disaster is larger in scale than an emergency and results in
widespread damage and impacts beyond local government capability.
Subd. 5. Catastrophe. Catastrophe is larger than disaster with significant levels of
property damage and sever loss of life that overwhelms both state and local capabilities.
Subd. 6. Emergency Management Organization. Emergency Management Organization
means the staff element responsible for coordinating City-level planning and preparation
for disaster response. This organization provides City liaison and coordination with
2
federal, state and local jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities, major
incidents, mutual aid, and other projects consistent with this ordinance and assures
implementation of federal, state, county and other program requirements.
Subd. 7. Emergency Management Mutual Aid. Emergency Management Mutual Aid
means any disaster or major incident which requires the assignment of City personnel,
equipment or other necessary resources within or without the City limits.
210:05. Establishment of an Emergency Management Organization. There is hereby created
within the City government an emergency management organization which will be under the
supervision and control of Stearns County. The Emergency Manager, hereinafter called the
"Emergency Manager". The City has a joint powers agreement with the County of Stearns to
provide emergency management services. The Emergency Manager will have direct
responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the emergency preparedness
organization.
210:07. Powers and Duties of the Emergency Manager.
Subd. 1. The Emergency Manager will represent the City of any regional or state
conference for emergency management. The Emergency Manager may develop
additional mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions of the state for
reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in an emergency too great to be
dealt with unassisted, and will present the agreements to the City Council for its
consideration. The arrangements will be consistent with the Emergency Plan.
Subd. 2. The Emergency Manager will make assessments of personnel, businesses and
industries, resources and facilities of the City as deemed necessary to determine their
adequacy for emergency management and to plan for their most efficient use in time of
an emergency, major incident or disaster.
Subd. 3. The Emergency Manager will prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for the
emergency preparedness of the City and will present such plan to the Mayor for approval.
When the Mayor has approved the plan by resolution, it will be the duty of all City
departments and all emergency operations center personnel to perform the duties and
functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may be modified in like manner
from time to time. The Emergency Manager will coordinate the basic emergency
management activities of the City to the end that they will be consistent and fully
integrated with local, state, and federal requirements.
Subd. 4. In accordance with the emergency plan, the Emergency Manager will implement
training programs, public education programs, emergency exercises and drills as may be
necessary to assure a prompt and effective response in accordance with the emergency
plan.
Subd. 5. During times of an emergency or disaster, the Emergency Manager will utilize
the personnel, services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments and
3
agencies of the City to the maximum extent practicable. City personnel from departments
will be, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperative with and extend such services
and facilities to the emergency management organization. The head of each department
or agency is cooperation with the Emergency Manager will be responsible for the
planning and programming of emergency activities as will involve the utilization of the
resources of the department or agency.
Subd. 6. The Emergency Manager will, in cooperation with the existing departments
affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting and training of personnel, as may be required
on an emergency basis to carry out the emergency operations plan. To the extent that
such emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular department for
emergencies, they will be assigned to such departments and will be under the
administration and control of the assigned department.
Subd. 7. The Emergency Manager will carry out all orders, rules and regulations issued
by the City Council with reference to emergency management.
Subd. 8. The Emergency Manager will prepare and submit such reports on emergency
preparedness activities as may be requested by the City Council.
210:09. Local Emergencies.
Subd. 1. A local emergency or disaster may be declared by the Mayor. It will not be
continued for a period in excess of 72 hours except by or with the consent of the City
Council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local
emergency will be given prompt and general publicity and will be filed promptly by the
City Clerk.
Subd. 2. A declaration of a local emergency will invoke necessary portions of the
response and recovery aspects of applicable plans, including fiscal expenditures, which
are consistent with this ordinance.
Subd. 3. No other City agency or official may declare a local emergency unless expressly
authorized by the agreement under which the agency functions.
210:11. Emergency Regulations.
Subd. 1. Whenever necessary to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for such an
emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the governor of the
State of Minnesota or the City, the City Council may by resolution promulgate
emergency regulations, consistent with the applicable Federal or State law or regulation,
respecting the conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies; the repair,
maintenance, and safeguarding of essential public services; emergency health, fire, and
safety regulation; drills or practice periods required for preliminary training; and all other
matters which are required to protect public safety, health, and welfare in declared
emergencies.
4
Subd. 2. Every resolution of emergency regulations will be in writing, dated, refer to the
particular emergency to which it pertains, if so limited, and be filed with the City Clerk.
A copy will be kept posted and available for public inspection during business hours.
Notice of the existence of such regulation and its availability for inspection at the office
of the City Clerk will be conspicuously posted at the front of the city hall or at such other
places in the affected area as the City Council will designate in the resolution. By like
resolution, the City Council may modify or rescind any such regulation.
Subd. 3. The City Council may rescind any emergency regulation by resolution at any
time. If not sooner rescinded, every such regulation will expire at the end of 30 days after
its effective date or at the end of the emergency to which it relates, whichever comes first,
unless the regulation is renewed by the City Council. Any renewal is terminated
automatically after 30 days unless again renewed by the City Council. Any resolution,
rule or regulation inconsistent with an emergency regulation promulgated by the City
Council will be suspended during the period of time and to the extent such conflict exists.
Subd. 4. During a declared emergency, the Emergency Manager is, notwithstanding any
statutory provision to the contrary, empowered through the City Council acting within or
without the corporate limits of the City, to enter into contracts and incur obligations
necessary to combat such disaster by protecting the health and safety of persons,
property, and the environment by providing emergency assistance to the victims of such
disaster. The Emergency Manager may exercise such powers in the light of the demands
of the disaster without compliance with the time-consuming procedures and formalities
prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering rental
equipment agreements, purchase of supplies and materials, limitations upon tax levies,
and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds including, but not limited to,
publication of resolutions, publication of call for bids, provisions of personnel laws and
rules, provisions relating to low bids, and requirements for budgets.
210:13. Emergency Management a Governmental Function. All functions and activities relating
to emergency management are declared to be governmental functions. The provisions of this
section will not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he or she would
otherwise be entitled under this ordinance or under the workers’ compensation law, or under any
pension law, nor the right of any such person to receive any benefits or compensation under any
act of Congress.
210:15. Participation in Labor Dispute or Politics. The emergency management organization will
not participate in any form of political activity, nor will it be employed directly or indirectly for
political purposes, nor will it become involved in a labor dispute. The Emergency Manager may
express professional opinions on legislative or other legal regulations consistent with the areas
found in Chapter 12 of the Minnesota State Statute.
210:17. Authorizing Dispatch and Use of City Equipment and Services by the Emergency
Manager in Emergency Situations.
5
Subd. 1. The City finds it desirable and necessary to authorize the Emergency Manager to
make available City equipment and personnel to local communities who request aid to
combat their emergency, disaster, or major incident consistent with this ordinance and
sections 210:07 and 210:09.
Subd. 2. The Emergency Manager will evaluate the internal needs of the City, and make
available appropriate mutual aid. The Emergency Manager will immediately recall, order
and terminate the use of any assigned equipment and personnel when the need for their
use no longer exists, or earlier when it appears in the best interest of the City.
Subd. 3. The Emergency Manager’s acts will be fully authorized as acts of the City, and
all provisions for compensation of personnel, rental of equipment, liability insurance
coverage, workers’ compensation insurance and all other safeguards and matters
pertaining to the City, its equipment and personnel, will apply in each case as if
specifically authorized and directed at such time, whether or not the City Council has
previously requested and provided for assistance and the use of equipment and personnel
under a mutual protection agreement or other type protection agreement within the City.
History: Ord. 2732 11/20/2017
Section 220 – Health & Inspections Department
Section 220:00. Health Director. The Health Director will be a person suitably trained or
experienced in public health administration. The Director will have current Minnesota
Department of Health, Environmental Health Specialist/Sanitarian Registration.
Section 220:05. Duties of the Health Director.
Subd. 1. The Health Director will execute and enforce all statutes, ordinances, and
regulations for the protection and promotion of the public health, and will take other
action as is necessary for the public health. The Director will direct the inspection of
food establishments and other such places where food is prepared for public sale in raw or
processed form; will direct the inspection of all public housing facilities, such as hotels,
boarding homes, motels, boarding care homes, and other such places, in order to protect
public health and to prevent the spread of disease; will direct sanitation activities; will
direct all other environmental health activities; will direct the humane activities of the
City in regard to catching, housing and disposing of dogs, cats, and other animals that
pose a potential hazard to the general health, safety, and welfare of the people; will keep
the records necessary for the operation of the department; will supervise the Building
Inspection Division and Housing Inspection Division.
Subd. 2. Inspection and Notice. The Health Director will have the power, in person or by
authorized agent, to inspect any premises within the City to ascertain whether the conditions
are Sanitary. If any unsanitary or offensive condition are found to exist, the Health Director
will give written notice to the occupant or owner of the premises of the existence of
unsanitary or offensive conditions. The occupant or owner will immediately remove such
conditions. No person will prevent or hinder the Health Director or his authorized agent
from entering upon any premises for the purpose of or performing any of his duties. If
within the time specified in such notice, which will be not less than five days, the owner or
occupant will fail to remove such condition, the Health Director will report such fact to the
City Council and the City Council may authorize the condition to be removed and may
assess the costs against such property. Such assessment, if levied, will bear interest at the
rate of 6% per annum and will be certified to the auditor of the county in which the land
assessed is situated and will be collected and remitted to the City in the same manner as
assessments for local improvements. If such premises are rented or leased and the owner
fails to remove the condition specified in notice, the Council may condemn the premises as
unsanitary and close the same against tenants and it will be unlawful for the owner thereof
to collect any rent for the period during which such specified condition continues to exist.
Section 220:10. Citations for Certain Violations. Pursuant to Minn. Statute §626.862, the
Health Director or representatives who are limited to the Building Inspection Program
Coordinator, Environmental Health Specialist, Environmental Health Technician, Building
Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Electrical Inspector and Heating Inspector is authorized to issue a
citation for ordinance violations. A citation may be issued to any person, firm or entity for any
alleged violation of any of the following enumerated sections of the 2007 Code of Ordinances of
the City of St. Cloud:
Section 240 - Refuse and Garbage Collection and Disposal; Section 240:35. Responsibilities of
Owners and Occupants.
Section 300 - State Building Code Adopted by Reference; International Residential Code,
Chapter 3, Section R317 entitled Smoke Detectors and the International Building Code, Chapter
9 entitled Fire Protection Systems.
Section 300:30 - Electrical Code, Section 3. Permits and Licenses Generally, 3.020. Permit
Required.
Section 300:20 - Minnesota Uniform Mechanical Code Adopted by Reference; Heating
Contractor's License Required, Section 300:20 Subd. 2; Certificates of Competency for Heating
Installers, Section 300:20 Subd. 6; Permits Required, and Section 300:20 Subd. 16; Permit Will
be Obtained Before Work is Started, Section 300:20 Subd. 19.
Section 300:40 - The Uniform Housing Code, 1994 Edition Adopted by Reference, Chapter 8,
Exits, Sec. 801; and Chapter 10 Substandard Buildings; Section 1001.2, 12. Infestations of
insects and 15. Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities; 1001.4
Nuisances and 1001.11 Hazardous or Unsanitary Premises;
Section 300:10 - Minnesota State Plumbing Code, Adopted by Reference: Section 1.2, Licenses
for Plumbing Contractors; and Section 3.1, Permits Required.
Section 355 - Zoning Ordinance: Article 6, Off Street Parking and Loading; Article 7, Sign
Regulations, Section 7 - Licenses and Permit Fees; and Article 32, - Administration and
Enforcement, Section 2 - Building Permits and Section 3 - Certificate of Occupancy.
Section 465 - Rental Dwelling Licensing.
Section 1000 - Nuisances Generally, Defined, Enumerated and Made Unlawful: Section 1000:15,
Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety Enumerated, Subdivision 7, Special Provisions - Outside
Parking and Storage.
Section 1005 - Public Nuisances Affecting Health and Safety; Section 1005:40, Nuisances
Affecting Health and Safety Enumerated, Subdivisions 1 through 12 and Section 1005:50,
Property Owner Negligence, Subdivisions 1 through 6.
Section 1040-Animal Control Ordinance, Section 1040:20, Animals at Large.
Section 1040:25, Permit Required for Animals other than Dogs, Cats or Ferrets.
Section 1040:30, Restriction of Certain Dogs Section, 1040:40, Damage to Property by Dogs,
Cats or other Animals Prohibited, Section 1040:90, License Required; Fee.
Section 225 - Medical Consultant
Section 225:00. Medical Consultant, Appointment. The Health Officer will be appointed by the
Mayor, with the approval of the Council, and will be subject to removal by the Mayor. The Health
and Housing Advisory and Appeals Committee may submit recommendations in with respect to the
appointment of the Health Officer.
Section 225:05. Duties of Health Officer. The Health Officer will serve in an advisory capacity
to the Health and Housing Advisory and Appeals Committee and the Health Director. The Health
Officer will see that all health laws and regulations are obeyed, but the actual enforcement of
these laws and regulations will be the duty and responsibility of the Health Director. The Health
Officer will take such legal steps as are necessary to control communicable disease, and the
Health Officer will advise the Health and Housing Advisory and Appeals Committee and the
City Council of any health regulations or directions of the State Board of Health that are not
being carried out by the Department of Public Health. The Health Officer will advise the Health
Director in a medical way as to diagnosis for the purpose of quarantine, release of quarantine,
details of necessary control methods, and other technical preventive measures. Health Officer
will be responsible for the duties placed upon local health officers by Minn.Stat. § 145A.
Section 230 - St. Cloud Human Rights Ordinance
Section 230:00. Findings, Declaration of Policy and Purposes.
Subd. 1. Findings. The Council finds that discrimination defined by Minnesota Statute,
Chapter 363A entitled the "Human Rights Act" adversely affects the health, welfare,
peace and safety of the community. Such discrimination demeans the dignity of human
persons, threatens the rights and privileges of the inhabitants of this City, and menaces
the institutions and foundations of democracy. Discriminatory practices that threaten the
rights, privileges, and opportunities of any City resident or non-resident are declared to be
unlawful, and the adoption of this ordinance is an exercise of the police power of the City
to protect such rights.
Subd. 2. Declaration of Policy and Purpose. It is the public policy of the City of St.
Cloud and the purpose of this ordinance:
(a) To encourage all citizens, whether individual or corporate, to join in
establishing and preserving full and true equality among all residents and
visitors;
(b) To declare as civil rights the rights of all persons to equal opportunities
defined by State and Federal Law;
(c) To prevent and prohibit any and all discriminatory practices defined by
State and Federal Law;
(d) To protect all persons from unfounded charges of discrimination; and
(e) To effectuate the foregoing policy by means of public information, and
education, mediation, conciliation, and enforcement.
Section 230:30. St. Cloud Human Rights Commission.
Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose of the Human Rights Commission is to secure for all
citizens and visitors equal opportunity in education, employment, housing, public
accommodations, and public services, and full participation for all its citizens in the
affairs of this community.
Subd. 2. Composition and Qualifications, Appointment and Removal, Compensation.
(a) The Commission will consist of eleven members. Six of the eleven Commission
members must be persons having protected status with at least three of the six
members representing different protected categories. No more than six members
may be of the same gender. In addition to the eleven Commission members, one
City Council member will be appointed by the Council to the Commission as an
ex-officio, non-voting member of the Commission.
(b) All members will be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council and with due regard to their fitness to fulfill the functions, powers, and
duties vested in and imposed upon the Commission.
(c) The Mayor may remove any member of the Commission in the best interests of
the City.
(d) Members of the Commission will serve without compensation.
Subd. 3. Terms of Members, Vacancies, Participation.
(a) Appointment: At the time of the initial, members of the Commission will be
appointed to a terms of three years, except that any person appointed to fill an
unexpired term will serve only until the expiration of that term. No person will
serve more than two consecutive terms.
(b) Meetings: The Commission will meet monthly, and may meet additionally at the
call of the Chairperson or of any two members.
(c) Officers: The Commission will at its first meeting in January of each year, elect a
Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson. No person will serve more than two
consecutive terms as Chairperson or Vice Chairperson. The Staff Assistant for
Human Rights will serve as the Recording Secretary for the Commission.
(i) Chairperson: The Chairperson will preside and maintain order at all
Commission meetings in accordance with subd. 4(e) of this ordinance and will
make such reports as required by law and as ordered by the Commission to the
Mayor and City Council.
(ii) Vice Chairperson: The Vice Chairperson will fulfill the duties of the
Chairperson in the absence of the Chair including the calling of Commission
meetings and assist the Chairperson with administrative duties, and monitor the
expenditure of funds allocated for human rights through the Commission.
(d) Procedure: All business of the Commission will be conducted in an orderly and
lawful manner, and the Commission will at all times be vigilant to preserve and
protect the rights and privacy of both persons having human rights complaints and
persons against whom human rights complaints have been made. Specific human
rights complaints made against named individuals will not be heard by the
Commission. However, the Commission may be addressed by individuals
regarding problems and issues generally with due regard for the privacy of all
persons. Persons having specific human rights complaints will be referred to the
Human Rights Director. Such persons will also be advised of their opportunity to
participate in no-fault mediation. Generally, Commission business will be
conducted in accordance with Robert's Rules of Parliamentary Procedure except
as Robert's Rules may be in conflict with this ordinance in which case this
ordinance will govern. The Commission may also enact bylaws, with the
approval of the City Council, to govern its own affairs, provided that the bylaws
are not in conflict with Robert's Rules or this ordinance. The bylaws of the
Commission, and any amendments, will be submitted for approval to the City
Council upon their adoption by the Commission. The bylaws and any
amendments will be deemed to be approved by the City Council unless the City
Council takes action to modify the bylaws or amendments within 30 days after
submission to the City Council. The bylaws will not provide for the removal of
Commission members by the Commission, but may provide a procedure by which
the Commission may recommend removal of a Commission member to the
Mayor. The bylaws may include recommendations for the training of
Commission members as deemed appropriate by the Commission.
(e) Public: All meetings of the Commission, records and minutes will be open to the
public except as otherwise may be provided by applicable law. Applicable law
will govern access to documents for no-fault mediation.
Subd. 5. Duties and Responsibilities.
(a) The Commission will foster, through education, conferences and public
information, general awareness and understanding of human rights issues and
laws in the community. The Commission may make recommendations to the
Mayor and City Council on legislation and policy changes at any level of
government. Except for their advice to the Mayor and City Council, the
Commission will not attempt to directly influence the legislation or policy
changes the Commission recommends. Individual Commission members may, as
individuals or representatives of other organizations, advocate before other
legislative or executive bodies as individuals or representatives of other
organizations, but they will not represent that they are representing the City of St.
Cloud unless so authorized by the Mayor and City Council. The Commission will
not participate in, or intervene in (including the publishing or distributing of
statements) any political campaign on behalf of (or in opposition to) any candidate
for public office. The Commission will limit its efforts to human rights issues as
defined by the declared policy and purpose of this ordinance.
(b) The Commission will enlist the cooperation of agencies, organizations, and
individuals in the community, and will cooperate with the human and civil rights
agencies of other communities, in an active program directed to create equal
opportunities and equal rights for all persons.
(c) The Commission will advise the Mayor, the City Council and other agencies of
the City government on human relations and civil rights issues. The Commission
will act in an advisory capacity with respect to planning or operation of any City
department on issues of civil and human rights and recommend the adoption of
such specific policies or actions as are needed to provide for full and equal
opportunity in the community.
Section 235 Park and Recreation Advisory Board
Section 235:00. Membership. The Park and Recreation Advisory Board will consist of ten
members. Five members will be appointed by the Mayor of the City of St. Cloud, with the
consent of the City Council. Additionally there will be four representative members, including
the Mayor of the City of St. Cloud, or designee, one member of the City Council, to be
designated by said Council, one member of the St. Cloud Planning Commission to be designated
by the Commission and the School District 742 Superintendent or designee.
Section 235:10. Residency. No person will be appointed to the Park and Recreation Advisory
Board unless that person at the time of the appointments is a full-time resident of the City of St.
Cloud. The residency requirement does not apply to the School District 742 Superintendent or
designee. If a member’s residency no longer meets these requirements, then the member’s
position on the Board will be considered vacant.
Section 235:20. Term. The terms of the three voting members appointed by the Mayor will be for
a period of three years. A maximum of two consecutive terms may be served per member. Upon
completion of the terms, a member may be eligible for reappointment after one year of nonmembership.
An appointed member will continue to serve until a successor is appointed. Terms
for the ex-officio members or designees are determined by the group they represent and are not
limited by this ordinance.
Section 235:30. Attendance. A member appointed by the Mayor missing three meetings within a
one-year time frame may be removed from the Board by the Mayor.
Section 235:40. Vacancy. Any vacancy in the appointive membership will be filled by
appointment by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council, and such appointee will serve
for the remaining term. Said appointee may serve two additional three year terms pursuant to
Section 235:20.
Section 235:50. Board Officers. The Board will elect at its September meeting from its
membership a Chair, and Vice-Chair, who will serve pursuant to the Board’s rules. Secretarial
duties and the taking of minutes will be designated to Park and Recreation clerical staff.
Section 235:60. Meetings. The Park and Recreation Advisory Board will give notice of its
meeting schedule at the last regular meeting of each calendar year. The Board will approve
schedule that states regular dates, times and places of each meeting for the next year. The
President or any two Board members will have the authority to call special meetings of the Park
and Recreation Advisory Board.
Section 235:70. Quorum. A quorum is necessary for the transaction of business at any meeting.
A quorum consists of at least four voting members.
Section 235:80. Duties. The Park and Recreation Advisory Board will study and determine the
park and recreational needs of the City, and make recommendations to the Mayor regarding Park
& Recreation programs and policies.
Section 235:90. Expenses. The members of the Board will serve without compensation, but
reasonable expenses, incurred in the performance of his or her official duties will be paid by the
City.
Section 236 - Park and Recreation Conduct and Use Regulations
(Note: 236:00 section number omitted)
Section 236:05. Definitions.
Subd. 1. “Parks & Recreation Director” is the Parks & Recreation Director for the City of
St. Cloud.
Subd. 2. “Land adjacent to a park” means all public alleys, streets, highways, or any
other public lands which border on a park.
Subd. 3. “Park” is a park, reservation, trail, greenway, playground, swimming pool,
beach, recreation center, shelter house, or any other area in the City, owned or used by
the City and devoted to active or passive recreation.
Subd. 4. “Parkway” is any roadway in or leading into a park area.
Subd. 5. “Vehicle” is any conveyance on wheels or tracks, whether motor powered,
animal drawn or self-propelled. The term will include any trailer of any kind or
description. Exception is made for baby carriages.
Subd. 6. “Resident” is any person who lives within the corporate limits of the City of St.
Cloud.
Subd. 7. “Trail” is an off road area that may be used for walking, bicycling, running,
inline skating, skateboarding and other generally recreational or leisure activities. Trails
may be constructed of a variety of surfacing material.
Subd. 8. “Board” means the St. Cloud Park and Recreation Board.
Subd. 9. “Special Event” means any event at which 50 or more persons are involved or
any event for which a permit is required.
Subd. 10. “Keg” means a container designed for and capable of holding intoxicating or
3.2 malt liquor to be dispensed from a tapper.
Subd. 11. “Organized Sporting Event” means any sport event, sport practice, exercise
class, therapeutic class, non-impact class, cross-training class, dance class, water class,
whereby participants are charged a fee by the hosting organization for participation,
membership or attendance.
Section 236:10. Park Hours and Open Dates.
Subd. 1. Parks & Trails. The opening times and closing times for all parks and trails will
be from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. for the entire calendar year.
Subd. 2. Park Shelters. Riverside Park Shelter will be available for rental 6:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m. year round. Wilson Park, Pineview Park, Lions Park, Heritage Park and
Knights of Columbus Park shelters will be open from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. from May
1- September 30.
Subd. 3. Changes in Regular Park Hours. The Parks & Recreation Director may
establish temporary park operation hours.
Subd. 4. Special Events. A written permit must be obtained from the Parks & Recreation
Department for all special events.
Section 236:14. Rules and Regulations. The Parks & Recreation Director may establish
reasonable rules and regulations for the use of park and recreation facilities and for obtaining
permits. Such rules and regulations will be based on a due regard for the purpose for which the
facility is established, the safety of those using the facility, the need for supervisory personnel
and the maximum number of persons who can safely use the facilities at one time. Park and
Recreation facilities may be used by members of the general public for recreational and athletic
purposes consistent with the nature of the facility and the safety of the public and property,
subject to permit requirements.
Section 236:15. Permits. No person will, without a permit:
Subd. 1. Conduct a public assembly, parade, picnic or other event involving more than
fifty people.
Subd. 2. Circulate or distribute any leaflets, handbills, notices, pamphlets, books,
documents or papers of any kind in any indoor recreational facility, fieldhouse, garden or
other special facility.
Subd. 3. Conduct any exhibit, music or dramatic performance, fair, circus, concert, play,
radio or television broadcast, other than a news transmission.
Subd. 4. Exhibit or display any motion picture, television program, light or laser light
display or similar event.
Subd. 5. Operate a vehicle, except upon a publicly dedicated street, alley, parkway,
parking lot or other roadway which may abut or traverse a park.
Subd. 6. Create or emit any amplified sound, except from a radio, recorder or other
device possessed and used by an individual and operated in such a manner so as not to
interfere with the use and enjoyment by another person.
Subd. 7. Station or erect any building, tent, canopy, stand, bandstand, stage, tower,
scaffold, sound stage, platform, rostrum or other structure.
Subd. 8. Station or use any electrical or electronic device or equipment that would
require outdoor auxiliary power.
Subd. 9. Sell or offer for sale any goods or services.
Subd. 10. Display, post or distribute any placard, handbill, pamphlet, circular, book or
other writing containing commercial advertising matter within a park.
Subd. 11. Bring, land or cause to ascend or descend or alight any airplane, helicopter,
flying machine, balloon, parachute or other apparatus for aviation.
Subd. 12. Conduct any organized sporting event.
Subd. 13. Ride any horse on any parkway, path or trail.
Subd. 14. Bring onto park property a tame, non-domestic supervised and controlled or
restrained animal for limited non-commercial or promotional purposes.
Subd. 15. Provide the professional catering of food, pop and/or beer.
Subd. 16. Transport or carry into Wilson or Riverside Parks keg beer. Keg permits will be
issued during the period of May 1 through September 30 only.
Subd. 17. Utilize any park rental shelter at any park location
Subd. 18. Conduct any wedding ceremony or wedding photography session at Munsinger
Gardens or a wedding ceremony at any other City park.
Subd. 19. Place or operate any watercraft in Lake George or on any waters within any
city park.
Subd. 20. Utilize any off leash dog park areas located in the fenced and posted areas of
Wilson Park on Riverside Drive N.E., Jaycees Park on 37th Avenue North and the
northern fenced and posted portion of Whitney Park on Northway Drive and adjacent
land north of the Sauk River that is accessible only by the foot bridge.
Subd. 21. Install bags or mark fields at Whitney Memorial Park. Only Recreation
Maintenance Staff using department equipment may install bags are mark fields without
permission.
Section 236:20. Application. A person seeking a permit pursuant to Section 236:15 will file an
application with the Parks & Recreation Director. The application will state the information
required in the following subdivisions:
Subd. 1. Name and address of applicant.
Subd. 2. Name and address of the person(s), corporation or association sponsoring the
activity.
Subd. 3. Day, hour and year for which the permit is desired.
Subd. 4. Park or portion of park for which the permit is desired.
Subd. 5. Estimate of anticipated attendance.
Subd. 6. Types of beverages and foods to be served.
Subd. 7. Detailed description of the proposed activity.
Subd. 8. Other information requested by the Parks & Recreation Director that is
reasonably necessary to determine whether or not a permit will be issued.
Section 236.21. Application Fee. No permit application will be considered unless the applicant
has the required application fee.
Section 236.22. Indemnification and Reimbursement Agreement. No application for permit will
be granted unless the applicant will have executed an agreement with the City, on a form to be
prescribed by the Parks & Recreation Director, in which the applicant will promise and covenant
to bear all costs of policing, cleaning up and restoring the park upon conclusion of the event or
activity; to reimburse the City for any such costs incurred by the City; and to indemnify the City
and hold the City harmless from any liability to any person resulting from any damage or injury
occurring in connection with the permitted event proximately caused by the action of the
permittee, the sponsoring organization, its officers, employees or agents or any person under
their control insofar as permitted by law.
Section 236.23. Security Deposit. The Parks & Recreation Department reserves the right to
access a security deposit in an amount in accordance with the schedule of fees set by the Parks &
Recreation Director and approved by the City Council. The amount of the security deposit will
be equal to the estimated cost of policing, cleaning up, and restoring the park upon the
conclusion of the use or activity. The security deposit will be deposited by the City into an
escrow account. Promptly after the conclusion of a permit activity, the City will inspect the
premises and equipment used by the permit holder.
Subd. 1. If it is determined that there has been no damage to City Property or equipment,
the security deposit will be refunded in full within 30 days of the conclusion of the
permitted event.
Subd. 2. The City will give written notice of the assessment of damages and retention of
the security deposit to the permit holder by personal delivery or by deposit in the United
States mail, with proper postage prepaid to the name and address provided in the
application for permit. Any assessment of damages in excess of the security deposit will
be paid to the City within ten days after notice of such assessment of damages. Retention
of all or a portion of a security deposit will be subject to the appeal procedures contained
in Section 236:29.
Subd. 3. When no shelter attendant is assigned, the permit holder will be assessed a
$100.00 key deposit upon receipt of the shelter key. The deposit will be returned no later
than 12 business days after the key is returned.
Section 236.24. Designation of Park Facilities.
Subd. 1. Proposed Designation. The Parks & Recreation Director will classify all park
property under a uniform system of classification and designate for each such
classification the use or uses which, in his/her judgment, should be permitted therein.
Categories of classifications which the Parks & Recreation Director will designate may
include, but are not limited to, parks, playgrounds, and recreation areas. The Parks &
Recreation Director will classify all park property under the following classification
system:
(a) public forums;
(b) limited use areas;
(c) areas or facilities not designated for public assembly; or
(d) special facilities.
The Parks & Recreation Director will then record the designations for each park and will
transmit the same promptly to the Park and Recreation Board. The Park and Recreation
Board will review the designations and forward them with its recommendations to the
City Council. The City Council, will then approve, amend or reject the designations. The
Parks & Recreation Director may, from time to time amend or revise the designations and
will promptly transmit in writing the amendments or revisions in the same manner used
for the original designations. All designations, amendments and revisions thereof, will be
in full force and effect from the time that they are approved or amended by the City
Council.
Section 236:25. Fees for Use of Park Facilities. No permit will be issued unless the applicant
has paid, within the time prescribed by the Parks & Recreation Director the permit fee and any
other required fee approved by the City Council.
Section 236.26. Insurance. The amounts and type of insurance required for using the park
property will be determined by the City based upon the nature and risk of the activity. The
permit applicant is required to obtain the required insurance coverage. The insurance contract
must state that the City is an additional insured party and that the City will receive advanced
notice of the insurer’s intent to cancel coverage. Prior to the applicant’s use of the park property
and within the time prescribed by the Parks & Recreation Director the applicant will provide the
City with a certificate from the insurer evidencing the insurance coverage.
Section 236.27 Permits Not Transferable. No permit or preliminarily approved permit
application may be transferred.
Section 236.28. Processing of Permit Applications.
Subd. 1. Order. Applications for permits will be processed in order of receipt; and the
use of a particular Park will be allocated in order of receipt of fully executed applications
accompanied by the application fee.
Subd. 2. Denial. Notice of denial will be in writing and will be served on the applicant by
personal delivery, or by deposit in United States mail, with proper postage prepaid, to the
name and address provided in the permit application.
Subd. 3. Contents of Notice; Grounds for Denial. Notice of denial of a permit application
will clearly state the grounds upon which the permit was denied and, where feasible, will
contain a proposal by the Parks & Recreation Director for measures by which the
applicant may cure any defects in the permit application or otherwise obtain a permit.
Where an application or permit has been denied because a fully executed prior
application for the same time and place has been received, and a permit has been or will
be granted to the prior applicant authorizing uses or activities which do not reasonably
permit multiple occupancy of the particular area, the Parks & Recreation Director will
propose an alternative place, if available for the same time, or an alternative time, if
available for the same place.
Subd. 4. To the extent permitted by law, the City may deny a permit application if the
applicant or the person on whose behalf the application for permit was made has on prior
occasions made material misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of an event or
activity previously permitted or has violated the terms of prior permits issued to or on
behalf of the applicant. The City may also deny a permit application on any of the
following grounds:
(a) the permit application (including any required attachments and submissions) is not
fully completed and executed;
(b) the applicant has not tendered the required application fee with the application or has
not tendered the required user fee, indemnification agreement, insurance certificate,
or security deposit within the times prescribed by the City;
(c) the permit application contains a material falsehood or misrepresentation;
(d) the applicant is legally incompetent to contract or to sue and be sued;
(e) the applicant or the person on whose behalf the application for permit was made has
on prior occasions damaged park property and has not paid in full for such damage, or
has other outstanding and unpaid debts to the City;
(f) a fully executed prior application for permit for the same time and place has been
received, and a permit has been or will be granted to a prior applicant authorizing
uses or activities which do not reasonably permit multiple occupancy of the particular
park or part thereof;
(g) the use or activity intended by the applicant would conflict with previously planned
programs organized and conducted by the City and previously scheduled for the same
time and place;
(h) the proposed use or activity is prohibited by or inconsistent with the classifications
and uses of the park;
(i) the use or activity intended by the applicant would present an unreasonable danger to
the health or safety of the applicant, or other users of the park, of City employees or
of the public;
(j) the applicant has not complied or cannot comply with applicable licensure
requirements, ordinances or regulations of the City concerning the sale or offering for
sale of any goods or services;
(k) The use or activity intended by the applicant is prohibited by law or by the
regulations of the Parks & Recreation Department.
Section 236.29. Procedures for Appeal; Waivers.
Subd. 1. Review by Director of Community Services & Facilities.
(a) Any applicant who is denied a permit or denied a request for a waiver of user fee,
security deposit, or certificate of insurance, or a permit holder who has had all or a
portion of its security deposit retained because it was assessed damages may, within
seven days of the service of notice of such determination, file a written appeal from
such determination with the Director indicated on the notice of determination.
(b) The Director will have seven days to serve upon the applicant a notice that he/she has
affirmed, modified or reversed the denial or retention of the security deposit within
seven days from the date of receiving the appeal.
(c) The notice will be deemed served upon the applicant or permit holder when it is
personally delivered or when it is sent by United States mail, with proper postage
prepaid, to the name and address stated in the permit application.
(d) If the notice is not served upon the applicant or permit holder within seven days of
the date the appeal was filed, then the denial or retention of the security deposit will
be deemed reversed.
Subd. 2. Form of Appeals.
Any appeals filed pursuant to this ordinance will state the grounds upon which the
determination should be modified or reversed and will be accompanied by copies of the
permit application, the written notice of the determination of the Parks & Recreation
Director and any other papers material to the determination.
Subd. 3. Waiver of Requirements.
Any requirements for a user fee, security deposits, or certificate of insurance will be
waived by the City Attorney, if the activity is protected by the First Amendment of the
United States Constitution and the requirement would be so financially burdensome that it
would preclude the applicant from using park property for the proposed activity. Fees for
equipment and services will not be waived. Application for a waiver of a user fee, security
deposit, or certificate of insurance will be made on a form prescribed by the City Attorney
and must include an affidavit by the applicant and sufficient financial information about
the applicant to enable the City Attorney to determine whether the requirement(s) would be
so financially burdensome that it would preclude the applicant from using park property
for the proposed activity. If it appears that the applicant does not have sufficient funds to
satisfy the user fee requirement prior to the proposed event, but that the applicant intends
to raise sufficient funds at the event, the City Attorney will require the applicant to pay
such user fee out of the proceeds of the proposed event. If no written denial is issued
within fourteen days from the date of receiving a fully completed application for waiver is
executed and filed with the City Attorney, the waiver application will be deemed approved,
contingent upon the applicant complying with all other permit requirements. Denials of
requests for such waivers will be subject to the appeal procedures contained in Section
236.29.
Section 236:30. Effect of Permit. A permit holder will be bound by all park rules and
regulations and all applicable ordinances. All permits must be made available for inspection(s)
during the activity for which it was issued.
Section 236:40. Revocation. The Parks & Recreation Director will have the authority to revoke
any permit upon a violation of any rule or ordinance or good cause.
Section 236:50. Prohibited Activities and/or Destruction of park property. No person will do
any of the following acts in a park:
Subd. 1. Destroy, cut, break, deface, mutilate, injure, disturb, sever from the ground or
remove any sod, earth or growing thing including, but not limited to, any plant, flower,
flower bed, shrub, tree, growth, or any branch, stem, fruit, or leaf; or bring into or have in
his/her possession in any park any tool or instrument intended to be used for cutting
thereof, or any garden or agricultural implements or tools, which could be used for the
removal thereof, except as approved and allowed by permit.
Subd. 2. Set fire to any trees, shrubs, plants, flowers, grass, plant growth or living timber,
or suffer any fire upon land to extend into park lands.
Subd. 3. Go upon any lawn, grass plot, planted area, tree, shrub, monument, fountain,
sculpture or structure where access is prohibited by signs or symbols which are posted or
otherwise displayed or where access is restricted by fence or other physical barrier.
Subd. 4. Cut, break, or in any way injure, deface, destroy or alter any building, fence,
monument, sculpture, bridge, or other structure or property contained therein.
Subd. 5. Operate or drive any motor car, automobile or vehicle of any kind in a park in
such a manner as to cause the same to collide with, run against, strike or cause to strike,
injure, deface, or damage any park property or appurtenance of any kind.
Subd. 6. Fasten any animal or attach any rope, sign, handbill, or other things to any tree,
shrub or to any protective device around any tree or shrub growing in any park.
Subd. 7. Allow any animal to injure any tree, plant, shrub, lawn or grass plot in any
manner whatsoever.
Subd. 8. Fasten any bicycle, motorcycle, moped, or other vehicle to or leave the same
standing so as to injure any tree, shrub, lawn or grass plot.
Subd. 9. Deface, destroy, cover or otherwise make unreadable any warning or
prohibitory sign or symbol on park property.
Subd. 10. Intentionally make dirty or unsanitary the restrooms, washrooms and shower
rooms. No person over the age of seven years will enter the restrooms, shower rooms or
other rooms designated for the opposite sex without the proper adult supervision.
Subd. 11. Run or string any public service utility into, upon, or across such lands, except
on special written permit issued hereunder.
Subd. 12. Give or offer to any animal or bird any type of food or poisonous or otherwise
harmful substance in any city park.
Subd. 13. Light or make use of any fire in any park except that fires for cooking
purposes may be made in portable metal containers or grills under such regulations as
may be prescribed.
Subd. 14. Engage in any organized athletic game or sport in any park except such
portions thereof as may be designated for that purpose and then only under such rules and
guidelines as may be prescribed.
Subd. 15. Skate, skateboard, sled, or ski in any part of any park in a reckless manner or
at a speed greater than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the number of
people.
Subd. 16. Skating and biking of all types, including, but not limited to, roller-skating,
skateboarding, and cycling will be prohibited at all times within the confines of
Munsinger and Clemens Gardens.
Subd. 17. Stack or arrange picnic tables in such a manner as to disrupt overall park use.
Subd. 18. Place or cause to be placed in the waters of any body of water or fountain in or
adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such
waters, any substance which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
Subd. 19. Dump, deposit, or leave refuse or other trash, not generated by a permitted use
within the park. All waste generated by use of the park will be placed in the proper
receptacles if provided. Where no waste receptacle is available all waste will be packed
out and properly disposed of by the park user.
Subd. 20. Transport or carry in or possess glass beverage containers in any City park.
Subd. 21. Domestic Animals. Having been responsible for the entry of a dog or other
domestic animals into the park area, permit that animal to do any of the following acts:
(a) Except in areas designated as “off leash pet exercise area,” a domestic animal
may be brought into a park so long as such animal is continuously restrained by
a leash not to exceed six feet in length. No dogs, other than those designated as
“service dogs” are allowed in Munsinger or Clemens Gardens.
(b) Animals, other than service dogs, may not enter or remain in any building,
playground, swimming pool, spray pool, garden, athletic field or other areas
that may be designated as prohibited areas.
Subd. 22. Ice Rinks.
(a) Go onto ice on any area designated and posted as being unsafe.
(b) Operate a snowmobile, sled, bicycle, toboggan, or any other Vehicle on any ice
rink.
Subd. 23. Entering Unfinished, Undeveloped or Closed Areas.
(a) Enter upon any part of any Park, which is in an unfinished state or under
construction.
(b) Enter or attempt to enter any building or area in any Park when its is closed
to the public.
(c) Enter upon any part of any Park, which is designated as under construction
or development.
Subd. 24. Use of Playground Equipment. Being a person over 12 years of age, use
playground equipment designated for use by persons under 12 years of age in a way that
is inappropriate or destructive.
Subd. 25. Pay Fees. Participate in any activity or utilize any facility for which a fee is
required without paying the required fee.
Subd. 26. Exhibit Permits. Fail to produce or exhibit any permit issued by the Parks &
Recreation Director upon request from any Park and Recreation attendant or police officer
who will desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance with an
ordinance or rule.
Subd. 27. Interference with Permit Holders. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any
person or party occupying any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a
permit issued pursuant to this ordinance.
Subd. 28. Biking of all types, including, but not limited to, Mountain biking, BMX biking
or Freestyle biking will be prohibited at all times within any skate board or roller blade
park.
Subd. 29. Dump, deposit, leave or place cremated remains in or adjacent to any City
Park or Trail.
Section 236:55. Alcohol in Parks. No person in a Park will consume, possess, dispense,
transport or carry any alcoholic beverage, including 3.2 beer, in or into any City park, except as
permitted below:
Subd. 1. Wilson, Lions and Riverside Parks. Except during designated alcohol free days,
beer or wine packaged only in its original glass free container will be allowed in Wilson,
Lions and Riverside Parks. Keg beer is allowed in Wilson and Riverside Parks when
permitted by Section 236:15 Subd. 16. Keg beer is not allowed in Lions Park.
Subd. 2. Whitney Park. Except during designated alcohol free days, beer or wine may be
consumed at Whitney Park if they were first purchased from the vendors located at that
facility or when permitted by Section 236:15, Subd. 17.
Subd. 3. Alcohol free days. The Parks & Recreation Director may designate any day as
alcohol free in Wilson, Whitney, or Riverside Park. When an alcohol free day is
designated in a park, that park will be posted at the entrance and on principal shelter
facilities with a notice indicating that alcohol possession and consumption is prohibited.
Subd. 4. Beer Kegs. Keg beer is allowed by permit only and will be issued in conjunction
with shelter rental at Wilson and/or Riverside parks. Keg permits are only issued during
the summer and fall shelter seasons of May 1 through September 30 for each calendar
year. Each rental is allowed one keg per permit and one permit per rental. The keg must
be kept inside the picnic shelter at all times. Keg permits will not be granted for any type
of fundraising activity or incidental to a fundraising activity.
Subd. 5. Alcoholic beverages may not be consumed, possessed or dispensed in the Lake
George Complex or anywhere on Eastman Park grounds except as pursuant to a
temporary on-sale liquor license that has been granted pursuant to Section 810:05, Subd.
7 or Section 800:05, Subd. 5. Alcoholic beverages served pursuant to a temporary license
may not be consumed or possessed outside of a service area as defined by the Parks &
Recreation Director.
Section 236:60. Traffic. No person in a park will do any of the following prohibited acts:
Subd. 1. Traffic Signs. No person will fail to obey the directions of all traffic and parking
control signs in any park.
Subd. 2. Speed of Vehicles. No person will ride or drive a vehicle at a speed greater than
15 miles per hour on parkways open to regular traffic.
Subd. 3. Areas of Vehicle Operation. No person will drive a vehicle on any area of a park
except on a parkway, parking lot, or other roadway designated for vehicles.
Subd. 4. Bicycles.
(a) Persons may operate a bicycle only on paths, trails, Parkways or other areas
designated for bicycle use.
(b) Persons operating bicycles must ride on the right hand side of such path,
trail, Parkway, or other area designated for bicycle use.
(c) No person may operate a bicycle in a reckless manner so as to endanger
pedestrians.
(d) No person will cling or attach himself/herself or his/her bicycle to any other
moving vehicle.
(e) The operator of the bicycle will yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians on
walkways and will walk the bicycle in all areas where riding is prohibited.
(f) No person will leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when one
is provided and space is available, or leave a bicycle in a place where other
persons may be injured by the bicycle.
Section 236:65. Recreation Activities. No person in a park will do any of the following
prohibited acts unless specific authorization is received from the Park and Recreation Director:
Subd. 1. Bathing and Swimming.
(a) Designated Areas. Swim, bathe, or wade in any water or waterways in or
adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places as are
provided therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set
forth.
(b) Hours. Swim, bathe, or wade in any water or waterways in or adjacent to
any park, except during the hours posted at each designated swimming area.
(c) Apparel. Swim, wade or bathe nude in any Park. For purposes of this
section nudity is defined as less than completely and opaquely covered
human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a
point immediately above the top of the areolae.
Subd. 2. Fishing.
(a) General Prohibition. Fish in any waters, whether by the use of hook and
line, net, trap or other device, except in waters designated for that use.
(b) Ice Fishing. Fish through the ice on any part of Lake George. No fish
house will be placed on Lake George nor will any person drill or chop holes
in its ice.
Subd. 3. Hunting and Firearms. Hunt, trap, pursue or endanger any animal life. No
person will, except in a designated areas open for nuisance deer hunting by permit, use,
carry, or possess firearms of any description, or air rifles, spring guns, bow or arrows,
slings, or any other forms of weapons potentially inimical to life or dangerous to human
safety or any instrument which can be loaded with and fire black cartridges, or any kind of
trapping device. Shooting into park areas from beyond park boundaries is forbidden.
Subd. 4. Picnic Areas and Use. Leave the picnic area before the fire is completely
extinguished and before all refuse or other trash is placed in the disposal receptacles where
provided.
Subd. 5. Camping. No persons will set up tents, shacks, or any other temporary shelter for
the purpose of overnight camping nor will any person leave in the park after closing hours
any movable structure or any special vehicle to be used or that could be used for such
purposes, such as house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon, or the like, except in designated
camping areas.
Subd. 6. Games. Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving throwing or
otherwise propelling objects such as baseballs, golfballs, stones, arrows, javelins, model
airplanes, snow and ice chunks or snowballs, except in the areas set apart for such forms of
recreation. The playing or practicing of rough or comparatively dangerous games such as
football, baseball, adult softball, and golf is not permitted, except on the fields, courts, or
areas provided therefor. Use of ballfields will be governed by the rule of first come, first
served, except where prior reservations are made.
Section 236:75. Merchandising, and Advertising. No person in or on land adjacent to a park
will do any of the following prohibited acts:
Subd. 1. Vending and Peddling. Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, or station
or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any article or
thing. Exception is hereby made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by
and under the authority of the Health Department with the approval of the Parks &
Recreation Director for all Parks
Subd. 2. Advertising. Announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any
article or service for sale or hire.
Section 236.76. Signs. No person in a Park may post, erect, or cause to be posted or erected by
any means any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatsoever. City of St. Cloud Park &
Recreation signs and postings are exempted from this prohibition.
Section 236:85. Park & Recreation Fees. Fees for all park and recreational activities and other
fees are set forth in Chapter 500 of this Code.
Section 236:86. Park & Recreation Financial Assistance. Individuals in need of financial
assistance for youth programming and activities may be eligible for assistance through the
scholarship program. Assistance is based upon household family income, as adopted by City
Council resolution.
Section 236:90. Park & Recreation Department Cancellation Policy. A letter of credit for 100
percent of fees paid or a full monetary payment will be refunded for cancellations which occur
prior to the first day of any class or lesson. A letter of credit for 50 percent of fees paid or a 50
percent payment will be issued for cancellations which occur on the first or second day of class
or lessons. No credit or monetary payment will be given for cancellations, which occur after the
second day of class or lessons.
Subd. 1. For all facility rentals if a reservation is cancelled 30 or more calendar days
before the event, the total fee will be refunded, minus the $16.00 Administrative Fee. If a
reservation is cancelled and fewer than 30 calendar days remain before the event, only 50
percent of the total fee will be refunded, minus the $16.00 Administrative Fee. No refunds
will be given on or after the day of a scheduled rental for any reason.
Subd. 2. Rain or severe weather cancelations that effect the Whitney Park Sports
Complex activities will be rescheduled on an alternate date without penalty.
Section 236:100. Exceptions for Emergency Vehicles, City Vehicles and City Activities. The
provisions of Section 236 do not apply to the following:
Subd. 1. Emergency, police or fire department vehicles or watercraft, or any vehicle or
watercraft owned by the City or a City employee displaying proper identification where the
employee is duly authorized to operate such vehicle or watercraft at such location.
Subd. 2. City employees authorized to perform duties in a park.
Subd. 3. Events or activities organized and supervised by the City and its employees.
History: Ord. 2487 12-20-10; Ord. 2497 5-23-11; Ord. 2604 12-8-14; Ord. 2688 12-19-16
Section 237 - Civic Facilities Conduct and Use Regulations
Section 237.00. Definitions.
Subd. 1. "Civic Facilities" include the St. Cloud Municipal Athletic Complex, including its
parking areas, the St. Cloud Civic Center, including its parking areas and adjacent exterior
common areas, and the Paramount Theater.
Subd. 2. "Civic Center" includes all land and rights including water, improvements and
personal property which is designated as the St. Cloud Civic Center.
Subd. 3. "Municipal Athletic Complex" includes all land and rights including water,
improvements and personal property which is designated as the St. Cloud Municipal
Athletic Complex-Ice Arena, Stadium and Veterans Golf Course.
Subd. 4. "Director" is the Director of Civic Facilities for the City of St. Cloud.
Subd. 5. "Civic Center Manager" is the manager of the Civic Center for the City of St.
Cloud.
Subd. 6. " Municpal Athletic Complex Manager" is the manager of the Municipal Athletic
Complex for the City of St. Cloud.
Subd. 7. "Vehicle" is any conveyance on wheels or tracks, whether motor-powered,
animal-drawn or self-propelled. The term will include any trailer of any kind or description.
Exception is made for baby carriages.
Subd. 8. "Pedestrian Walkway" is that portion of the downtown skyway, including stair
tower, elevator tower and ground level walkway that is located on Civic Center property.
Subd. 9. "Event" means a theater performance or show, athletic contest or other
entertainment or amusement, or a public gathering to which the general public is admitted.
Subd. 10. "Catering" means the dispensing and/or sale of food, beverage or novelty items
by a permitted caterer/vendor acting with the expressed permission of the appropriate
building manager.
Subd. 11. "Decorating" means all activities relating to the provision of furnishings (i.e.
pipes, drapes, tables, chairs) for an event including but not limited to the setup and
takedown of those furnishings and clean up following the event.
Section 237:10. Event Scheduling. The Civic Facilities Director will have discretionary authority
to schedule events and all other uses of the Civic Center or the Municipal Athletic Complex in
accordance with the following policy:
Subd. 1. Every effort will be made to accommodate each and every potential user.
Subd. 2. When more than one potential user requests a similar date, generally speaking,
events producing the greatest revenue to the City of St. Cloud, either short or long term, will
be given the greatest consideration.
a. Consideration will include repeat or steady customers.
b. Consideration may also be extended to those events with the greater
potential for spin-off commerce to the St. Cloud retail market.
c. The City Administration may, from time to time, develop more explicit
guidelines/policies to accommodate changing market conditions and
community-use standards.
Section 237:15. Rental Fees. Rental fees and charges for use of the Municipal Athletic Complex
and Civic Center will be set forth in Sections 540:00 and 545:00 of this Code.
Section 237:20. Civic Facilities Catering and Decorating Permits. No person will perform catering
or decorating services in any civic facility without having obtained a permit from the Director.
Subd. 1. Catering Permit Application. Catering permits will be issued by the Director to all
persons holding a current Food Catering License issued by the St. Cloud Health Department
who comply with the requirements set forth below. Failure of any caterer to conform to
all requirements set forth below may result in immediate revocation of a Civic Facilities
Catering permit.
a. Application will be made annually on or before November 15 to the Director
on the forms provided by the Director. Approved permits will remain in
force for a calendar year (January 1 to December 31). Any person making
application for a catering permit will pay an annual fee in an amount
established from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
b. At the time of filing the permit application, proof of financial responsibility
with regard to liability must be furnished to the City. Proof of financial
responsibility will include as a minimum a certificate that there is in effect
for the permit period an insurance policy in an amount of not less than
$300,000 combined single limit coverage. Any insurance policy will name
the City of St. Cloud as an additional insured under the policy. Any
insurance policy will include a provision that the coverage provided will not
be cancelled until a minimum of ten days prior written notice has been given
to the City. Liability insurance policies will be approved as to form by the
City Attorney.
c. Each applicant will provide verification which in the discretion of the
Director is sufficient to show the ability to serve meals in the quantities and
at the intervals requested in the application.
d. Each caterer will abide by the Civic Facilities Caterers Rules and
Regulations.
Subd. 2. Catering Fee. Any person performing catering services in the Civic Facilities will
be required to pay a fee set forth in Section 580:00 of this Code.
Subd. 3. Decorating Permit Application. Decorating permits will be issued by the
Director to all persons who comply with the requirements set forth below. Failure of
any decorator to conform to all requirements set forth below may result in immediate
revocation of a Civic Facilities Decorating Permit.
a. Application will be made prior to providing services to the Director on the
forms provided by the Director.
b. Each decorator will abide by the Civic Facilities' Decorator's rules and
regulations.
Subd. 4. Decorating Fee. Any person performing decorating services in the Civic Facilities
will be required to pay a fee set forth in Section 580:00 of this Code.
Section 237:25. Licensee's Liability. Any person using or occupying the Civic Facilities will be
liable for any damage or injury to the Civic Facilities or to its personnel occasioned by the activities
or occupancy of that person regardless of whether that occupancy occurs by formal lease or by use
of the Civic Facilities as a public place.
Section 237:30. General Standards of Conduct. It will be a violation of this ordinance for any
person, while on or about Civic Facilities:
Subd. 1. To gain access to or make use of any facilities without obtaining a ticket or paying
a fee in situations where the obtaining of a ticket or the paying of a fee is required.
Subd. 2. To dispose of refuse or litter, except in receptacles provided for that
purpose.
Subd. 3. To bring onto and dispose of refuse or litter not created as part of a Civic
Facilities event.
Subd. 4. To deface, damage or alter the appearance of any structure, property, sign or
equipment.
Subd. 5. To hunt, snare, trap or otherwise disturb any animals, birds or other wildlife.
Subd. 6. To dig or remove any sod, trees, shrubs, flowers or foliage of any kind.
Subd. 7. To wash animals except at times and in locations specifically designated for
the purpose.
Subd. 8. To ride or lead any animal except in such areas as designated as exercise rings or
specially designated as a posted area.
Subd. 9. To smoke in any area where "No Smoking" signs are posted.
Subd. 10. For any person except a police officer in the performance of duty upon any Civic
Facility to carry any gun or firearm of any description, other than a pistol permitted by state
law, unless it is dismounted or broken apart or carried in a case in a manner that it cannot be
discharged.
Subd. 11. To use, discharge or shoot any air rifle, air pistol, BB gun, sling shot or arrows
from bows.
Subd. 12. To enter or remain in any building at the Civic Facilities with bare feet except in
locker/shower areas of Civic Facilities. To enter or remain in any building common areas
without a shirt/blouse or to remove shirt/blouse while in any building at the Civic Facilities.
Exception is made for any entertainment, exhibit or display that is part of a scheduled event
at the Civic Center Municipal Athletic Complex.
Subd. 13. To intentionally make dirty or unsanitary restrooms, washrooms and shower
rooms in Civic Facilities. No person over the age of six years will enter the restrooms,
shower rooms or other room designated for the opposite sex.
Subd. 14. To climb, walk, stand or set upon any trees, monuments, fountains, railings,
fences or upon any other property not designed or customarily so used.
Subd. 15. To disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area
or participating in any activity under the authority of a lease issued pursuant to this
ordinance.
Subd. 16. To take part in or abet the playing of any games involving or otherwise
propelling objects such as baseballs, golf balls, stones, arrows, javelins, model airplanes,
snow and ice chunks or snowballs, except in the areas set apart for such forms of recreation.
Subd. 17. To fail to obey the directions of all traffic and parking control signs in outside
parking lot and/or parking ramp.
Subd. 18. To ride or propel rollerblades, rollerskates or skateboards anywhere upon Civic
Facilities.
Subd. 19. To ride a bicycle upon any interior portions of the Civic Facilities or to lock or
chain a bicycle to any object other than a bike rack.
Subd. 20. To operate a snowmobile upon the Civic Facilities.
Subd. 21. To use profane, vulgar or indecent language so as to be audible and offensive.
Subd. 22. To engage in brawling or fighting or in conduct tending to reasonably arouse
alarm, anger or resentment in others.
Subd. 23. To intentionally throw any object, thing or article onto a stage, playing field,
audience or seating area, or area where an event is conducted which may be likely to
endanger any person or property or interfere with the orderly play or conduct of the event.
Subd. 24. To intentionally run on or go onto a stage, playing field or area where an event is
conducted.
Subd. 25. To obstruct an aisle, block a properly marked exit or take or obstruct the seat of
another.
Section 237:35. Conduct Requiring Manager's Approval. Unless the prior written approval of the
Manager is obtained, it will be a violation of this ordinance for any person, while on or about Civic
Facilities:
Subd. 1. To make use of the Civic Facilities or any part thereof while part of an organized
group.
Subd. 2. To post any sign or notice.
Subd. 3. To bring upon the Civic Facilities or possess any intoxicating beverages or
non-intoxicating malt beverages as defined in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 340A other than
those furnished by the City directly or through its vendors.
Subd. 4. To use a mobile livestock trailer or other conveyance on paved areas of the
Civic Facilities.
Subd. 5. To clean a mobile livestock trailer or other conveyance on paved areas of the Civic
Facilities.
Subd. 6. To build fires at any location.
Subd. 7. To bring onto the Civic Facilities any animal. This rule will not prohibit a blind,
physically handicapped or deaf person from taking a service dog onto the Civic Facilities, if
the service dog can be properly identified as being from a recognized school for seeing eye,
hearing ear, service, or guide dogs and if the dog is properly harnessed or leashed so that the
blind, physically handicapped, or deaf person may maintain control of the dog.
Subd. 8. To be in the Civic Facilities during times when the Civic Facilities are closed, as
posted.
Subd. 9. To bring into the Civic Facilities any food, beverage, bottle or other breakable,
disposable container designed to hold food, beverage or other consumable commodity.
Subd. 10. To promote, solicit, sell, barter or trade any commodity or item of monetary
value, including but not limited to any admission ticket, on any part of the Civic Facilities
premises, provided that the sale of an admission ticket for its face value or less than its face
value will not be a violation of this ordinance. For purposes of this ordinance, a
complimentary ticket will be deemed to have a face value of zero.
Subd. 11. To construct, erect or place any building or structure, including tents, of whatever
kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any public service utility
into, upon or across the Civic Facilities.
Subd. 12. To announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any article or
service for sale or hire.
Subd. 13. No person will set up tents, shacks or any temporary shelter for the purpose of
overnight camping nor will any person leave in the Civic Facilities after closing hours any
movable structure or any special vehicle to be used or that could be used for such purposes,
such as house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon, or the like.
Section 237:40. Vehicle and Parking Regulations. It will be a violation of this ordinance for any
person, while on the Civic Facilities property:
Subd. 1. To operate a vehicle in such a manner as would, if done on a public street,
constitute a violation of Minnesota Statutes § 169.
Subd. 2. To park any vehicle at any location except such locations as are specifically
designated as parking stalls, except with the express prior approval of the Manager.
Subd. 3. Where lines or marks are drawn to indicate parking stalls, to park a vehicle in such
a manner that the vehicle is not completely within a stall bordered by such line or markers.
Subd. 4. To park in any area posted as a fire lane.
Subd. 5. To park in the vicinity of a loading or dock area except for vehicles which are
actually in the process of loading or unloading supplies, equipment or other merchandise.
Subd. 6. To drive a vehicle in any area except on a parkway, parking lot, path or other
roadway designated for the vehicle.
Subd. 7. To provide driver's training except with the express prior approval of the
Manager.
Section 238 -Whitney Senior Center Conduct and Use Regulations
Section 238:00. Definitions.
Subd. 1. “Senior Citizens Organization” means any group where at least 75 percent of the
members are 55 years of age or older.
Subd. 2. “Aging Services Director” means the Aging Services Director or that person's
designated appointee responsible for the operation of the Whitney Senior Center for the City of
St. Cloud.
Subd. 3. “Senior Center” means the Whitney Senior Center, located at 1527 Northway Drive
in the City of St. Cloud, Minnesota.
Subd. 4. “Sectarian Instruction” is any activity that can be construed as education and/or
promotional that is either offered or sponsored by a religious sect.
Subd. 5. “St. Cloud Area” means any location within ten miles of Whitney Senior Center.
Subd. 6. “Non Profit Organizations” means any fraternal, religious, veterans or other nonprofit
organizations covered by the following:
a) Any corporation, fund, foundation, trust or association organized for exclusively
scientific, literary, religious, charitable, educational or artistic purposes, or for the
purpose of making contributions to or for the use of the United States of America, the
State of Minnesota, or any of its political subdivisions for exclusively public purposes,
if no part of the net income of any such corporation, fund, foundation, trust or
association inures to the benefit of any private member, stockholder or individual;
b) Clubs organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation, or other nonprofitable
purposes, no part of the net income of which inures to the benefit of
any private member, stockholder or individual.
Section 238:05. Permits. Unless otherwise authorized by contract with the City, a permit will be
obtained from the Aging Services Director before participating in any senior center activity or event
not sponsored or held under the auspices of the City of St. Cloud.
Section 238:10. Application.
Subd. 1. A person seeking issuance of a permit will file an application in person with the Aging
Services Director at the Whitney Senior Center. The application will state the information
required in the subdivisions which follow:
Subd. 2. Name and address of applicant.
Subd. 3. Name and address of the person(s) sponsoring the activity.
Subd. 4. The day and hour for which the permit is desired.
Subd. 5. An estimate of attendance.
Subd. 6. What type of activities are going to be conducted.
Subd. 7. Any other information which the Aging Services Director will find necessary for fair
determination as to whether a permit should be issued.
Section 238:15. Standards of Issuance.
Subd. 1. The Aging Services Director will issue a permit when it is found that all of the
requirements of the subdivisions which follow have been met.
Subd. 2. The proposed activity or use of the Whitney Senior Center will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the normal daily activities of the center.
Subd. 3. The proposed activity or use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the
promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation.
Subd. 4. The proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or
disorderly conduct.
Subd. 5. The proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expenses
or police operation.
Subd. 6. The facility has not been reserved for other use at the day and hour requested in the
application.
Subd. 7. If the application is refused, the Aging Services Director will make known in writing
to the applicant the reason for refusal.
Subd. 8. No permit will be issued for more than five consecutive days.
Section 238:20. Effect of Permit. The permit holder will be bound by all Whitney Senior Center rules
and regulations and City Ordinances.
Section 238:25. Hold Harmless. Any person(s) to whom the permit is issued will indemnify and hold
harmless the City together with any of its officers, employees or agents for any loss, damage, injury or
death from any act or omission of the person(s) to whom the permit is issued, said persons, invitees,
licensees, employees or agents, while on or near the Senior Center premises.
Section 238:30. Revocation. The Aging Services Director will have the authority to revoke any
permit for a violation of any rule or ordinance or for good cause.
Section 238:35. Rental Fee. A rental fee will be paid prior to receipt of the permit. The rental fee will
be set forth in Section 522:00 of this Code.
Section 238:40. Reservation. Application for reservation by Groups B and C will be made within 60
days prior to, but no later than 15 days prior to the day(s) for which the permit is desired. Applications
for reservation by Group A will be made no later than 5 days prior to the day(s) for which the permit is
desired. Groups A, B, and C are defined as follows:
1. Group A: Senior organizations, senior advocate and senior support groups; Nutrition
Centers Program/United Way of St. Cloud Area; City of St. Cloud Employee Bargaining
Units/City of St. Cloud Departments; City authorized activities and committees.
2. Group B: District 742 Schools; St. Cloud area non-profit organizations; private parties for
honoring only persons age 55 years of age or older sponsored by St. Cloud area individuals
(i.e., anniversaries, birthdays and retirements).
3. Group C: Non-St. Cloud area organizations; commercial group rentals.
Section 238:45. Whitney Senior Center Use.
Subd. 1. No person will use Whitney Senior Center facilities or property in any manner
prohibited in the subdivisions.
Subd. 2. Persons in groups falling under the B & C rental categories will not be allowed to rent
the Whitney Senior Center for fundraising events.
Subd. 3. Whitney Senior Center will be closed promptly at 10:00 PM unless prior
arrangements are made with Whitney Senior Center staff.
Subd. 4. Whitney Senior Center will be closed to all rental groups on legal holidays
designated by the City of St. Cloud.
Subd. 5. Only persons in groups falling under Categories A & B will be permitted to rent
the Whitney Senior Center kitchen facilities. Prior arrangements must be made with
nutrition staff.
Subd. 6. Alcoholic beverages may not be consumed, possessed or dispensed in the senior center
or on senior center grounds except as pursuant to a temporary on-sale liquor license that has been
granted pursuant to Section 810:05, Subd. 7 or Section 800:05, Subd. 5 of this Code. Alcoholic
beverages served pursuant to a temporary license may not be consumed or possessed in the
Whitney Recreation Center or other portions of Whitney Park.
Subd. 7. The senior center will not be used for sectarian instruction or as a place for
religious worship.
Subd. 8. Whitney Senior Center is a smoke free facility.
Section 238:50. Activity Fees. The Winter Senior Center will collect and assess activity fees set
forth by the City Council. No person will participate in any activity for which a fee is required
without paying the required fee.
History: Ord. 2456 4-5-10.
Section 239 - Whitney Senior Center Advisory Board
Section 239:00. Composition and Qualifications, Appointment and Removal, Compensation.
Subd. 1. The Board will consist of not less than ten nor more than twenty-five voting members.
Membership will consist of representation from senior groups, public service agencies,
professionals and other citizens of the City of St. Cloud concerned with the best interests of older
adults.
Subd. 2. All members will be appointed by the Mayor with the advise and consent of the
Council. At least 50% of the voting membership will be persons age 55 and over and will
include older adults who participate in programs at Whitney Senior Center.
Subd. 3. The Mayor may remove any member of the Board.
Subd. 4. Members of the Board will serve without compensation.
Section 239:10. Term. The term of membership will rotate with one-third of the membership
being appointed or re-appointed each year. A full term will consist of three years. A member may
not serve more than six consecutive years, unless serving as an elected officer in which case he or
she may serve one additional term.
Section 239:15. Vacancy. Any vacancy in the appointive membership will be filled by
appointment by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council, and the appointee will serve the
remaining term. The appointee may serve no more than two additional terms.
Section 239:20. Board Officers. The Board will elect from its membership a Chair, a Vice-Chair
and a Secretary, who will serve the terms and will have the powers and perform duties as may be
prescribed in the rules of the Board. Secretarial duties and the taking of minutes will be assigned to
the Whitney Senior Center staff.
Section 239:25. Meetings. An annual meeting of the Advisory Board will be held each year. The
Advisory Board will also hold regular meetings during the year. The date, time and place of the
meetings will be determined by the membership of the Board. Additional meetings may be called
by the Advisory Board Chair or the Aging Services Director.
Section 239:30. Quorum. A simple majority of voting members will constitute a quorum and must
be present at a meeting of the Board for the transaction of business.
Section 239:35. Duties of the Board.
Subd. 1. Serves in an advisory capacity to the Mayor and Aging Services Director, and makes
recommendations regarding matters of policies and programs.
Subd. 2. Communicates with the Mayor, the Aging Services Director, community residents and
program participants.
Subd. 3. Promotes the Whitney Senior Center Program through their work and contacts with the
community.
Section 242 - Retired And Senior Volunteer Program Advisory Council
Section 242:00. Composition and Qualifications, Appointment and Removal, Compensation.
Subd. 1. The Advisory Council will consist of not less than ten nor more than 21 voting
members. Membership will consist of representation from volunteer stations, local funding
sources, senior groups, public service agencies, professionals and other citizens of the City
of St. Cloud area concerned with the best interests of older adults.
Subd. 2. All members will be appointed by the Mayor with the advise and consent of the
City Council. At least 25% of the voting membership will be persons age 55 and over and
will include RSVP volunteers.
Subd. 3. The Mayor may remove any member of the Advisory Council.
Subd. 4. Members of the Advisory Council will serve without compensation.
Section 242:10. Term. The term of membership will rotate with one-third of the membership
being appointed or re-appointed each year. A full term will consist of three years. A member may
not serve more than two full consecutive terms.
Section 242:15. Vacancy. Any vacancy in the appointive membership will be filled by
appointment by the Mayor, with the consent of the City Council. The appointee will serve the
remaining term and may serve not more than two additional terms.
Section 242:20. Advisory Council Officers. The Advisory Council will elect from its membership
a Chair, a Vice-Chair and a Secretary, who will serve the terms and will have the powers and
perform the duties as may be prescribed in the rules of the Council. Secretarial duties and the
taking of minutes will be assigned to the RSVP staff.
Section 242:25. Meetings. An annual meeting of the Advisory Council will be held each year. The
Advisory Council will also hold regular meetings during the year. The date, time, and place of said
meetings will be determined by the membership of the Advisory Council.
Section 242:30. Quorum. A simple majority of voting members will constitute a quorum and must
be present at a meeting of the Advisory Council for the transaction of business.
Section 242:35. Duties.
(a) Serves in an advisory capacity and makes recommendations regarding general and specific
matters of policies and programs to the Mayor and RSVP Director.
(b) Assists RSVP staff in recommending benefits to RSVP volunteers in the greater St. Cloud
area which includes St. Cloud, Sartell, Sauk Rapids, Waite Park, St. Joseph, Stearns,
Benton and Sherburne Counties.
(c) Promotes RSVP through their work and contacts with the community.
Section 243 - Whitney Recreation Center Conduct and Use Regulations
Section 243:00. Definitions.
Subd. 1. “Whitney Recreation Center” will mean all land and rights thereto including
water, parking areas and adjacent exterior commons and improvements and personal
property thereon which is designated as the Whitney Recreation Center, 1529 Northway
Drive, St. Cloud, Minnesota 56303.
Subd. 2. “ Director” is the Director of Recreation for the City of St. Cloud.
Subd. 3. “Assistant Director” is the assistant director of the Whitney Recreation Center for
the City of St. Cloud.
Subd. 4. “ Vehicle” is any conveyance on wheels or tracks, whether motor powered, animal
drawn or self propelled. The term will include any trailer of any kind or description, except
for baby carriages.
Subd. 5. “Event” means any athletic contest or a public gathering to which the general
public is admitted.
Subd. 6. “Catering” means the dispensing or sale of food, beverage or novelty items by a
permitted caterer/vendor acting with the express permission of the appropriate building
manager.
Subd.7. “Decorating” means all activities relating to the provision of furnishings (i.e. pipes,
drapes, tables, chairs) for an event including but not limited to the setup and takedown of
those furnishings and clean up following the event.
Section 243:10. Event Scheduling. The Recreation Director will have discretionary authority to
schedule events and all other uses of the Whitney Recreation Center in accordance with the
following policy:
Subd. 1. Every effort will be made to accommodate each and every potential user.
Subd. 2. When more than one potential user requests a similar date, generally speaking,
events producing the greatest revenue to the City of St. Cloud, either short or long term, will
be given the greatest consideration.
a. Consideration will include repeat or steady customers.
b. Consideration may also be extended to those events with the greater potential for
spin-off commerce to the St. Cloud retail market.
c. The City Administration may, from time to time, develop more explicit
guidelines/policies to accommodate changing market conditions and community-use
standards.
Section 243:15. Rental Fees. Rental fees and charges for use of the Whitney Recreation Center
will be set forth in Section 541:00 of this code.
Section 243:20. Licensee's Liability. Any person using or occupying the Whitney Recreation
Center will be liable for any damage or injury to the Whitney Recreation Center or to its personnel
caused by the activities or occupancy of that person regardless of whether that occupancy occurs by
formal lease or by use of the Whitney Recreation Center as a public place.
Section 243:25. General Standards of Conduct. It will be a violation of this ordinance for any
person, while on or about Whitney Recreation Center Facilities:
Subd. 1. To gain access to or make use of any facilities without obtaining a ticket or paying
a fee in situations where a ticket or fee is required.
Subd. 2. To dispose of refuse or litter, except in receptacles provided for that purposes.
Subd. 3. To dispose of refuse or litter not created as part of a Whitney Recreation Center
event.
Subd. 4. To deface, damage or alter the appearance of any structure, property, sign or
equipment.
Subd. 5. To hunt, snare, trap or otherwise disturb any animals, birds or other wildlife.
Subd. 6. To dig or remove any sod, trees, shrubs, flowers or foliage of any kind.
Subd. 7. To smoke in any area where "No Smoking" signs are posted.
Subd. 8. For any person, other than a police officer in the performance of duty to carry any
gun or firearm of any description, except for a pistol permitted by State law, or firearms that
are dismounted, broken apart or carried in a case in a manner that it cannot be discharged.
Subd. 9. To use, discharge or shoot any air rifle, air pistol, BB gun, sling shot or arrows
from bows.
Subd. 10. To enter or remain in any building at the Whitney Recreation Center with bare
feet except in locker/shower areas of Whitney Recreation Center. To enter or remain in any
building common areas without a shirt/blouse or to remove shirt/blouse while in any
building at the Whitney Recreation Center. Exception is made for any athletic activity,
entertainment, exhibit or display that is part of a scheduled event at the Whitney Recreation
Center.
Subd. 11. To intentionally make, washrooms and shower rooms in Whitney Recreation
Center dirty or unsanitary. No person over the age of six years will enter the restrooms,
shower rooms or other room designated for the opposite sex.
Subd. 12. To climb, walk, stand or set upon any trees, monuments, fountains, railings,
fences or upon any other property not designed or customarily used for such purpose.
Subd. 13. To unreasonably disturb or interfere with any person or party occupying any area
or participating in any activity under the authority of a lease issued pursuant to this
ordinance.
Subd. 14. To participate in or abet the playing of any games involving or otherwise
propelling objects such as baseballs, golf balls, stones, arrows, javelins, model airplanes,
snow and ice chunks or snowballs, except in the areas set apart for such forms of recreation.
Subd. 15. To fail to obey the directions of all traffic and parking control signs.
Subd. 16. To rollerskates, rollerblade or skateboards anywhere upon Whitney Recreation
Center.
Subd. 17. To ride a bicycle upon any interior portions of the Whitney Recreation Center or
to lock or chain a bicycle to any object other than a bike rack.
Subd. 18. To operate a snowmobile upon the Whitney Recreation Center.
Subd. 19. To use profane, vulgar or indecent language so as to be audible and offensive.
Subd. 20. To engage in brawling or fighting or in conduct tending to reasonably arouse
alarm, anger or resentment in others.
Subd. 21. To intentionally throw any object, thing or article onto a stage, playing field,
audience or seating area, or area where an event is conducted which may be likely to
endanger any person or property or interfere with the orderly play or conduct of the event.
Subd. 22. To intentionally run on or go onto a stage, playing field or area where an event is
conducted.
Subd. 23. To obstruct an aisle, block a properly marked exit or take or obstruct the seat of
another.
Section 243:26. Identification Required. Individuals wishing to use the Whitney Recreation Center
must provide proof of identity in the form of a driver's license or identification card. Upon proof of
identity, a Whitney Recreation Center picture identification card will be issued. All users of the
Whitney Recreation Center will be required to display the Whitney Recreation Center picture
identification card before being allowed access to the facility. Individuals under legal age and
without identification described herein will be required to provide a signed parental permission
form prior to issuance of a Whitney Recreation Center picture identification card.
Section 243:30. Conduct Requiring Director's Approval. Unless the prior written approval of the
manager is obtained, it will be a violation of this ordinance for any person, while on or about
Whitney Recreation Center:
Subd. 1. To make use of the Whitney Recreation Center while part of an organized group.
Subd. 2. To post any sign or notice.
Subd. 3. To possess any intoxicating beverages or non-intoxicating malt beverages as
defined in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 340A other than those furnished by the City directly
or through its vendors.
Subd. 4. To build fires at any location.
Subd. 5. To bring onto the Whitney Recreation Center any animal. This rule will not
prohibit a blind, physically handicapped or deaf person from taking a service dog onto the
Whitney Recreation Center, if the service dog can be properly identified as being from a
recognized school for seeing eye, hearing ear, service or guide dogs and if the dog is
properly harnessed or leashed so that the blind, physically disabled or hearing impaired
person may maintain control of the dog.
Subd. 6. To be in the Whitney Recreation Center during times when the Whitney
Recreation Center is closed.
Subd. 7. To bring onto the Whitney Recreation Center any food, beverage, bottle or other
breakable, disposable container designed to hold food, beverage or other consumable
commodity, except an athlete or athletic team participating in an organized sponsored
athletic event may do so upon obtaining the Director's approval.
Subd. 8. To promote, solicit, sell, barter or trade any commodity or item of monetary value,
including but not limited to any admission ticket, on any part of the Whitney Recreation
Center premises, provided that the sale of an admission ticket for its face value or less than
its face value will not be a violation of this ordinance. For purposes of this ordinance, a
complimentary ticket will be deemed to have a face value of zero.
Subd. 9. To construct, erect or place any building or structure, including tents, of whatever
kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any public service utility
into, upon or across the Whitney Recreation Center.
Subd. 10. To announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any article or
service for sale or hire.
Subd. 11. No person will set up tents, shacks or any temporary shelter for the purpose of
overnight camping nor will any person leave in the Whitney Recreation Center after closing
hours any movable structure or any special vehicle to be used or that could be used for such
purposes, such as house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon, or the like.
Section 243:35. Vehicle and Parking Regulations. It will be a violation of this ordinance for any
person, while on the Whitney Recreation Center property:
Subd. 1. To operate a vehicle in such a manner as would, if done on a public street,
constitute a violation of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 169.
Subd. 2. To park any vehicle at any location except such locations as are specifically
designated as parking stalls, except with the express prior approval of the Director.
Subd. 3. Where lines or marks are drawn to indicate parking stalls, to park a vehicle in such
a manner that the vehicle is not completely within a stall bordered by such line or markers.
Subd. 4. To park in any area posted as a fire lane.
Subd. 5. To park in the vicinity of a loading or dock area except for vehicles which are
actually in the process of loading or unloading supplies, equipment or other merchandise.
Subd. 6. To drive a vehicle in any area except on a parkway, parking lot, path or other
roadway designated for the vehicle.
Subd. 7. To provide driver's training except with the express prior approval of the Director.
Section 244 – Refuse, Recycling and Yard Waste Collection and Disposal
Section 244:01. Purpose. This ordinance establishes rules and regulations for the collection
and disposal of refuse, recycling and yard waste for the City of St. Cloud.
Section 244:02. Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms
as used in this ordinance shall have the meanings designated.
Subd. 1. “Ashes” mean cinders and solid products resulting from complete combustion of wood, coal
or other materials; provided they are not mixed with any other solid wastes.
Subd. 2. “Contaminated” means not in its pure state, tainted, putrefied, or polluted.
Subd. 3. “Dumpster” means a metal container used for the disposal of refuse, which container has a
minimum capacity of 200 gallons.
Subd. 4. “Dwelling” means a structure, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for
residential occupancy, including single-family, two-family, townhouse and multi-family dwellings,
but not including hotels, motels, dormitories or lodging houses.
Subd. 5. “Detached dwelling” means a dwelling entirely surrounded by open space, with the open
space located on the same zoning lot as the dwelling.
Subd. 6. “Multi-Family dwelling” means a dwelling containing three or less dwelling units, designed
so that each dwelling unit is connected to a common corridor or entranceway, originally constructed
for said purposes. Multi-family dwelling does not include converted dwellings or townhouses.
Subd 7. “Single family detached dwelling” means a detached dwelling containing accommodations
for, and occupied by one family.
Subd. 8. “Townhouse dwelling” means an independent dwelling unit which is attached on one or
both sides to another independent dwelling units(s) or attached garage, and where more than one
principal structure can be located on the same zoning lot with common open space for all
independent dwelling units on the zoning lot. Each townhouse must have a separate entrance.
Subd. 19. A “Municipal Collection Service” means the refuse, recycling and yard waste collection
service provided by the City of St. Cloud.
Subd. 20. “Premise” means land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings
together with such open spaces as are required under this ordinance and having its principal frontage
upon a street or officially approved place.
Subd. 21. “Recycling” means the process of collecting materials from the waste stream and
separating them by type, remaking them into new products, and marketing and reusing the materials
as new products.
Subd. 22. “Refuse” means all putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes (except body waste) (baby
diapers permitted), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, and market and
industrial solid wastes.
Subd. 23. “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes (excluding recyclables) such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery and other similar materials.
Subd. 24. “Sleeping room” means a room in a structure rented for sleeping with access to a
bathroom, with or without access to a kitchen, but not including motels and hotels open to travelers.
Subd. 25. “Source separation” means the separation of recyclable materials and yard waste from
mixed municipal solid waste at the source of generation.
Subd. 26. “Yard waste” includes grass clippings, leaves, pine cones, pine needles, pumpkins, acorns,
apples, sod, dirt, bark, hay, straw and tomatoes.
Subd. 27. “Tree waste” includes branches, sticks, tree stumps, firewood, Christmas trees, shrubs or
bushes, cornstalks and woody or vine-type plants or garden vegetation.
Subd. 28. “Compost” is decomposed organic material resulting from the composting process.
Subd. 29. “Recyclable” means material that still has useful physical or chemical properties after
serving its original purpose and can, therefore, be reused or remanufactured into additional products.
Subd. 30. “Owner” means any person having a freehold interest or contract interest in property.
Subd. 31. “Garbage” means all discarded material resulting from the handling, processing, storage,
preparation, serving and consumption of food.
Subd. 32. “Alley” means the public right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to
the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other street.
Subd. 33. “Street” means a public right-of-way affording primary access for pedestrians and
vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway,
throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, land, place or however designated.
Subd. 34. “City” means the City of St. Cloud, Minnesota.
Subd. 35. “Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms in a dwelling designed for occupancy by one
family for living purposes, and having its own permanently installed kitchen and bathroom facilities.
Subd. 36. “Commercial hauler” means any person licensed by the City who owns, operates or leases
vehicles for the purposes of collection and transportation of any type of mixed municipal solid waste,
recyclables and/or yard waste.
Subd. 37. “Mixed municipal solid waste” means garbage, rubbish, refuse and other solid waste from
residential activities which is generated and collected in aggregate, but does not include auto hulks,
street sweepings, ash, construction debris, mining waste, sludges, tree and agricultural wastes, tires,
lead acid batteries, used oil and other materials collected, processed and disposed of as separate
waste streams.
Subd. 38. “Lodging house” means a structure where only sleeping rooms are provided, with a
common entrance, internal access to all rooms, one (1) or more bathrooms, and one (1) or more
kitchens to provide lodging for five (5) or more persons distinguished from dwelling units and
motels, hotels open to transients. Bathrooms and bedrooms may have locks on the doors.
Subd. 39. “Scavenging” means the unauthorized collection of refuse materials including recyclable
materials that have been set out by residents of the City specifically for the municipal collection
service.
Subd. 40. “Dwelling, Above the Ground Floor” means dwelling units within multi-story buildings
located above non-residential uses on the ground floor.
Subd. 41. “Dwelling, Two Family” means one (1) principal structure containing two (2) dwelling
units on a zoning lot.
Subd. 42. “Hazardous Waste” means waste chemicals and compounds which are considered
hazardous substances under state law.
Subd. 43. “SCSU District” means the area surrounding the St. Cloud State University’s campus
between T.H. 23 and 16th Street South and between the Mississippi River and 9th Avenue
South/Clearwater Road.
Section 244:10. Municipal Collection Service. The municipal collection services of the City of St.
Cloud shall provide regular collection and disposal of refuse, recycling and yard waste within the
City from the following dwellings:
Subd. 1. Single family detached dwellings.
Subd. 2. Townhouse dwellings.
Subd. 3. Above the ground floor dwelling.
Subd. 4. Two family dwellings.
Subd. 5. Multifamily dwellings.
Subd. 6. Lodging houses.
The municipal collection service shall be supervised by the Sanitation Manager and shall be operated
according to the methods, schedules, and rates as set forth in Section 244:00 and Section 570:00 of
this Code.
The owner or occupant of every dwelling shall dispose of refuse, recycling and yard waste by the
municipal collection service and shall comply with the following conditions:
Section 244:15. Refuse Service. Refuse service consist of the collection and disposal from each
dwelling, of refuse from 90-gallon carts or City refuse bags, once each week. Refuse service shall
require the use of City refuse bags unless a single 90-gallon cart is requested by the owner of a
dwelling. Requests must be made to the Public Works Department on a form provided by the City.
All non-homesteaded rental properties eligible for municipal refuse service shall utilize the 90 gallon
refuse cart unless private disposal by a commercial hauler is specifically authorized by the Sanitation
Manager pursuant to Section 244:40, Subd. 4. The Health Director or the Sanitation Manager may
require additional 90 gallon carts for those properties that demonstrate a need for additional refuse
service. The Public Services Director shall review applications for exemptions from this Section and
may allow for refuse bag service taking into consideration the history of ordinance code violations,
maximum occupancy, and the overall condition of the property. The Public Services Director also
has the ability to revoke the exemption at any time and require refuse cart service.
Subd. 1. Size and Type of Containers. Each dwelling shall use a cart or City refuse bags for refuse
storage collected as part of the City's refuse service. The content weight of any cart shall not exceed
138 pounds and the content weight of any City refuse bag shall not exceed 25 pounds, the total
volume of any cart shall not exceed 90 gallons. Refuse that has been compacted by a household
compactor may be placed in a cart or City refuse bags. Only one bundle of compacted refuse not
exceeding 25 pounds may be placed in each City refuse bag. A maximum of three bundles of
compacted refuse not exceeding 138 pounds may be placed in the cart.
Subd. 2. Provision and Maintenance of Refuse Carts. Refuse carts will be supplied by the City. Carts
will remain the property of the City and will be returned to the City upon termination of refuse cart
service. The City logo will be stamped on the sides of the refuse cart, and a serial number assigned
by the City will be visible on the rear of the cart. The first cart delivered to a dwelling unit will be
provided by the City without charge. The cost of a replacement cart will be charged to the owner or
occupant of the dwelling unit. The city will assume responsibility for maintenance of lids, wheels
and axles; however, the owner or occupant of the dwelling unit must notify the City to initiate
maintenance.
Subd. 3. Contents Secured. All refuse will be placed in fully enclosed containers so as to prevent
animals from preying on and scattering the refuse and so as to prevent seepage out of the container.
Containers for household refuse only will be enclosed or tied to the extent necessary to prevent
scattering of the contents by wind and to allow the containers to be picked up without special
handling.
Subd. 4. Limitations on Materials. The refuse to be picked up as part of the refuse service will
consist only of those materials resulting from a normally operating residential unit, and will not
contain hazardous wastes, wasted construction materials, large furniture or appliances, rocks, dirt,
sod, trees, acids, explosives, hot ashes or other potentially dangerous or corrosive materials.
Subd. 5. Placement for Collection. The Sanitation Manager will designate the collection point for
refuse service. The containers, refuse bags and carts shall be placed as near to the designated alley or
street as is reasonably possible so that they are easily accessible for, City crews no later than 6:00
a.m. on the scheduled days of collection and no earlier than 6:00 pm the preceding day of collection.
The front side of each refuse cart must face the street or alley on collection day. Carts will not be
dumped on collection day if not properly set for collection. After the collection, any reusable
containers shall be removed from the street or alley by 7:00 pm on collection day.
Subd. 6. Removal of Snow. Each dwelling shall be responsible for clearing snow and ice from
around the base of the refuse cart of approximately 1 foot to allow City crews access to the cart. Any
cart that does not have the snow and ice removed as required will not be emptied. Refuse carts
cannot be placed on top of a snow bank for collection.
Section 244:20. Yard Waste Service. Yard waste service will consist of the collection and disposal of
approved yard waste contained in any number of City yard waste bags from each dwelling unit. Yard
waste collection will occur, April to November, weather permitting. The Sanitation Manager will
designate the point of collection and the schedule for yard waste service.
Section 244:22. City Compost Site. The City may seasonally operate a compost site for use by
residents to self-haul and dispose of yard waste. The following rules and regulations shall apply to
this service when available:
Subd. 1. City Compost Site service will be operated seasonally and weather permitting according to
the schedule, hours of operation, and procedures established by the Sanitation Manager.
Subd. 2. Permit Required:
(a) An annual compost permit shall be required for use of the compost site. Permits may be
purchased from the Cashier at City Hall. Permits will not be available at the compost site.
(b) Permits are not transferrable. If a permit is lost, stolen or destroyed, a replacement permit may be
purchased.
(c) Applicants will be required to provide their name and address, license plate number of the vehicle
to be used to transport the yard waste, and other vehicle identification information. In addition,
applicants for non-resident permits (as set forth below) shall be required to provide their property tax
parcel number.
(d) A separate permit shall be required for each user parcel/address and for each vehicle to be used to
haul waste to the compost site. Permit holders that purchase permits for vehicles other than their own
household vehicles, or haul waste from other than their own parcel, will forfeit their permit(s) for the
year and all monies paid.
(e) The compost permit must be displayed on the bottom of the windshield on the passenger side of
the transport vehicle. Entrance to the compost site will not be permitted without a valid permit.
Subd. 3. Types of Permits: Operation of the City compost site is subsidized by City Sanitation
Division revenue which is funded solely by user fees and by City property tax. For this reason there
shall be three rate classes, as follows, for compost site permits:
(a) R1 permit – Available to City residents/parcels that are currently customers of the City Sanitation
Division.
(b) R2 permit – Available to City residents/parcels that are not customers of the City Sanitation
Division.
(c) NR Permit – Available to residents of neighboring cities.
The annual fee for each class of permit is set forth in Section 570:00 of this Code.
Subd. 4. Commercial haulers and lawn service companies are not eligible to use the City compost
site.
Subd. 5. Waste Transport:
(a) All loads entering the site must be covered to prevent the loss of waste during the transport
process.
(b) After unloading, all pickup boxes, trailers, etc. must be swept clean before exiting the compost
site.
Subd. 6. Customers must register with the attendant before entering the compost site. To monitor
compost site usage, the site attendant may record the license plate number and/or may photograph
the transport vehicle and load upon entry to the compost site.
Subd. 7. Acceptable Waste:
(a) Only clean yard waste, brush and tree waste will be accepted.
(b) Acceptable yard waste includes leaves, grass clippings, pine cones, pumpkins, acorns, apples,
dirt, bark, hay, straw, tomatoes and sod.
(c) Acceptable brush and tree waste includes garden vegetation, shrubs, tree branches, cornstalks,
whole logs and firewood. The City reserves the right to limit the quantity or disallow the disposal of
brush and tree waste without prior notice.
Subd. 8. Unacceptable Waste:
(a) Unacceptable yard waste includes stumps, yard waste mixed with rocks, metal, concrete,
Styrofoam, animal feces, food scraps, and other debris, construction wood, dimensional lumber,
wood pallets and any other material that the site attendant rejects will not be accepted.
Subd. 9. Self-Disposal:
(a) Compost site users must empty/dump their own bags and containers at the locations designated
by the site attendant and as indicated by signs, and must take all bags and containers with them.
Plastic bags may not be left at the compost site as they contaminate the compost.
(b) Brush and tree waste must be separated from the yard waste and be deposited at separate
locations as indicated by the site attendant and signs.
Subd. 10. Composted Soil:
(a) When available, up to 90 gallons of composted soil may be taken from the compost site per week
by compost site users/permit holders. Users must provide their own shovels and containers and must
self-load and haul the compost.
(b) The City reserves the right to further restrict the quantity or disallow the hauling of composted
soil from the compost site at any time without prior notice.
Subd. 11. The Park Director shall establish specific procedures to allow for the disposal of diseased
trees to control the spread of disease.
Section 244:25. Special Pickups. Special pickups will be collected only upon request in accordance
with the following regulations stated in the subsequent subdivisions:
1. Yard waste: Collection will be made only by request.
2. Household: Collection will be made only by request.
Subd. 1. Rubbish Only. Material to be collected must consist of household refuse only. Household
refuse cannot be mixed or contain yard waste, acids, explosives, hot ashes, other potentially
dangerous or corrosive materials, or any hazardous wastes.
Subd. 2. Type of Containers. All loose materials for household refuse collection will be contained in
trash bags, heavy cardboard boxes or in wooden, plastic or metal containers. Trash bags and
cardboard boxes will be taken with the household refuse collection. Material contained in refuse
carts will not be picked up during special collection.
Subd. 3. Size of Containers. The total weight of each container and its contents will not exceed 75
pounds and the contents will not weigh more than 46 pounds. The total volume of any trash bag,
cardboard box or other container will not exceed 30 gallons.
Subd. 4. Tree Branches. Tree branches, not exceeding 4 inches in diameter, will be accepted without
being contained if they are securely bundled and tied. Tied bundles will not exceed 4 feet in length,
nor more than 12 inches in diameter.
Subd. 5. Requests for Service. Special pickup requests will be made to the Department of Public
Works no later than two days prior to collection day.
Subd. 6. Placement for Collection. All special pickups to be collected must be placed in the same
location where refuse is normally collected.
Section 244:30. Recycling Service. Recycling service provided by the City will consist of the
collection and disposal of recyclable materials contained in a single 95-gallon cart from each
dwelling. Recycling will be picked up every other week.
Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the mandatory separation of recyclable
items from refuse within the City of St. Cloud.
Subd. 2. Separation Required for the Municipal Collection Service. All refuse set out for disposal by
the owner or occupant of every dwelling unit, including multi-family dwellings, will be set out for
disposal so that the following materials are separated from the refuse for recycling except if
employed in the disposal of other refuse or if the material has been contaminated.
(a) Newsprint and inserts, magazines, telephone books, catalogs and shredded paper in paper bags.
(b) Rinsed glass bottles and jars, no broken glass.
(c) Aluminum cans.
(d) Rinsed bi-metal (tin) cans.
(e) Rinsed plastic containers with a recycling symbol of #1 through #6;
(f) Corrugated cardboard cut into 18” x 18” pieces or smaller.
(g) Junk mail, including paper, envelopes, greeting cards, and computer printouts. Unacceptable
materials include gift wrapping paper, paper towels, construction paper, carbon paper, brown craft
envelopes, blueprints and books.
(h) Boxboard (also called fiberboard) including such items as beverage boxes, cereal boxes, and egg
cartons. Unacceptable items include styrofoam, waxed cardboard and cardboard contaminated with
grease or other food products.
The Sanitation Manager may establish other rules as reasonably necessary for the separation of
recycling materials from refuse and the preparation and suitability of recyclable materials for
collection.
Subd. 3. Size and Type of Containers. Each dwelling unit shall utilize a cart for the collection of
recycling to be collected as part of the City's recycling service. The content weight of any cart shall
not exceed 200 pounds. In addition, the total volume of any cart shall not exceed 95 gallons. The
Health Director or the Sanitation Manager may require additional recycling carts for those dwellings
that demonstrate a need for additional services.
Subd. 4. Provision and Maintenance of Recycling Carts. Recycling carts shall be supplied by the
City. Carts remain the property of the City and shall be returned to the City upon termination of
recycling service. The City logo shall be stamped on the sides of the recycling cart, and a serial
number assigned by the City shall be visible on the rear of the cart. The first cart delivered to a
dwelling shall be provided by the City without charge. The cost of a replacement cart shall be
charged to the owner or occupant of the dwelling. The City shall assume responsibility for
maintenance of lids, wheels and axles; however, the owner or occupant of the dwelling must notify
the City to initiate maintenance.
Subd. 5. Placement for Collection. The Sanitation Manager shall designate the collection point for
recycling service. Recycling carts shall be placed as near to the designated alley or street as is
reasonably possible so that they will be easily accessible for City crews using automated loading
equipment. Carts shall be placed out for collection no later than 6:00 a.m. on the scheduled day of
collection and no earlier than 6:00 p.m. the preceding day of collection. The front side of each
recycling cart shall face the street or alley and have a clearance of 4 feet from buildings, parked cars,
shrubs, trees, mailboxes or other structures or obstacles to allow for the automated loading
equipment to operate efficiently. Carts will not be dumped on collection day if not properly set for
collection, with lids completely closed. After collection, the cart will be removed from the street or
alley by 7:00 p.m. of collection day. The cart may be stored outside the dwelling as long as the cover
of the cart is kept securely closed at all times to prevent refuse from blowing out of the cart, and to
keep rain and snow from accumulating inside the cart.
Subd. 6. Removal of Snow. Each dwelling shall be responsible for clearing snow and ice from
around the base of the recycling cart of approximately 1 foot to allow City crews access to the cart.
Any cart that does not have the snow and ice removed as required will not be emptied. Recycling
carts cannot be placed on top of a snow bank for collection.
Subd. 7. Anti-scavenging Clause. Ownership of the recyclable materials set out for collection by the
City will be vested in the City of St. Cloud. It will be unlawful and an offense against this ordinance
for any person, firm, or corporation other than the owner, lessee, or occupant of a residential
dwelling, to pick up recyclable materials for their own use.
Subd. 8. Separation Required for Dwellings Collected by Licensed Commercial Haulers. All refuse
set out for disposal by the owner or occupant of every dwelling that is not part of the municipal
collection service will have the following materials separated from the refuse except if employed in a
disposal of other refuse or if contaminated:
(a) Newsprint and inserts, magazines, telephone books, catalogs and shredded paper
(b) Rinsed glass bottles and jars, no broken glass
(c) Aluminum cans
(d) Rinsed bi-metal (tin) cans
(e) Rinsed plastic containers with a recycling symbol of #1 through 6
(f) Corrugated cardboard
(g) Junk mail, including paper, envelopes, greeting cards, and computer printouts. Unacceptable
materials include gift wrapping paper, paper towels, construction paper, carbon paper, brown craft
envelopes, blueprints and books
(h) Boxboard (also called fiberboard) including such items as beverage boxes, cereal boxes, and egg
cartons. Unacceptable items include styrofoam, waxed cardboard and cardboard contaminated with
grease or other food products
This subdivision applies to the entire City of St. Cloud.
Section 244:35. Responsibilities of Owners and Occupants. It will be unlawful for any person
owning or occupying any premises in this City to fail to dispose of refuse, rubbish, recycling in a
sanitary manner or to allow refuse, rubbish, recycling or yard waste to accumulate on premises,
owned or occupied by such person, or to fail to keep said premises in an orderly and sanitary
condition.
Section 244:40. Exceptions to Municipal Collection Service. The following are exceptions to the
requirements for refuse, rubbish recycling, and yard waste service.
Subd. 1. The owner of dwelling located on a tract of land ten acres or larger may request in writing
that municipal refuse, rubbish recycling and yard waste service be terminated until further notice
provided:
(a) The owner signs an agreement with the City whereby the owner agrees to dispose of the
refuse and rubbish generated on the premises at their own expense, pursuant to Section
244:45; and
(b) The owner signs an agreement with City whereby the owner agrees to provide for the
separation of all recyclable materials from the refuse and rubbish in the dwelling and provide
for the collection and delivery of these materials to a recycling facility through a licensed
commercial hauler. The materials separated for recycling will be, at a minimum those listed
in Section 244:30, Subd. 8 of this Code.
Subd. 2. The owner of a residence which is situated more than 100 feet from the public roadway may
be provided refuse, rubbish recycling and yard waste service to a readily accessible location within
100 feet of the residence, provided the owner signs an agreement with the City which:
(a) Allows the City to utilize the private driveway for refuse, rubbish recycling and yard waste
collection.
(b) Provides that such service will only be provided so long as the driveway is maintained in
serviceable condition and provides adequate opportunity to allow the collection trucks to turn
around.
(c) Holds the City harmless from any property damage, which occurs, in the normal provisions of
refuse, rubbish recycling and yard waste service.
Subd. 3. The owner of a residence which had primary access to a road having a posted speed limit in
excess of 35 miles per hour may either place the owner’s refuse, rubbish recycling and yard waste for
collection on said property immediately adjacent to the road right of way or place the materials at a
readily accessible location on the owner’s driveway, provided the owner signs an agreement with the
City which:
(a) Allows the City to utilize the private driveway for refuse, rubbish recycling and yard waste
pickup.
(b) Provides that such service will only be provided so long as the driveway is maintained in
serviceable condition and provides adequate opportunity to allow the collection trucks to turn
around.
(c) Hold the City harmless from any property damage, which occurs, in the normal provisions of
refuse, rubbish recycling and yard waste service.
Subd. 4. The Sanitation Manager is authorized to order the discontinuance of municipal refuse,
recycling and yard waste service for dwellings located throughout the City. The Sanitation
Manager’s order will be based upon a finding that:
(a) The volume of refuse and recycling generated by the dwelling is at a level which indicates that a
dumpster may be better used to store refuse and recycling for collection on the premises as opposed
to 90-gallon carts or City refuse bags. Thereafter the owner will provide a dumpster on the premises
of adequate size (minimum of 200 gallons) to contain the volume of refuse and recycling generated
prior to disposal, and further will dispose of the refuse and recycling at their own expense, pursuant
to Section 244:45.
(b) The owner signs an agreement with the City whereby the owner agrees to place a dumpster on
the premises of adequate size (minimum of 200 gallons) to contain the volume of refuse and
recycling generated on the premises prior to disposal, and further agrees to dispose of the refuse and
recycling at their own expense, pursuant to Section 244:45.
(c) The owner signs an agreement with the City whereby the owner agrees to provide for the
separation of all recyclable materials from the refuse and rubbish in the dwelling and provide for the
collection and delivery of these materials to a recycling facility through a licensed commercial
hauler. The materials separated for recycling will be a minimum those listed in Section 244:30,
Subd. 8 of this Code.
Section 244:45. Payment for Private Disposal. Non-residential premises and dwellings not included
or otherwise exempted from the municipal collection service provided in Sections 244:10 and
244:40, will dispose of refuse, rubbish recycling and yard waste entirely at their own expense. The
owner or occupant will employ a commercial hauler licensed by the City to dispose of refuse,
rubbish recycling and yard waste.
Section 244:55. Commercial Haulers Licensed. The St. Cloud City Council may issue licenses for
the collecting and hauling of refuse, rubbish and recycling for hire from dwellings located within the
corporate limits of the City of St. Cloud, upon compliance with the following requirements:
Subd. 1. Certification by the applicant that billing for refuse and rubbish collection services is based
on volume.
Subd. 2. Certification by the applicant that recycling collection services are provided to all its
customers.
Subd. 3. Submission of specifications of all vehicles to be used for refuse, rubbish and recycling
collection and transportation.
Subd. 4. Submission of the address for all dwelling located within the corporate limits of the City of
St. Cloud for which refuse, rubbish and recycling collection services are provided.
Subd. 5. Filing with the City a copy of any license required by Stearns, Benton or Sherburne
Counties to collect and transport refuse, rubbish and recycling in their respective jurisdictions.
Subd. 6. Payment of license fee established in Section 510 of this Code.
Subd. 7. During move-in/move-out week in the SCSU district, the refuse haulers, at the direction of
the City’s Health and Inspections Division, shall accomplish daily refuse pick up. This shall be a
condition of the Commercial Haulers License.
Section 244:57. Noise Complaints. Upon receipt of a complaint of a commercial hauler making or
causing excessive noise while in the process of collecting or hauling refuse or recycling in or near a
residential area, the Sanitation Manager will contact the commercial hauler and request that such
actions be taken to cease excessive noise. Failure on the part of the commercial hauler to correct or
remedy the situation may result in suspension or revocation of its commercial hauler’s license issued
by the City.
Section 244:60. Hauling Requirements. When hauling refuse, rubbish and recycling within the City,
any person hauling such refuse, rubbish and recycling, whether privately or as a commercial service,
will comply with the following provisions.
Subd. 1. All garbage, ashes, and wet rubbish will be hauled in covered cans as required by this
ordinance or in covered vehicles having metal, water-tight bodies to prevent scattering or dripping of
contents.
Subd. 2. Dry rubbish may be hauled in any type vehicle, provided, however, that the necessary steps
will be taken, including tying or covering of the rubbish, to prevent scattering of such rubbish during
transit.
Section 244:65. Establishment of Charges. The City Council will make and establish a schedule of
charges for the collection and disposal of refuse, yard waste, rubbish and recycling by the municipal
collection service from all dwellings utilizing such service. The fees shall be set by resolution of the
City Council as set forth in Section 570:00 of this Code.
Section 244:70. Application for Credit. The charges for municipal collection service under Section
570:00 will be imposed upon the owner of each dwelling whether or not the municipal collection
service is actually used by any such person or dwelling. If a dwelling is vacant and unoccupied for no
less than 60 continuous days, an owner may apply for and receive a credit by completing a
Declaration of Residence Vacancy form provided by the Finance Department. The Declaration of
Residence Vacancy form will be completed and filed with the Finance Department within 30 days
following the billing date of the billing cycle in which the application for credit is requested. Credit
will be based on water consumption being less than 2 units per 30 days.
Section 244:75. Billing and Payment of Charges. The charges for refuse, yard waste, rubbish and/or
recycling collection and disposal for a dwelling will be entered, shown and placed on the City utility
bill for such dwelling and will be indicated thereon as for refuse, rubbish, yard waste and/or
recycling collection and disposal charges. Charges may be billed annually or, on a monthly,
bimonthly, or quarterly basis. All such charges will be due and payable at the office of the Finance
Director and will be deemed to be for the same period in which the utility bill is incurred. Provided,
however, that in initiating this charge, the City Council will provide for pro-rating the first charge in
one-month increments, depending on the month in which utility charges are made.
Section 244:80. Delinquent Accounts.
Subd. 1. All City utility bills will be due and payable upon the date of billing and will be considered
delinquent, if not paid by the final business day for the month in which the bill is due. A finance
charge may be added to delinquent accounts. The finance charge will be established from time to
time by resolution of the Council.
Subd. 2. The City Clerk will cause an assessment to be levied against each dwelling for unpaid
charges that were due and payable on or before August 1st of that year. The assessment will be in an
amount equal to the unpaid charges. Interest on said assessment will be charged at the same rate as is
the charge for assessment rolls for improvement projects adopted in the same year. The owner of any
property so assessed may, at any time prior to certification of the assessment to the County Auditor,
pay to the Finance Director the whole or partial amount of the assessment covering the property.
Interest will not be charged on payments made within 30 days from the date the assessment bill is
prepared following the City Council’s adoption of the assessment role. After that time interest will
be charged at the same rate as established above and will accrue from the date the assessment role is
adopted by the City Council to the date of payment. The City Clerk will transmit all unpaid balances
of such special assessments to the County Auditor to be extended on the property tax list of the
county of such assessment. The assessment will be collected and paid over a one year period with
municipal taxes.
Subd. 3. Those properties with delinquent utility accounts, charges or fees are ineligible for City
issued licenses or permits.
Section 244: 85. Refuse Service Fund. There is established a "Refuse Service Fund" into which all
monies collected by the City under this ordinance will be deposited. This fund will be used to
provide for regular collection of refuse, rubbish recycling and to establish an equitable and economic
means to pay the costs associated with the municipal collection service, and to provide for the repair
and replacement of collection equipment.
Section 244:90. Saving Clause. The invalidity of any section, subsection, sentence, clause, definition,
phrase or portion of this ordinance will not invalidate any remaining portion.
Section 244:95. Sales of Yard Waste and Refuse Bags.
Subd. 1. Yard waste and refuse bags required by this ordinance will be offered for sale by the City of
St. Cloud and by authorized distributors exclusively. Parties who desire to become authorized
distributors will contact the Public Works Department.
Subd. 2. No party will offer for sale any City yard waste or refuse bags unless said party has entered
into a written agreement with the City of St. Cloud and has been identified as an authorized
distributor.
Subd. 3. No party will offer for sale any yard waste or refuse bags at a rate different from that rate set
by the City of St. Cloud.
Section 244:100: Authorized staff may issue an immediate administrative citation for violations
of this Section.
History: Ord. 2458 4-5-10; Ord. 2561 8/12/13; Ord. 2700 5/8/17
Section 245 - Public Utilities Department
Section 245:00. Sewer, Water, Stormwater and Electric Divisions Constituted A Single Utility.
The sewer, water, stormwater and electrical systems of the City are made, constituted, and declared
to be a single municipal utility and public convenience, and will be operated, administered, and
treated as a single utility and convenience, and will be known as the "St. Cloud Public Utilities
System."
Section 245:05. Public Utilities Charges, Collection Procedures. The owner of any tract or parcel
of real property connected by pipes with the water system, the sewer system, the stormwater
system, or the electrical system or any or all of those will be liable to the City for the payment of
any rents, rates, or charges for water, sewer, stormwater or electrical service, to such piece or parcel
of real property, as well as any lessee or occupant using such services. The rents, rates, or charges
for water, sewer, stormwater or electrical service furnished or provided by the City to a particular
tract or parcel of real property will constitute a lien until paid.
Such rents, rates, or charges may be recovered through legal action against any one or more of the
persons liable, or by the foreclosure of the lien as provided by law. Water or sewer may be shut off
at any time that payments of such rents, rates, or charges become and remain in default for 30 days,
and will not be restored until they have been paid, together with the sum required to be paid for
shutting off and restoring service.
Section 245:10. Public Utilities Delinquent Accounts, Special Assessments. Every public utility
service account will constitute a lien enforceable by special assessment against the lands and
premises served. Each account and tract of land or premises included is found and declared to be
benefited by the furnishing of such service in the amount of the gross charge or charges and of the
special assessment levied against it. All public utilities rental accounts and charges which are
delinquent on the fifteenth day of August of any year may be certified by the City Clerk who will
prepare and file in an assessment roll not later than the first day of September of each year
providing for the special assessment of all such delinquent accounts against the respective lands,
tracts, or parcels served. A copy of the assessment roll will be delivered to the City Council for
adoption on or before the tenth day of October of any such year. Notice of the proposed special
assessment will be given not later than 14 days before the date of the first council meeting in
October will hear such special assessments. Notice will be made by mailing a copy of an
appropriate notice stating, among other information, the amount of the assessment, the description
of the property sought to be assessed, and the date and place of the Council's special assessment
hearing, to the person at the last known address who appears as owner of the premises in the files of
the County Recorder or by service of such notice as provided in the case of civil actions.
Each assessment will be payable on or before the first Monday of the following January. Interest on
the assessment will be charged at the same rate as is the charge for assessment rolls for
improvement projects adopted in the same year as the assessments for such delinquent public utility
charges. Interest will accrue from the due date of each account or accounts. The owner of any
property so assessed may, at any time prior to certification of the assessment to the County Auditor,
pay to the City Clerk the whole of the assessment covering the property with interest at the same
rate as established above accrued to the date of payment.
Upon adoption by the City Council, the City Clerk will transmit a certified duplicate of such special
assessments to the County Auditor to be extended on the property tax list of the county of such
assessment. It will be collected and paid over in the same manner as other municipal taxes.
Section 245:15. Connection to Municipal Utility Services
Subd. 1. Request to Connect. A property owner desiring connection to the municipal
utilities shall make a written request to the Public Utilities Director.
Subd. 2. Water and Sewer will be connected together as a package. Sewer service will
not be connected without the water service being connected simultaneously. Water
connection means connecting the water service to the entire household distribution
system. The sewer connection includes pumping and properly abandoning the septic
tank.
Subd. 3. The time frame for accomplishing the complete water and sewer connection is
one year from the time the utilities are accepted for use by the City from the general
contractor.
Subd. 4. Private wells that exist on the property are allowed for irrigation purposes but
under no circumstances shall be cross connected to the City system.
Subd. 5. In the event the property owner refuses to connect to the sanitary sewer system
or the drinking water distribution system to the public water supply, the matter will be
referred to the City Attorney’s office for action under the Minnesota State Plumbing code.
Section 245:25. Disconnection of Utility Services.
Subd. 1. Requests for Disconnection. Any City utility service customer or property
owner responsible for paying utility services desiring to discontinue the use of City utility
services must make a written request to the Public Utilities Department to disconnect the
service. The Public Utilities Department will have the service shut off or disconnected by
authorized personnel.
Subd 2. No unauthorized person will shut off City utility services
Subd. 3. Disconnection Fee. A fee will be charged for disconnecting City utility
services. The fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
Subd. 4. Authority to Disconnect. The Public Utilities Director or their designee, to
protect the public health and safety and in order to protect the public utilities
infrastructure and/or private property, may order City utility service immediately
disconnected from any property upon determining that any of the following conditions
exist and/or create a hazardous condition:
(a) The property is vacant;
(b) The property is not secured;
(c) The property is determined to be uninhabitable or unsuitable for
occupancy;
(d) Other utilities to the property providing heat and/or electricity have been
shut off or disconnected;
(e) The property has plumbing that is failing or unsafe;
(f) Providing utility services will make an unsanitary or unsafe condition to
anyone who may enter the property; or
(g) The property owner or occupant has refused access by authorized City
personnel as authorized by this Section.
Subd. 5. City utility services will not be restored until heat and electrical services have
been restored, all required City permits have been obtained from the Building Safety
Department for repairing/replacing of all damage related to the plumbing system or other
related damage resulting from bulk water flowing into the property, and all required
inspections have been completed and approved. Additionally, all inspection/reconnection
fees and utility bills must be paid prior to reconnection. The inspection/reconnection fee
will be set by resolution of the City Council.
Section 245:30. Property Owners Responsibility for Service Lines. It is the responsibility of the
property owner(s) to maintain the service lines from the structure to the City water and sewer
mains. Upon notification of a service line failure, the owner(s) have 72 hours to repair the line. In
the event that the owner does not repair the line, the City will repair the line and bill the owner its
expenses.
History: Ord. 2406 9-22-08; Ord. 2481 12-6-10; Ord. 2575 1-6-14
Section 255:00 - St. Cloud Public Arts Commission
Section 255:00. Definitions.
Subd. 1. “Arts” means activities involving music, theater, dance, performance, cinema,
documentation, sculpture, painting, poetry, literature, folk traditions or fine crafts that
involve a quality of aesthetic judgment and execution that will best contribute to the quality
of life for citizens of the St. Cloud community.
Subd. 2. “St. Cloud Public Arts Fund” is a non-profit corporation acting in conjunction with
the City of St. Cloud and the Commission in furtherance of funding arts projects.
Subd. 3. “Commission” is the St. Cloud Public Arts Commission.
Subd. 4. “Commissioner(s)” is the person or those persons appointed as members of the
Commission.
Subd. 5. “Conflict of Interest” is the existence of any of the following conditions, which
apply to a Commission member:
(a) A Commissioner has a material or financial interest in a proposal or the proposal
materially affects the Commissioner's business, profession or occupation.
(b) A Commissioner is a director, trustee, officer, regular or contracted employee or
agent of an institution directly involved in the issue or proposal.
(c) A Commissioner is related as a spouse, child, parent or has some other
significant relationship to an individual directly affected by the issue or proposal.
Section 255:05. Purpose. The purpose of the St. Cloud Public Arts Commission is to promote
public appreciation, accessibility and patronage of the arts in the St. Cloud community.
Section 255:10. Composition and Qualifications, Appointment and Removal and Compensation.
Subd. 1. The membership of the Commission shall consist of seven Commissioners
appointed by the Mayor with Council approval.
Subd. 2. Commissioners shall be residents of the City of St. Cloud.
(a) Commissioners will serve without compensation. The original term of two
Commissioners shall be for one year, the original term for two Commissioners
shall be for two years, and the original term for three Commissioners shall be
three years until their respective successors are appointed. Subsequent terms of
Commissioners shall be for three years, and all terms will expire on September
30 of the appropriate year. No Commissioner shall serve more than two
consecutive terms. When a vacancy occurs in the Commission, by means of
resignation, death, removal from the community or removal for failure to
perform the duties of a Commissioner, the vacancy will be filled for the
remaining term.
(b) The Central Minnesota Arts Board, the St. Cloud Community Arts Council, and
the United Arts Board shall each have the authority to appoint one non-voting
member to the Commission. City of St. Cloud residency is not required for nonvoting
members.
(c) The Mayor may remove any member of the best interests of the City.
(d) The Commission shall meet at a regularly scheduled monthly meeting. The
Chairperson or of any two members may schedule additional meetings to
effectuate the purposes and policies of this ordinance.
(e) The Commission shall, at its first meeting in January of each year, elect a
Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson. No person shall serve more than two
consecutive terms as Chairperson or Vice Chairperson. The Commission
shall also elect a person, who may or may not be a member of the
Commission, to serve as the Recording Secretary for the Commission.
1. Chairperson: The Chairperson will preside and maintain order at all
Commission meetings. The Chairperson will submit reports as required
by law and as requested by the Commission, to the Mayor and/or City
Council.
2. Vice Chairperson: The Vice Chairperson will fulfill the duties of the
Chairperson in the absence of the Chair, including the calling of
Commission meetings and assisting the Chairperson with administrative
duties.
3. Secretary: The Secretary will assist the Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson in the administrative duties of the Commission. The
Secretary will prepare the minutes of all Commission meetings.
Subd. 3. Commission Authority.
(a) To recommend to the Mayor and City Council a Public Arts Plan for the City.
The Commission will develop a Public Arts Plan for the entire City. The plan
shall be subject to the approval of the Mayor and City Council. The plan shall be
updated periodically, at least annually. The plan shall include, but not be
limited to the following: a listing of long term objectives of the Commission in
carrying out its purpose; criteria for the selection of artists and works of art; a
list of locations throughout the City for the placement of works of art; and a
current list of priorities for the funding of various arts organizations and projects
throughout the City.
(b) The Commission will recommend to the Mayor and City Council methods of
location and selection of artisans, performance and artful activity, funded
directly or indirectly by the City.
(c) The Commission will recommend to the Mayor and City Council arts
organizations or projects to be funded in whole or in part by the City.
(d) The Commission will recommend to the Mayor and City Council criteria for the
selection of artful activity.
(e) The Commission will serve as a consultant on art projects for the City of St.
Cloud.
(f) The Commission will assist the City in raising money from public and private
sources to fund arts projects in the City.
(g) The Commission will report annually to the Mayor and City Council regarding
the activities of the Commission and recommended projects.
(h) If a member of the Public Arts Commission has a conflict of interest with regard
to any applicant or proposal, that conflict is to be declared when the applicant or
proposal is first discussed. When a conflict of interest occurs, the
Commissioner shall refrain from ranking or voting on the applicant or proposal
and shall refrain from advocating for the applicant or proposal in any discussion
by the Commission.
Section 255:15. Arts Fund. A special fund shall be established by the City for the purpose of
collecting and retaining funds from public and private sources for arts projects. The general tax
levy of the City of St. Cloud shall not be a revenue source for this special fund.
Section 260 - St. Cloud Police Citizens' Review Board
Section 260:00. Definitions.
Subd. 1. “Charter" is the Home Rule Charter of the City of St. Cloud, Minnesota, adopted
November 28, 1911, and as amended.
Subd. 2. “Board” is the St. Cloud Police Citizens' Review Board.
Subd. 3. “Member” is a person appointed by the Mayor, approved by the City Council, to
serve on the Board.
Subd. 4. “Conflict of interest” is the existence of any of the following conditions, which
apply to a Board member:
(a) A Board member has a material or financial interest in any issue before the
Board that materially affects the Board member's business, profession,
occupation, or membership in a fraternal or special organization.
(b) A Board member is a director, trustee, officer, regular member, or contracted
employee, or employee or agent of an institution or organization directly
involved in the issue to be addressed by the Board.
(c) A Board member is a spouse, child, parent or has a significant relationship
to an individual directly affected by the issue.
Section 260:10. Purpose and Scope of the Board.
Subd. 1. The Board assists the Mayor and Police Chief in providing lawful and
nondiscriminatory peacekeeping services to the public.
Subd. 2. The Board provides participatory oversight of the police in the processing and
adjudication of citizens' complaints. Citizen review, in conjunction with the police, of
complaints against police officers, will assure that complaints are dealt with fairly and with
regard for officers and citizens alike.
Subd. 3. The Board makes annual reports to the Mayor and the Police Chief. The report
shall include, at a minimum, information concerning case dispositions, case reviews, and
initiatives taken by the Board with regard to policy and procedural recommendations.
Section 260:20. Composition, Qualifications, Appointment and Removal.
Subd. 1. The membership of the Board shall consist of nine voting members to be
appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Council.
(a) All non-police officer members shall be residents of the City of St. Cloud.
(b) Six members of the Board shall be non-police officers and three members
shall be police officers of the St. Cloud Police Department.
(c) The Police Chief shall recommend the three police officer members to the
Mayor for appointment. At least two of the members shall be affiliated with
Law Enforcement Labor Services or such other labor organization as is then
representing two separate units, i.e., the patrol officers and separately the
sergeants, at that time.
(d) Members shall, to the extent reasonably possible, be representative of the
City's diversity of neighborhoods, races, cultures, abilities and incomes.
Subd. 2. The original appointments to the Board by the Mayor of the six non-police officer
members shall be for the terms of one, two, three, four, five and six years respectively as
designated by the Mayor. Thereafter, non-police officer members shall be appointed for a
three year term. No member shall serve more than two consecutive terms.
Subd. 3. The original appointments to the Board by the Mayor of police officers shall be as
recommended by the Police Chief and for terms of one, two and three years as designated
by the Mayor. Thereafter, these members may be appointed for a three year term. No
officer shall serve more than two terms. No officer affiliated with the Law Enforcement
Labor Services, nor their immediate family, shall be eligible to serve as a non-police officer
member.
Subd. 4. The Board shall meet a minimum of quarterly and up to twice a month as
determined by a majority of the Board. The Board shall annually elect a chairperson and a
vice chairperson to preside over its proceedings, and shall also elect a secretary who will be
responsible for the minutes of the Board's meetings. The Board chair shall be elected from
among the citizen members. Members of the Board shall not be paid.
Subd. 5. The Mayor may remove any member of the Board whenever, in his or her
discretion, he best interest of the City will be served thereby.
Subd. 6. When a vacancy occurs in the Board by means of removal, resignation, death,
removal from the community or removal for failure to perform the duties of a Board
member, the vacancy will be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term.
Subd. 7. The Board shall at its first meeting in January of each year elect a chairperson and
a Vice Chairperson. No person shall serve more than two consecutive terms as chairperson
or vice chairperson.
(a) Chairperson. The Chairperson will preside and maintain order at all Board
meetings and will make such reports as required by law and as may be
deemed necessary by the Board to the Mayor and the Police Chief.
(b) Vice Chairperson. The Vice Chairperson will fulfill the duties of the
chairperson in the absence of the chairperson, including the calling of Board
meetings and assist the chairperson with administrative duties.
(c) Secretary. The Secretary will assist the chairperson and vice chairperson in
the administrative duties of the Board. The Secretary will be responsible for
the preparation of the minutes of all meetings of the Board.
Subd. 8. Generally, Board business will be conducted in accordance with Robert's Rules of
Parliamentary Procedure except as Robert's Rules may be in conflict with this ordinance, in
which case this ordinance shall govern. The Board may also enact, with the approval of the
Mayor, such bylaws as it deems necessary to govern its own affairs, provided that those
bylaws are not in conflict with Robert's Rules or this ordinance.
Section 260:30. Board Authority.
Subd.1. The Board shall conduct all of its meetings consistent with and subject to all City
ordinances and published policy directives. Further, the Board shall be subject to all
provisions of the Home Rule Charter, City ordinances and State laws including those
statutes and government data practices, open meetings, peace officers' bill of rights and
related law.
Subd. 2. Each Board member shall, prior to assuming official duties, participate in a
training program that includes topics related to police work, investigation, relevant law,
cultural diversity, gender, sexual orientation, disability, and emotional impact of abuse. The
training program shall be designed and administered by the Police Chief or his/her designee.
The Board shall also participate in ride-alongs with an officer on active patrol. Failure to
complete the training program shall constitute cause to terminate a member's appointment
by the Mayor as recommended by the Police Chief. Additionally, a violation of law
regarding government data practice or non-attendance at more than three meetings in a year
by a member shall also constitute cause to terminate a member's appointment by the Mayor
as recommended by the Chief of Police.
Subd. 3. The Board may review all complaint investigations concerning members of the
police department who are certified by the Minnesota Board of Peace Officer Standards and
Training and have completed their probationary period as employees of the City of St.
Cloud by the internal affairs unit of the police department and subsequent investigations
thereof related to alleged acts of:
(a) Excessive force.
(b) Inappropriate use of firearms. (Exception: In any case where the incident
involves a pending criminal investigation, the Board has no authority to act.)
Upon conclusion of the criminal investigation and consideration by the
prosecuting authority, the case may then be reviewed by the Board.
(c) Discrimination as defined within this code of ordinances and Minnesota
statutes.
(d) These complaints categorized as formal infractions, major violations and
policy/procedural complaints as described within the policies and procedures
of the St. Cloud Police Department complaint procedure. See General Order
131.0.
(e) Other cases and issues presented to the Board at the discretion of the Chief
of Police.
Subd. 4. The meeting of the Board on such matters will be closed pursuant to Minnesota
Statutes 471.705, Subd. 1d(b) (2), excepting members of the Board, complaint review
administrator, investigators, the Police Chief or his designee, and the Mayor.
Subd. 5. The Board's review coordinator shall be in attendance at Board meetings to
facilitate Board review, serve as custodian of the Board files and record proceedings of the
Board on audio tape. Internal affairs may be present at all Board meetings.
Subd. 6. The Board after review and deliberation of an investigation shall, by majority vote,
make its recommendation on the case. Such recommendation by the Board shall be upon a
finding that the complaint be unfounded, not sustained, sustained, sustained with
qualifications, or that the matter does not involve guilt or lack thereof but rather a failure of
a departmental policy to address the situation. The Board shall also by majority vote make
a recommendation as to any action to be taken concerning the involved officer.
Subd. 7. Failure of the Board to reach a majority decision shall cause the investigation to
proceed directly to the Police Chief for determination and disposition.
Subd. 8. If a majority decision is obtained, the chair of the Board will inform the Chief of
Police in writing of the recommendation and rationale for the recommendation.
Subd. 9. In the event the Chief of Police disagrees with the action recommended by the
Board, the Chief shall notify the chairperson of the Board in writing within seven days of
receipt of the Board recommendation, the action the Chief intends to impose.
The Board chair and the Chief of Police shall have five working days from the date of the
Chief's written communication to the Board chair of the Chief's intent to act, to discuss any
concerns they may have before any action is finalized. This provision does not prohibit the
Chief of Police from taking immediate action in any case.
Subd. 10. The Chief of Police shall appoint a review coordinator to serve as staff to the
Board and manage as needed the complaint process. The review coordinator will serve at
the pleasure of the Chief of Police.
Section 260:40. Board Authority Limited.
Subd. 1. The Board has no direct disciplinary powers but effectively recommends such
actions to the Chief of Police.
Subd. 2. The Board has no subpoena powers.
Subd. 3. The Board does not hold hearings.
Section 270 – Convention and Visitor’s Advisory Board
Section 270.00. Purpose. The purpose of the Convention and Visitors Advisory Board is to
advise the city on attracting non-resident spending to the City by having conventions, meetings,
and other group activities in the City. The increased non-resident spending will improve
employment opportunities, increase business activity, and improve the number of entertainment
opportunities available to the citizens.
Section 270.10. Duties. The Convention and Visitor’s Advisory Board will:
Subd. 1. Study and determine the convention and visitor needs of the City, and to make
recommendations to the Mayor in respect to policies, programs and facilities.
Subd. 3. Review and make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council on the City’s
Convention and Visitor Strategic Work Plan and Marketing Plan.
Section 270.15. Board Recommendations. Board recommendations that requires action by the
Planning Commission or City Council shall be submitted to Mayor.
Section 270.20. Expenses. Board members will serve without compensation. However, the City
will pay reasonable expenses of Board members incurred in the performance of their official
duties.
Section 270.25. Membership. The Board shall consist of seven voting members appointed by
the Mayor with consent of the City Council. Membership on the Board shall represent the
lodging, hospitality, and retail industries in the City. The Mayor may appoint a representative of
the City Council and representative(s) at large. In addition to the seven voting members, the
Mayor shall assign a member of the Administration and a representative of the Contract Vendor
as ex-official non-voting members of the Board.
Section 270.30. Residency Requirements. All voting members of the Board shall live or have a
business in the City of St. Cloud.
Section 270.35. Term. The terms of the seven members shall be as follows: the original term of
two members shall be for one year; the original term of two members hall be for two years; the
original term of three members shall be for three years; subsequent terms of Board members
shall be for three years; no voting member of the Board shall serve more than two consecutive
terms.
When a vacancy occurs on the Board by means of resignation, death, and removal for failure to
perform the duties of a Board member, the vacancy will be filled for the remaining term. The
Mayor may remove any member of the Board whenever, in his or her judgement, the best
interest of the will be served.
Section 270.36. Board Officers. The Board shall elect from its membership a Chair and Vice
Chair who shall serve terms, have powers, and perform duties prescribed in the rules of the
Board. The Mayor shall assign clerical support duties to the City’s contract vendor or to a City
employee.
Section 270.37 Meetings. Meetings of the Board shall be held at a regular time and place as
may be prescribed in the rules of the Board. However, at least one meeting shall be held
quarterly. All meetings of the Board, records and minutes will be open to the public except as
otherwise may be provided by law.
Section 270.38. Quorum. Four or more voting members of the Board present at a meeting shall
constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting business.
Section 275:00 – Transportation Infrastructure Advisory Board
Section 275:00. Purpose. The purpose of the Transportation Infrastructure Advisory Board is to
study and determine the transportation infrastructure needs of the City of St. Cloud as it relates to
the multi-modal transportation needs and demands of the community.
Section 275:05. Composition of the Board.
Subd. 1. The membership of the Board shall consist of seven voting members appointed
by the Mayor with City Council approval.
Subd. 2. The Board members shall be residents of the City of St. Cloud.
Subd. 3. Board members shall serve without compensation. The original term for two
members shall be one year, the original term for two members shall be for two years, the
original term for three members shall be three years. The respective terms of office will
expire on June 30 of each year.
Subd. 4. The Mayor shall have the authority to remove any member in order to serve the
best interests of the City.
Subd. 5. The Board, at its initial meeting, shall elect from its membership, a Chair and
Vice-Chair, who will serve for a period of one year. Secretarial duties and the taking of
minutes will be designated to staff of the Engineering Department.
Subd. 6. Any vacancy in the Board will be filled by appointment of the Mayor with the
consent of the City Council, and such appointee will serve for the remaining term.
Section 275:10. Duties.
Subd. 1. The Transportation Infrastructure Advisory Board will study and determine the
transportation infrastructure needs of the City and make recommendations to the Mayor
and the City Council regarding prospective transportation infrastructure projects or
improvements. The Board shall conduct its study and make its recommendations in the
context of the multi-modal transportation needs of the City, including but not limited to
vehicular, pedestrian, commercial and mass transit traffic demands. Additionally, the
Board shall make recommendations regarding financial options for transportation
infrastructure projects. The Board, in conducting its work, shall remain mindful and fully
consider the future plans of the Area Planning Organization and the St. Cloud Planning
Commission.
Subd. 2. The Board will prepare an annual plan addressing the various transportation
infrastructure needs of the City. The plan shall be submitted to the Mayor not less than
120 days prior to the beginning of the budget year, a list of recommended infrastructure
improvements which, in the opinion of the Board, are necessary or desirable in the next
three years.
Section 275:15. Meetings.
Subd. 1. The Board will meet at regularly scheduled monthly meetings. The Chair or
any two members may schedule additional meetings to effectuate the purposes and
policies of this ordinance.
Subd. 2. Meetings of the Board, records and minutes will be open to the public except as
may otherwise be provided by applicable law. Additionally, the Board may from time to
time conduct public hearings and elicit comment from the public before making a
recommendation to the Mayor or City Council.
Subd. 3. All business of the Commission will be conducted in an orderly manner and
generally in accordance with Robert’s Rules of Parliamentary Procedure.
History: Ord. 2583 2-24-14.
Section 280:00 – Convention Center Advisory Board
Section 280:00. Purpose. The purpose of the Convention Center Advisory Board is to advise the
city on River’s Edge Convention Center operations and marketing with the goal of maintaining
and strengthening the financial health of the convention center as well as maximizing the
economic impact of the convention center in the community. The purpose further includes advice
and counsel to the City concerning the operations, marketing and future development of the
Municipal Athletic Complex.
Section 280:05. Composition of the Board.
Subd. 1. The membership of the Board shall consist of seven voting members appointed
by the Mayor with City Council approval.
Subd. 2. The Board members shall be residents of or business owners in the City of St.
Cloud. Membership on board shall include representation from the lodging, hospitality
and retail industries in the City. The Mayor may assign a member of the City
Administration and a member of the Convention and Visitors Bureau as an ex-officio,
non-voting members of the Board.
Subd. 3. Board members shall serve without compensation. The original term for two
members shall be one year, the original term for two members shall be for two years, the
original term for three members shall be three years. The respective terms of office will
expire on June 30 of each year.
Subd. 4. The Mayor shall have the authority to remove any member in order to serve the
best interests of the City.
Subd. 5. The Board, at its initial meeting, shall elect from its membership, a Chair and
Vice-Chair, who will serve for a period of one year. Secretarial duties and the taking of
minutes will be designated to staff of the River’s Edge Convention Center.
Subd. 6. Any vacancy in the Board will be filled by appointment of the Mayor with the
consent of the City Council, and such appointee will serve for the remaining term.
Section 280:10. Duties.
Subd. 1. Financial. The Convention Center Advisory Board shall study and review
monthly financial reports, event profit and loss statements as well as make
recommendations to the Mayor and the City Council on the annual budget.
Subd. 2. Operations. The Board shall study and review convention center policies,
procedures and operations regarding rents, commissions, fees and event scheduling and
advise the Mayor on matters of policy and operations.
Subd. 3. Marketing. The Board shall study and review the annual marketing plan with
the St. Cloud Convention and Visitor’s Bureau and advise the Mayor on marketing
strategies.
Section 280:15. Meetings.
Subd. 1. The Board will meet at regularly scheduled monthly meetings. The Chair or
any two members may schedule additional meetings to effectuate the purposes and
policies of this ordinance.
Subd. 2. Meetings of the Board, records and minutes will be open to the public except as
may otherwise be provided by applicable law. Additionally, the Board may from time to
time conduct public hearings and elicit comment from the public before making a
recommendation to the Mayor or City Council.
Subd. 3. All business of the Advisory Board will be conducted in an orderly manner and
generally in accordance with Robert’s Rules of Parliamentary Procedure.
History: Ord. 2546 01-07-13; Ord. 2616 3-9-15; Ord. 2636 11-9-15
CHAPTER III
BUILIDING AND HOUSING CODES
(Note: Formerly 300, 305, 315, 325, 330, 335, 336, 337, 421, 445)
Section 300:00. Minnesota State Building Code. The Minnesota State Building Code, established
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes § 16B.59 through § 16B.75, and § 326.37 through § 326.45 is
adopted as the Building Code of the City of St. Cloud. A copy of the Minnesota State Building
Code is available for use and inspection by the public in the Office of the City Clerk.
Subd. 1. The Minnesota State Building Code includes the following chapters of Minnesota Rules:
(a) 1300, Minnesota Building Code Administration;
(b) 1301, Building Official Certification;
(c) 1302, State Building Code Construction Approvals;
(d) 1303, Special Provisions;
(e) 1305, Minnesota Building Code;
(f) 1307, Elevators and Related Devices;
(g) 1309, Minnesota Residential Code;
(h) 1311, Minnesota Conservation Code for Existing Buildings;
(i) 1315, Minnesota Electrical Code;
(j) 1322, Residential Energy Code
(k) 1323, Commercial Energy Code
(l) 1325, Solar Energy Systems;
(m) 1335, Flood proofing Regulations;
(n) 1341, Minnesota Accessibility Code;
(o) 1346, Minnesota Mechanical Code;
(p) 1350, Manufactured Homes;
(q) 1360, Prefabricated Structures;
(r) 1361, Industrialized/Modular Buildings;
(s) 1370, Storm Shelters (Manufactured Home Parks);
(t) 4715, Minnesota Plumbing Code; and
(u) Minnesota High Pressure Piping Systems
Subd. 2. Organization and Enforcement. The organization of the Building Safety Division of the
Community Development Section, application, administration, and enforcement of the Code will be
consistent with by Minnesota Rule Chapter 1300. The Code will be enforced within the
incorporated limits of the City of St. Cloud and extraterritorial limits permitted by Minnesota
Statute § 16B.62. The Administrative Authority will designate a State certified "Building Official”
pursuant to Minnesota Statute § 16B.65.
Subd. 3. Fees
(a) Building Permits, Inspections and Fees. The schedule of fees for building permits,
inspections, and collection of fees will be set forth in Section 553 of this Code.
(b) Plan Check Fees. The plan check fees will be set forth in Section 553 of this Code.
(c) Surcharge. In addition to the permit fee required, the applicant will pay a surcharge to
be remitted to the Minnesota Department of Administration as prescribed by Minnesota
Statute § 16B.70.
(d) Occupancy During Construction or Reconstruction. Building permits issued to
construct or reconstruct areas in buildings open to the public will provide safe and
proper ingress, egress and occupancy to the public using the facility. The City of St.
Cloud Chief Building Official will inspect and determine if continued occupancy or
business activity would constitute a health hazard. If a health hazard is determined to
exist, the Chief Building Official will inform the permit holder of the hazard and any
possible means to mitigate or eliminate hazard. If no means of hazard elimination can
be found, continued occupancy or business activity will be discontinued. Failure to
comply with this section will result in immediate suspension of the building permit.
Subd. 4. Building Advisory Board.
(a) Purpose. The Building Advisory Board will be concerned with methods of
construction, suitability of alternate materials, and establishment of fee schedules.
(b) Organization.
1. Membership. The Building Advisory Board will consist of five voting
members and one ex-officio member. Appointments to the Board will be
made by the Mayor and will represent the following groups:
a. A general contractor licensed in the City of St. Cloud whose business is
primarily concerned with commercial building construction.
b. A general contractor licensed in the City of St. Cloud whose business is
primarily concerned with residential building construction.
c. A licensed realtor whose business is principally located in the City of St.
Cloud.
d. A professional architect whose business is principally located in the
City of St.Cloud.
e. A professional engineer specializing in structural or civil engineering
whose business is principally located in the City of St. Cloud.
f. The Chief Building Official or designated representative will serve in an
ex-officio capacity.
g. The mayor has the discretion to remove any member.
2. Terms and Appointment. At the first meeting of each calendar year, the
Board will select a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and a Secretary, each to
serve throughout the year and until a successor is chosen. Members will be
appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the Council. Vacancies
will be filled for the remaining term in the same manner as original
appointments.
3. The Chairperson. The Board will meet at the call of the Chairperson with a
minimum of one meeting per year. Additionally, the Chairperson will
arrange meetings with interested citizens who are seeking assistance from
the Board, assign duties to Board members, communicate with officials of
the Building Inspection Department, report pertinent information and
provide leadership to the board. In the absence, or at the request of the
Chairperson, any or all of these duties will be performed by the Vice
Chairperson.
4. The Secretary. The secretary will keep charge of permanent records and
proceedings of every meeting of the Board and will read the minutes of
those proceedings at each successive meeting at the request of the
Chairperson. The Secretary will serve as correspondent of the Board and as
Treasurer of any funds in the custody of the Board.
5. Quorum. For transaction of business at any meeting, three members will
constitute a quorum.
6. Compensation. Members of the Board will serve without compensation.
(c) Procedure. The Building Advisory Board will act in an advisory and review
capacity to and for the Mayor on all proposed new building code changes, and will
specifically be concerned with methods of construction, suitability of alternate
materials and establishment of fee schedules. The committee's final action on any
proposal will be in the form of a recommendation of approval or disapproval
directed to the Mayor.
BUILDING AND HOUSE MOVERS
Subd. 5. Building and House Movers.
(a) Definitions.
1. For purposes of this subdivision, “building" means and includes any structure
having a roof and walls, and designed, used or proposed to be used for
residential, commercial, industrial, storage, institutional, assemblage of persons
or animals purposes, or any other lawful purposes generally comparable to the
foregoing expressed purposes. A structure of less than 100 square feet will not
fall within this definition.
2. "Inspector" means the duly appointed, qualified and acting Building Inspector of
the City.
(b) Moving Permit. No building will be moved within the corporate limits of the City
unless the licensed building mover has first applied for and received a permit to move
the building and paid the required fee for the permit.
(c) Application for Permit. The application for a permit to move a particular building will
be in writing, on a form prepared by the Inspector, and filed with the Inspector.
(d) Contents of Application. The application will:
1. Furnish information that will readily enable the inspector to locate the building
proposed to be moved.
2. Give a general description of the building, including the nature of the
construction materials, its dimensions, including height, the number of rooms,
and the purpose for which it is to be used when relocated.
3. If the building is to be relocated in a platted area of the City or within two miles
of the City, it will give the lot and block numbers and the name of the
subdivision where it is to be located. If it is to be moved into an unplatted area
of the City or within two miles of the City, it will give a legal description of the
tract or parcel of land on which it is to be relocated.
4. Provide a map that shows where the building will be located on the new site.
5. If the building is to be relocated in a zoned area under a zoning ordinance, it will
show the zone classification of the new site.
6. Give the proposed date and hour for the commencement of moving the building.
7. Furnish written plans and specifications for improvements necessary to comply
with requirements of the Building Code.
8. Provide a map that shows a proposed route of the moving.
9. Show information that will be required to enable the Parks Director to protect
trees in the city as provided in Section 670:55 of this code.
10. Provide additional information as the inspector may require.
(e) Accompanying Documents. The application will be accompanied by the following
documents:
1. A receipt of the City Treasurer showing payment of the fee currently prescribed
by a resolution of the Council for the permit.
2. Certificates of the County Treasurer and of the County Auditor, of the County
wherein the building proposed to be moved is situated, showing that all current
and delinquent taxes on the real estate from which the building is proposed to be
moved are paid.
3. A certificate of the City Treasurer showing that there are no City charges of any
kind, including any special assessments for local improvements, upon or against
the real estate from which the building is to be moved remaining unpaid.
4. An application for a building permit for improvements to the building after
moving.
5. The tax statements from the County Treasurer for the current year for both the
site from which the building is to be moved and to which the building is to be
moved.
6. If the proposed route passes along or across any state or county highway or road,
the applicant will obtain appropriate permits from the state or county road
authorities and will attach a copy of the same to the permit application.
(f) Standards for Issuing a Moving Permit. The Inspector will inspect the building
proposed to be moved, to ascertain whether it meets the standards prescribed in this
section for the issuance of a moving permit. The Inspector will not issue a permit if he
finds that any of the following conditions exist:
1. Shows deterioration, dry rot, or decay to the degree that the building should not
be moved because of the risk or hazard of collapse in the moving process.
2. Is to be relocated within the fire limits of the City, unless the building will meet
the requirements for the erection of a new building within the limits when
moving and renovation are completed.
3. Is to be moved to a zoned area, unless the building will meet and comply with
all requirements for the erection of a new building in the zone classification
when moving and renovation are completed.
4. The City Engineer or Building Inspector determines that the building is too large
or too heavy to be moved over the route proposed, or any other route, without
causing substantial damage to the streets, alleys, and public grounds over, along,
or across which it is to be moved.
5. The building is so deteriorated, in a state of disrepair or otherwise so structurally
unsound as to be unsafe for the use proposed to be made thereof on relocation.
6. The applicant's equipment is inadequate to move the building without
endangering persons or property.
7. The building is to be relocated within the fire limits of the City and it does not
meet the requirements specified for the erection of a new building within the fire
limits.
8. The building is not compatible with the houses in the neighborhood to which the
applicant wishes to move the house or building, with respect to height, age,
style, condition, or design and as a result thereof would substantially reduce the
values of existing structures in the new location.
9. The Inspector, in determining whether the building should be moved, will
compare the market value of the building to be moved with the cost of necessary
improvements. The market value of the building to be moved will be
determined by deducting the value of the lot from the total market value of the
building and lot. The records of the County Treasurer and County Assessor will
be used to determine values.
In the event of any disagreement between the mover or owner and the Inspector over the
suitability of the building to be moved, the Inspector will, for review and recommendation,
refer the matter to the Building Advisory Board.
(g) Hearing. At the hearing, the City and the applicant or owner may produce any
competent evidence in respect of the ground or grounds upon which the denial was
based. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, or at any time thereafter within 15 days, the
Council will take the action in respect of said denial as it deems proper under the
evidence produced.
(h) Alternate Route; Property Damage. If the route over which the applicant proposes to
move the building is found by the City Engineer to be so inadequate that the building
cannot be moved over it without causing substantial damage to the streets and alleys,
traffic signals or street lights, or if the Chief of Police finds that the use of the route
would be hazardous to the traffic thereon, or the Parks Director finds that the moving of
the building over the proposed route would substantially damage the trees along the
route, the City Engineer, the Chief of Police, and the Parks Director will specify another
route, if one can be found over which the building may be moved without substantial
damage to the streets and alleys, without creating dangerous traffic hazards, and without
substantial damage to trees. If no route can be found, no permit will be issued.
(i) Duties of the Permit Holder. When a moving permit is issued, the permit holder is
required to fulfill the following duties:
1. Move the building only over the route approved or designated in the permit.
2. Notify the inspector in writing of any change in the date or hour proposed for the
commencing of the moving of the building.
3. Promptly notify the inspector in writing of any injury or damage to persons or
property, private or public, incurred in the moving of the building.
4. Cause adequate warnings to be given to the public of the presence of the
building in the street or alley, and, without limiting the foregoing prescribed
duty, will cause at least three (3) lighted flashers to be displayed at night on the
front and rear ends of the building in the direction it is being moved along the
street or alley, one to be approximately in the center of said respective ends, and
one on each side of said center flare, near the outer edge of the building. He will
also keep and maintain, day and night, proper barricades at each end of the block
in which the building is then present, which barricades will be so lighted at night
so as to adequately warn the public of their presence in the street.
5. The permit holder will not permit the building to stand in one place on a state
trunk highway or county highway for more than the time allotted under the State
or County permits, on a municipal state aid street for more than four hours, or on
any other street or alley for more than 24 hours, unless the inspector for good
cause shown, will have granted an extension of said period.
6. Notify the Fire Department when the building is left standing in any street or
alley and identify the location.
7. Leave the site from which the building is moved in a clean, safe, and sanitary
condition. If the applicant fails to do so, the City may do whatever is needed to
render the site clean, safe, and sanitary, and the permit holder will pay to the
City all expenses so incurred.
8. Exercise due, proper and reasonable care, at all times during the process of
moving the building, to prevent and avoid injury to persons or damage to
property, private or public.
9. Before the building is moved from its original site, obtain a Utility Disconnect
Permit from the Plumbing Inspector and shut off the water and sewer lines that
serve the premises. Water service lines are to be shut off at the corporation on
the City water main. Sewer service lines are to be capped at the City sewer main
in a manner that will prevent infiltration into the City sewer system. The
abandonment of water and sewer service lines must be inspected and approved
by the City Plumbing Inspector. Remove and return to the City any meters on
the premises belonging to it and notify the gas, electric and telephone companies
to discontinue their service, if any, to the premises, which notice will be given at
the time as will give the companies reasonable time to remove any of their
equipment from the premises.
10. Make arrangements with all public utility companies to temporarily remove any
lines, wires, and cables along the route which will be necessary to permit the
passage of the building along the same.
11. Make arrangements with the Director of Public Works to temporarily remove or
protect any City-owned or maintained traffic signals, street light poles, mast
arms, signs, wires or cables along the route as necessary to permit the passage of
the building and make payment to the City for all expenses so incurred.
12. Make arrangements with the Parks Director to trim or protect any boulevard
trees or other publicly owned trees along the route as necessary to permit the
passage of the building, and make payment to the City for all expenses so
incurred.
(j) Enforcement of Ordinance. The Inspector will be responsible for the enforcement of the
provisions of this subdivision.
(k) Violations. If an applicant, licensee, or permit holder commits any of the following acts,
he/she is guilty of a misdemeanor:
1. Willfully provides false or misleading information in the application.
2. Moves a building without obtaining a permit to move the building, as required
by this subdivision.
3. Moves the building over any state trunk highway, county road, street, alley or
public ground not approved or designated as a route therefore.
4. Moves the building without complying with the requirements of this
subdivision.
5. Leaves the building standing on a state trunk highway, county road, public street
or alley in violation of this subdivision.
COMMERCIAL CONTRACTORS
Subd. 6. Commercial Contractors. A commercial contractor will be any building contractor
engaging in work other than work performed under a license from the State of Minnesota as a
residential building contractor, remodelor or specialty contractor in the business of contracting or
offering to contract to improve residential real estate, all terms as defined by Minnesota Statute,
Chapter 326.83.
(a) Licenses Required. No person, firm or corporation will engage in a business of
commercial contracting in the City of St. Cloud without first securing an annual
license on application made to the Building Official showing qualifications, which
application will then be reviewed by the Building Official, and if approved, the Chief
Building Official will issue the annual license. The licenses will expire on December
31 of each year.
(b) Classification and License Fees. Commercial contractors, upon making application
for licenses as required, will declare which class of license they elect, subject to the
following scale and will pay the required fee charges:
Class "A". Commercial contractors whose annual gross and total building
operations exceed a sum of $50,000.
Class "B". Commercial contractors whose annual gross and total building
operations exceed a sum of $25,000 and not more than $50,000.
Class "C". Commercial contractors whose annual gross and total building
operations are less than $25,000.
(c) Adjustments. After a Class "B" or Class "C" license has been issued, and it is
established that a commercial contractor's gross and total building operations in any
year will exceed the limits provided for in the license, as set forth in Subd. 6 (b)
above, the licensee will at once pay the difference in license fees, which action will
automatically revoke the former license, and a new license in the higher class will be
issued to the licensee.
(c) Records. For the purpose of enforcing this provision, the Building Official will keep
an account of the work done by each contractor, which account will be open to
inspection at all times.
(d) License and Permit Requirements
1. It is declared to be illegal to agree to contract for, or engage in commercial
construction or commercial reconstruction or repair of any project coming within the
scope and intent of this section without having a license.
2. No person engaged in the construction, reconstruction, repair or demolition of any
building or structure, will obstruct or encroach upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public
grounds of the City, wholly or in part, without first having obtained a permit to do so,
obtained in the manner prescribed for obtaining a license as a commercial contractor,
except that no additional bond need be given.
(e) Bond and Insurance Requirements
1. Every Commercial Contractor, before being granted a license, will file with the
Building Official a bond, executed by the contractor, as principal, and by a
corporate surety duly authorized under the laws of the State of Minnesota to
execute the bond, as surety, in the sum of $25,000. The bond shall be payable to
and for the benefit of the City and the consumer and will be subject to approval by
the City Attorney. The bond shall serve the following purposes:
a. To keep and save the City from, and indemnified against, all claims of
every kind which may arise, directly or indirectly, out of the
performance of any work done by the commercial contractor within the
City, including all costs and expenses incurred in defending any
actions that may be brought against it;
b. To ensure compliance with all ordinances, rules or regulations of the
City applicable to the work;
c. To ensure performance of the work in conformity with all the plans
and specifications, if any;
d. And to ensure the repair all damage to any public property caused in
the performance the work.
2. In addition to the surety bond, the applicant for a license will furnish a general
policy of liability and property damage insurance, including products and
completed operation coverage which will have minimum limits of coverage of
$100,000 for injuries to or death of one person and not less than $500,000 on
account of one accident and not less than $250,000 for property damage.
3. The bond will be effective for the period of January 1 through December 31 of the
license year. The bonds and insurance will further provide that no cancellation of
said bond for any cause may be made by the principal or the surety or insurance
company, for any cause, without first giving ten days notice to the City, in writing,
of the intention to cancel. The notice will be addressed to the Building Official by
registered mail, or will be delivered to the Building Official personally.
4. A license issued under this ordinance will become invalid at any time when the
person to whom it was issued ceases to maintain, in full force and effect, the bond
and insurance required by this ordinance.
PLUMBING CODE
Section 300:10. Plumbing Code.
Subd. 1. Definitions. All technical terminology and abbreviations used in this ordinance will have
the meanings ascribed in the "Minnesota Plumbing Code", but if not defined therein, will have the
normal meanings ascribed in the plumbing trade.
(a) "Inspector" means that person designated by the City Council to inspect plumbing
systems and to enforce compliance with the provisions of the ordinance.
(c) "Plumber" means any person doing any work on a plumbing system subject to the
provisions of this ordinance.
(d) "Engage in Business" means entering into agreement or contract with another
person for the installation of a plumbing system, or any portion of a plumbing
system, or for the doing of any work on any plumbing system such as are subject to
the provisions of this ordinance.
(e) "Plumbing Code" means the Minnesota Plumbing Code, including the appendices
and amendments as adopted by reference by the City of St. Cloud in Section 300 of
the Building Code.
(f) “Sewer and Water Contractor” means any person that installs or repairs building
sewer and/or water service piping to new or existing properties and has the required
State issued pipe layers card for all workers.
Subd. 2. Licenses for Plumbing Contractors.
(a) Any person desiring to engage in business within the City, will first obtain a Master
Plumbing Contractor License, a Sewer and Water Contractor License, or a Sewer
Cleaning Contractor License from the Chief Building Official.
(b) A Master Plumbing Contractor License will entitle the license holder to engage in the
business of installing, altering, repairing, and servicing any plumbing system within the
City without limits as to requirements of the system or scope of work.
(c) A Sewer Cleaning Contractor License will entitle the license holder only to engage in
the business of cleaning out existing sewer systems when such cleaning operations can
be conducted by obtaining access to the sewer through existing clean outs, vents, drains
or manholes.
(d) The license fee for Master Plumbing Contractor and for Sewer Cleaning Contractor will
be set forth in Section 500 of this Code.
Subd. 3. Application Procedures and Requirements for Obtaining Licenses.
(a) Any person desiring to obtain a license will make written application to the Chief
Building Official for such license, stating the name and date of birth of the person
desiring such license, place of business, and stating the type of license for which the
applicant is applying. If the applicant is an individual person, such application will also
state that he is not less than 21 years of age.
(b) Upon the presentation to the Chief Building Official of an application for Master
Plumbing Contractor and a valid and current Master Plumber License issued by the
State of Minnesota in accordance with the provisions of the Minnesota Plumbing Code,
the Chief Building Official will issue the license to the applicant upon the applicant (a)
filing with the Chief Building Official the bond and insurance policies and (b) paying
the license fee.
(c) Master Plumbing Contractor Licenses will be issued in the following manner:
1. Only to an individual that holds a valid State Master Plumber License.
2. To a partnership or association of individual persons, only if such partnership or
association of individual persons has a member holding a valid State Master
Plumber License. In this event, the license will be issued in the name of the
individual holding the certificate and in the name of the partnership or
association of persons.
3. To a corporation, only if such corporation has an executive or administrative
officer holding a valid State Master Plumber License. In this event, the license
will be issued in the name of the individual holding the license and in the name
of the corporation.
4. When a Master Plumbing Contractor qualifies to receive a license by virtue of a
member or an officer holding a State Master Plumber License, such member or
officer will be in active charge of the work of installation, with authority and
power to direct such work, all to the end that when the job is completed it will
comply to all technical requirements of this ordinance. In all cases, the person
holding the permit for the particular job will be primarily responsible for such
compliance.
5. Upon the presentation to the Chief Building Official of an application for Sewer
Cleaning Contractor's License, the Chief Building Official will issue the license
to the applicant upon the applicant (a) filing with him the bond and insurance
policies and (b) paying the license fee.
Subd. 4. Expiration of Licenses. Any license will expire on the 31st day of December of the year
for which it was issued.
Subd. 5. Use of Licenses.
(a) No person licensed under this ordinance who holds a permit for a particular job, will
sublet or assign any work contemplated by such permit to any person not licensed under
this ordinance and such attempted subletting or assignment will be void.
(b) In the event the person holding such permit sublets any portion of the work to be done
under the permit to any other person holding a Master Plumbing Contractor's License,
the person holding the permit will remain responsible for the completion of all work
under said permit in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. Both the permit
holder and the person so doing the work will both be subject to prosecution for the
violation of any provision of this ordinance.
Subd. 6. Suspension and Invalidation of Licenses.
(a) When a Master Plumbing Contractor has qualified to receive a license only by reason of
a member or an officer holding a State Master Plumber License, then if the member or
officer ceases to hold their status as a member or officer, the license is suspended, all
work in progress under any existing permit will be suspended, and no additional permits
will be issued until the contractor has a valid State Master Plumber license.
Subd. 7. Bond and Insurance Requirements.
(a) Every Master Plumbing Contractor and Sewer Cleaning Contractor, before being
granted a license, will file with the Building Official a bond, executed by the
contractor, as principal, and by a corporate surety duly authorized under the laws of
the State of Minnesota to execute the bond, as surety. Master Plumbing Contractors
shall provide a bond in the sum of $10,000 and Sewer Cleaning Contractors shall
provide a bond in the amount of $5,000. The bond shall be payable to and for the
benefit of the City and the consumer and will be subject to approval by the City
Attorney. The bond shall serve the following purposes:
1. To keep and save the City from, and indemnified against, all claims of every kind
which may arise, directly or indirectly, our of the performance of any work done
by the commercial contractor within the City, including all costs and expenses
incurred in defending any actions that may be brought against it.
2. To ensure compliance with all ordinances, rules or regulations of the City
applicable to the work.
3. To ensure performance of the work in conformity with all the plans and
specifications, if any.
4. To ensure that any damage to public property is properly repaired.
(b) In addition to the surety bond, the applicant for a license will furnish a general policy
of liability and property damage insurance, including products and completed
operation coverage which will have minimum limits of coverage of $100,000 for
injuries to or death of one person and not less than $500,000 on account of one
accident and not less than $250,000 for property damage.
(c) The bond will be effective for the period of January 1 through December 31 of the
license year. The bonds and insurance will further provide that no cancellation of said
bond for any cause may be made by the principal or the surety or insurance company,
for any cause, without first giving ten days notice to the City, in writing, of the
intention to cancel. The notice will be addressed to the Building Official by
registered mail, or will be delivered to the Building Official personally.
(d) A license issued under this ordinance will become invalid at any time when the
person to whom it was issued ceases to maintain, in full force and effect, the bond and
insurance required by this ordinance.
Subd. 10. Registration of Journeyman Plumbers and Plumbers' Apprentices.
(a) Any journeyman plumber or plumber's apprentice working on any plumbing system
within the City will register their names with the Plumbing Inspector. Possession of a
State Journeyman's License will be accepted as prima facie evidence of a journeyman's
eligibility for registration. Proof of registration with the Minnesota Department of
Health will be accepted as prima facie evidence of an apprentice's eligibility for
registration.
(b) The fee for registration as either a journeyman or as an apprentice will be set forth in
Section 551 of this Code. Upon receipt of the proper credentials and of the fee, the
Plumbing Inspector will issue a certificate of registration to the registrant.
(c) No person other than an individual holding a State Master Plumber's License and
licensed as a Master Plumbing Contractor in accordance with the provisions of this
ordinance will do any work on any plumbing system unless the licensee is registered as
above described.
Subd. 11. Plumbing Code Board.
(a) The "Plumbing Code Board" consists of six members. One member of the Board will
be the Chief Plumbing Inspector who will serve ex-officio, without voting privileges.
The Director of Health and the Director of Public Utilities will be ex-officio members of
the Board with full voting privileges. The other three members of the Board will be
appointed by the Mayor of the City subject to the approval of each appointee by the City
Council. One of these appointees will be a person holding a Master Plumbing
Contractor License as provided by this ordinance. Another appointee will be a
registered Journeyman Plumber, as provided by this ordinance. The third appointee will
be any person chosen without pre-qualification by this ordinance. All members will be
appointed for terms of three years, except that an appointee to fill a vacancy will serve
the remaining term of the member in respect to whom the vacancy occurred.
(b) The appointed members of the Board will not be subject to the Civil Service Rules of
the City, and will serve without compensation, but will be paid for all expenses
reasonably incurred by them in the performance of their duties as members of the
Board.
(c) The Board will organize within 30 days after its approval by the City Council and will
elect a Chairperson. The Plumbing Inspector will serve as Secretary, and keep minutes
of the proceedings of the Board.
(d) Regular meetings of the Board will be held on the second Wednesday in January and on
the second Wednesday in July of each year.
(e) Special meetings of the Board will be called by the Secretary, upon the written request
of the Chairperson, or upon the written request of two or more members of the Board.
Such request will state the time, place and purpose of such meeting. The time so stated
will be such that the Secretary can give, by mail, all members at least five days notice of
such date, unless all members agree to meet upon shorter notice.
(f) The primary duty of the Board will be to review this ordinance and to recommend to the
City Council any additions or changes which it deems desirable and proper to ensure
adequate control and safety of plumbing systems and plumbing work in the City.
Subd. 12. Appeals.
(a) In the event any person wishes to dispute any interpretation of the technical provisions
of this ordinance by the Plumbing Inspector or any order of the Plumbing Inspector,
they will file a written appeal within 45 days of the ruling or order with the Plumbing
Inspector, stating the exact nature of the item being disputed, and giving the applicable
section and subsection of the code and other information which the person considers to
be relative to the issue.
(b) Upon receipt of such written appeal, the Plumbing Inspector will call a meeting of the
Plumbing Code Board within fifteen 15 days, and will notify the appellant of the time
and location when such meeting will be held.
(c) At the meeting, the Board will hear and consider all relative information presented and
as soon as practicable, the Board will issue a written statement of its findings, one copy
to be filed with the City Clerk and one copy to be sent to the appellant.
Subd. 13. Permits and Licenses Generally.
(a) It will be unlawful for any person to install, alter or repair any plumbing system that is
subject to regulation by the provisions of this ordinance, without first making written
application to and obtaining a permit from the City Health and Inspection Department.
Providing, however, that no permit will be required for minor repair work such as the
repair of leaks in pipes, traps and faucets and the opening of exposed waste and supply
pipes. However, where waste pipes and supply pipes are replaced or where fixtures are
to be changed, a permit will be required and the City notified to inspect the work before
it is covered up.
(b)Unless otherwise exempted, separate electrical, building and mechanical permits will be
required for the above-exempted items.
(c) Exemption from the permit requirement of this code will not be deemed to grant
authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of
this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
(d)Suspension and Revocation of Licenses.
1. Upon notice to the Plumbing Code Board that a person holding a license has
been convicted of a violation of this ordinance. The Plumbing Code Board may
suspend license for the period of time as the Council may deem proper under the
circumstances, or the Council may revoke the license and order that no new
license be granted for a period not to exceed six months from the date that the
action is ordered by the Council.
2. Before the Plumbing Code Board will revoke any license, the licensee will be
entitled to a hearing by the City Council upon ten days written notice by regular
mail addressed to the licensee at their place of business or by serving notice
upon the licensee in the manner prescribed by statute for serving summons.
Subd. 14. Permits to be Issued to Licensed Contractors Only. No permit for the construction,
alteration or repair of any plumbing system will be issued to any person unless he has a valid
Master Plumbing Contractor License as provided by this ordinance.
(a) Homeowner Exempted. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code of ordinances
to the contrary, and where permitted by state law, permits may be issued to make
repairs, additions, replacements, and alterations of any plumbing system of any
single-family dwelling structure used exclusively for living purposes or any accessory
buildings provided there is no change in the required capacity of the systems involved
and that all the work in connection with the structures will be performed only by the
person who is the bona fide owner and occupant of such dwelling as his residence or a
member of said owner-occupant's immediate family. "Immediate family" includes only
a parent, children by birth or adoption, or said children's spouse.
Subd. 15. Plans and Specifications Required.
(a) When application is made for a permit to install a plumbing system that serves the
public or serves more than four families, or any plumbing system that will affect the
public health in any manner, plans and specifications, together with additional
information that the Plumbing Inspector may reasonably require in order to evaluate the
adequacy of the proposed system, will be submitted to the Plumbing Inspector in
duplicate. The appraisal of the Plumbing Inspector will reflect the degree to which the
plans and specifications affect the public health and conform to the requirements of this
ordinance, and no permit will be issued until the plans and specifications are found to
conform to the requirements of this ordinance. Upon approval of the plans and
specifications, the Plumbing Inspector will indicate approval and will return one
approved set to the applicant and retain the other for the City's records.
(b) Where plans and specifications are required to be submitted, no construction will
proceed except in accordance with approved plans and specifications.
(c) Any material alteration or extension of an existing system will also be subject to the
provisions of this section.
Subd. 16. Permit Fees. The Plumbing Inspector will, before issuing any permit for the installation
of any plumbing system, require the applicant to pay the permit fees as set forth in Section 551 of
this Code.
Subd. 17. Issuance of Permit. Upon approval of the application and receipt of the permit fee, the
Plumbing Inspector will issue a permit to the Master Plumbing Contractor, stating the name of the
owner, agent, or occupant of the premises where the work is to be done, the address and/or legal
description of the premises, the description of the work to be done and the name of the permit
holder.
Subd. 18. Display of Permit. It will be the duty of the permit holder to keep the permit on the
premises where the work is being performed until the work is completed, tested and accepted by the
Plumbing Inspector, and to display the permit in a conspicuous place on the premises.
Subd. 19. Term of Permit.
(a) All work to be performed under a permit will be completed within six months from the
date of issuance of the permit, or within a longer period of time as the Plumbing
Inspector may specify on the permit. Upon the expiration of the time period, if the
contractor has not already requested final inspection, the Plumbing Inspector will
inspect the work. If the work is not completed, the Plumbing Inspector will notify the
contractor to complete the work within 15 days or the inspector may extend the time
period if the cause of delay is beyond the control of the contractor. Thereafter, no
additional work will be done on the plumbing system unless and until a new permit has
been applied for and issued. In the event any changes have been made to this ordinance,
prior to the issuance of the second permit, the permit will be deemed to be issued
subject to compliance with the ordinance as revised.
(b) If upon expiration of the term of the permit, the Plumbing Inspector finds the work to be
in violation of the provisions of this ordinance, the contractor will be ordered to correct
the deficiencies. If the deficiencies are not completed within 15 days, the contractor
will be required to obtain a new permit as provided above. In addition, the contractor
will be subject to the penal provisions of this ordinance.
Subd. 20. Supervision of Plumbing Systems. The Plumbing Inspector will have general
supervision over all plumbing systems in the City. The Plumbing Inspector will have authority to
inspect and re-inspect all such plumbing systems to the extent required to protect the public health.
Subd. 21. Inspector May Enter Buildings. The Plumbing Inspector is vested with full authority to
enter any building or premises in the discharge of his duties for the purpose of enforcing
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance.
Subd. 22. Condemning of Defective Plumbing Systems.
(a) Any plumbing system which at any time becomes so defective as to endanger the public
health or be detrimental to the public water supply system or the public sewer system,
will be condemned by the Plumbing Inspector. When in the Plumbing Inspectors
opinion it is necessary to prevent such endangering of the public health or detrimental
effects to the public water supply or public sewer system, the Inspector is authorized to
disconnect the system from the public supply and/or to order discontinuance of the
plumbing system. Upon the condemnation, the person or persons owning the plumbing
system will immediately take such steps as are necessary to eliminate dangers to the
public health or to the public water supply or sewer system. The taking of such steps
will not abrogate the right of the owner to utilize the appeal procedures provided for in
this ordinance.
(a) When any plumbing system has been condemned and has been disconnected or
discontinued by order of the Plumbing Inspector, no person will in any manner
reconnect or reactivate the plumbing system until it has been put in safe condition and
a certificate of acceptance has been issued by the Inspector.
Subd. 23. Disturbing Plumbing System. No person will disturb, alter or change any plumbing
system in such a manner as to render any portion of the system inoperative, defective or not in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
Subd. 24. Inspections Required. No plumbing system will be put to use until inspected and
approved by the Plumbing Inspector.
(a) When any plumbing system is found to have been installed without a proper permit or
not in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, the Plumbing Inspector is
authorized to shut off the water supply, plug the building drain, or by other means
prevent utilization of the system until a proper permit has been secured from the
Inspector and the plumbing system has been re-inspected and approved.
(b) Requests for inspections will be submitted to the Plumbing Inspector by the Master
Plumbing Contractor, and inspections will be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of the Minnesota Plumbing Code.
WATER SPRINKLING SYSTEMS
Subd. 25. Water Sprinkling Systems.
(a) “Water Sprinkling Systems” defined. For purposes of this ordinance, water sprinkling
systems will be defined as follows: any automatic or manually operated water system
which provides for the irrigation of lawns, landscaping, gardens or yards on any
commercial, residential or industrial property within the City. A water sprinkling
system will include any automatically timed or manually started surface or
underground system connected to any City water utility or private water supply.
(b) Permits Required. No person will begin work on the installation, alteration or repair
of any back flow prevention device on any sprinkling system within the City until
proper application has been made and approved by the Plumbing Inspector and a
permit has been issued. A permit will not be required for sprinkling systems which
have river water as the sole source of supply.
(c) Permits for the Installation and Operation of Back Flow Prevention to be Issued to
Licensed Contractors Only. Permits for the installation and operation of back flow
prevention device will be issued only to an individual with a valid Master Plumbing
Contractor License as provided by this ordinance, provided, however, anyone not so
licensed may be issued a permit to do plumbing work which complies with the
provisions of the minimum standard prescribed by the State Board of Health on
premises or that part of premises owned and actually occupied by the owner as the
owner's residence. Resident owners may designate any individual to install sprinkling
hoses and pipes.
(d) Plan and Specifications Required. At the time application is made to install, alter or
repair any sprinkling system, plans and specifications together with such additional
information that the Plumbing Inspector may require will be submitted to the
Plumbing Inspector. Plans and specifications for the proposed work must be filed
with the Plumbing Inspector before the permit is granted, and during the progress of
the work, if major changes are instituted which are not shown on the initial plan,
specifications or permit application. No permit will be issued until the plans and
specifications are found to conform with the Minnesota Plumbing Code, Section
4715.2000 through Section 4715.2160 which require back flow prevention devices for
all sprinkling systems installed on any public or private water supply system within
the City of St. Cloud.
(e) Permit Fees. The Plumbing Inspector will, before issuing any permit for the
installation, alteration or repair of any sprinkling system, require payment by the
applicant for the permit of a fee in the amount set forth in Section 551 of the Code of
Ordinances.
(f) Issuance of Permit. Upon approval of the application and receipt of the permit fee,
the Plumbing Inspector will issue a permit stating the name of the owner, agent or
occupant of the premises where the work is to be done, the address and/or legal
description of the premises, the description of the work to be done and the name of
the permit holder.
(g) Display of Permit. It will be the duty of the permit holder to keep the permit on the
premises where the work is being performed until the work is completed, tested and
accepted by the Plumbing Inspector, and to display the permit in a conspicuous place
on the premises.
(h) Term of Permit.
1. All work to be performed under a permit will be completed within six months
from the date of issuance of the permit, or within such longer period of time as
the Plumbing Inspector may specify on the permit. Upon the expiration of
said period if the contractor has not already requested final inspection, the
Plumbing Inspector will inspect the work. If the Plumbing Inspector finds that
the work is not completed, he will notify the contractor to complete the work
within 15 days or he may extend the period if the cause of delay is beyond the
control of the contractor. Thereafter no additional work will be done on the
sprinkling system unless and until a new permit has been applied for and
issued. In the event any changes have been made to this ordinance prior to the
issuance of the second permit, said permit will be deemed to be issued subject
to compliance with the ordinance as revised.
2. If upon expiration of the term of the permit the Plumbing Inspector finds the
work to be in violation of the provisions of this ordinance, he will order the
contractor to correct the deficiencies. If the deficiencies are not completed
within 15 days, the contractor will be required to obtain a new permit as
provided above. In addition the contractor will be subject to the penal
provisions of this ordinance.
(i) Inspector May Enter Building. The Plumbing Inspector is vested with full authority to
enter any building or premises in discharge of his duties for the purpose of enforcing the
provisions of this ordinance.
(j) Inspections Required.
1. No water sprinkling systems will be put to use until inspected and approved by
the Plumbing Inspector.
2. When any water sprinkling system is found to have been installed without a
proper permit or not in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, the
plumbing inspector is authorized to shut off, disconnect or by any other means
prevent utilization of the water sprinkling system until a proper permit has
been secured and the system has been re-inspected and approved.
WATER CONDITIONING INSTALLATIONS
Subd. 26. Water Conditioning Installations.
(a) Permits Required. No person, firm or corporation will install water conditioning
equipment other than the exchange of portable equipment in the City of St. Cloud until
application has been approved by the plumbing inspector and a permit has been issued.
(b) Permits to be Issued to Licensed Contractors Only. Permits will be issued only to
persons licensed as Water Conditioning Contractors by the Minnesota State Board of
Health or as Master Plumbers by the City of St. Cloud. Any person not so licensed may
obtain a permit to perform water conditioning work which complies with the provisions
of the minimum standards prescribed by the State Board of Health on the premises or
that part of the premises owned and actually occupied by him as his residence.
(c) Purpose of Permit. Permits will be issued only for the purpose of connecting water
softening and water filtering equipment to private residence water distribution systems,
provided that the connections so made comply with the minimum standards prescribed
by the Minnesota State Board of Health.
(d) Permit Fees. The Plumbing Inspector will, before issuing any permit for the installation
of any water conditioning equipment, require payment by the applicant for the permit of
a fee in the amount set forth in Section 551 of the Code of Ordinances.
(e) Issuance of Permit. Upon approval of the application and the receipt of the permit fee,
the Plumbing Inspector will issue a permit stating the name of the owner, agent or
occupant of the premises where the work is to be done, the address and/or legal
description of the premises, the description of the work to be done, and the name of the
permit holder.
(f) Display Permit. It will be the duty of the permit holder to keep the permit on the
premises where the work is being performed until the work is completed, tested, and
accepted by the Plumbing Inspector, and to display the permit in a conspicuous place
on the premises.
(g) Term of Permit.
1. All work performed under a permit will be completed within 90 days from the date
of issuance of the permit or within such period of time as the Plumbing Inspector
may specify on the permit. Upon the expiration of said period, if the installer has
not already requested final inspection, the Plumbing Inspector will inspect the work.
If the Plumbing Inspector finds that the work is not complete, the Plumbing
Inspector will notify the installer to complete the work within five days or the
Plumbing Inspector may extend the completion period if the cause of delay is
beyond the control of the permit holder. Thereafter, no additional work will be
done unless and until a new permit has been applied for and issued. In the event
any changes have been made to this ordinance prior to the issuance of the second
permit, the permit will be deemed to be issued subject to compliance with the
ordinances as revised.
2. If, upon expiration of the term of the permit, the Plumbing Inspector finds the work
to be in violation of the provisions of this ordinance, he/she will order the installer
to correct the deficiencies. If the deficiencies are not completed within five days,
the installer will be required to obtain a new permit as provided above. In addition,
the installer will be subject to the penal provisions of this ordinance.
(h) Inspector May Enter Building. The Plumbing Inspector is vested with full authority to
enter any building or premises in discharge of his duties for the purpose of enforcing the
provisions of this ordinance.
(i) Inspections Required.
3. No water conditioning system will be put to use until inspected and approved by
the Plumbing Inspector.
4. When any water conditioning system is found to have been installed without a
proper permit or not in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, the
plumbing inspector is authorized to shut off, disconnect or by any other means
prevent utilization of the water conditioning system until a proper permit has
been secured and the system has been reinspected and approved.
MECHANICAL CODE
Section 300:20. Mechanical Code.
Subd. 1. Definitions.
(a) "Inspector" means those persons designated by the City Council to inspect equipment
and devices and to enforce compliance with the provisions of the State of Minnesota
Mechanical Code.
(b) "Installer" means any person doing any work on any equipment subject to the provisions
of this ordinance.
(c) “Master Installer" means the installer who holds a permit for a particular job.
(d) "Mechanical Contractor" means a person engaged in the business of doing any work on
equipment subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
(e) "Code" means the Minnesota Mechanical Code, including the appendices and
amendments as adopted by the reference by the City of St. Cloud in Section 300:00,
Building Code.
(f) "Engage in Business" means entering into agreement or contract with another person for
the furnishing or installation of materials, apparatus or equipment or for the doing of
any work on any equipment, such as are subject to the provisions of the code.
(g) "Equipment" means any equipment as defined in the code.
(h) “Process Piping" is piping or tubing which conveys gas, liquid, or fluidized solids and
which is used directly in research, laboratory, or production processes.
(i) “Board” is the Board of Examiners for Mechanical Installers as described in provisions
of this ordinance.
Subd. 2. Contractor's License Required. No person will engage in or carry on the business of
erecting, installing, constructing, altering, repairing, relocating, adding to the use of or servicing
equipment as defined in the Minnesota Mechanical Code in the City of St. Cloud, without first
having secured a Contractor's License from the City authorizing them to do so. All work to be
performed and all material to be installed under a permit issued by this ordinance will meet the
requirements as set forth in the Code. The licensed mechanical contractor shall hold sole
responsibility for all work performed by themselves or their employees on mechanical systems they
work on.
Subd. 3. Board of Examiners for Heating Installers.
(a) The "Board of Examiners for Heating Installers" will consist of six members. One
member of the Board will be the Heating Inspector who will serve ex-officio, without
voting privileges. The other members of the Board will be appointed by the Mayor
subject to the approval of the City Council. In the appointment of the Board, care will
be taken that at least two of the members of the Board will have technical knowledge,
training and experience in each of the following fields: Master A Installations, so as to
qualify them to pass on the fitness of applicants for Certificates of Competency. No
action of the Board will be held invalid because there were not such members when the
action was taken. No more than one member of the Board will be an officer or an
employee of a public utility company. The member of the Board will not be subject to
the Civil Service Rules of the City.
(b) All successor members will be appointed to fill a vacancy will serve the remaining term
of the member irrespective of when the vacancy occurred.
(c) All members will serve without compensation, but will be paid for all expenses
reasonably incurred by them in the performance of their duties as members of the Board
The Heating Inspector will serve as its Secretary and will keep records of all
applications, examinations, the issuance of Certificates of Competency and renewals,
minutes of the proceedings and other activities of the Board.
(d) Regular meetings of the Board will be held on the second Tuesday in June and the
Fourth Tuesday in January.
(e) The Mayor has the discretion to remove any member of the Board
Subd. 4. Special meetings of the Board will be called by the Secretary upon the written request of
the Chairperson or the Secretary, or upon the written request of any two or more members of the
Board. The written request will state the time, place and purpose of such meeting. The time so
stated will be such that the Secretary can give, by mail, the respective members at least three days
notice of such date.
Subd. 5. Duties of the Board. Such Board will pass upon the qualifications and fitness of all
applicants for Certificates of Competency, both Master and Journeyman. The Board will subject
each applicant for a Certificate of Competency to such examination, both written and oral, and to
such investigation as it deems necessary to determine whether the applicant possesses sufficient
knowledge, skill, training, and experience as to enable the applicant to properly carry on the
business, or to work at the trade of installing, altering, repairing or servicing combustion equipment.
In the performance of this duty, the Board may engage such legal and technical assistance as it
deems necessary.
Subd. 6. Certificates of Competency for Installers.
(a) For the purpose of controlling the quality and workmanship in the installation,
alteration, repair and servicing of equipment within the limits of the City, and by so
doing to safeguard life, limb, and property, there are created "Certificates of
Competency" for Installers.
(b) No person will do any work on any mechanical system unless that person holds the
appropriate Certificate of Competency with the exception of those individuals who are
Apprentices or Learners and who comply with Subd. 6(e). Nor will any mechanical
permits be issued except to Master Class A or B Installers as defined.
(c) The Class A Master Mechanical Installer's Certificate of Competency shows that the
holder has been examined by the "Board of Examiners for Mechanical Installers" and
found qualified to properly plan, lay out, and supervise the installation, alteration, repair
and servicing of any mechanical equipment within the City, without limits as to B.T.U.
input capacity of the system.
The Class B Master Gas Installer's Certificate of Competency shows that the holder has
been examined by the "Board of Examiners for Heating Installers" and found qualified
to properly plan, lay out, and supervise the installation, alteration, repair and servicing
of any gas combustion equipment within the City which has an input capacity of less
than 1,000,000 B.T.U. per hour which uses one type of fuel only.
(d) The Class B Master Mechanical Installer's Certificate of Competency shows that the
holder has been examined by the "Board of Examiners for Mechanical Installers" and
found qualified to properly plan, lay out, and supervise the installation, alteration, repair,
and servicing of oil combustion equipment within the City which has an input capacity
of less than 1,000,000 B.T.U. per hour.
(e) The Journeyman Mechanical Installer's Certificate of Competency will be required of
any person, not holding any of the above described Installer's Certificates of
Competency, desiring to work at the occupation of installing, altering, repairing and
servicing of mechanical equipment of all types. The Journeyman Gas Installer's
Certificate of Competency shows that the holder has been examined by the "Board of
Examiners for Mechanical Installers" and found qualified to install, alter, repair or
service mechanical combustion equipment within the City, provided work is done under
the supervision and control of a person holding the appropriate type of Master
Mechanical Installer's Certificate.
(f) Master Appliance Certificate of Competency shows that the holder has been
examined by the "Board of Examiners for Mechanical Installers" and found qualified
to properly plan, lay out, and supervise the installation, alteration, repair and servicing
of gas burning domestic appliances, and with the exception of fuel gas or fuel oil
incinerators, appliances used for space heating purposes and ventilation equipment,
and that the holder has been found qualified to install not more than five feet of fuel
piping in connection with any installation.
(g) Apprentices or learners. Any person not holding a Certificate of Competency that is
working at the occupation of installing, altering, repairing or servicing of mechanical
equipment of any type, and must: (1) register with the City of St. Cloud as an
apprentice, and (2) work under the direct and immediate supervision of a Master or
Journeyman Certificate of Competency holder. For purposes of this section direct and
immediate supervision is meant to be on the work site at all times while work is being
completed.
Subd. 7. Exemptions for Certain Plumbing Work. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
ordinance, a person who has in his possession a current plumbing license, either Master or
Journeyman, may do piping without benefit of any other Certificate of Competency as set forth in
the subdivisions which follow:
(a) In the case of gas installations from the meter or source of supply to the shutoff valve of
the gas burning equipment, also the gas regulator vent if such is required.In the case of
oil burner installation from the fuel tank to the fuel burning equipment, also the fuel
tank vent and filler pipe.
(b) Provided further, that such work be done under the direction of a Class A or B Installer
who holds a permit for such installation.
Subd. 8. Method of Obtaining Original Certificates of Competency.
(a) Each person desiring a Certificate of Competency, whether for Master or Journeyman,
will file a formal application with the Secretary of the Board of Examiners for Heating
Installers, in which application the applicant will provide the following information:
1. Name, address, and date of birth;
2. Time and place of schools attended and studies completed;
3. A chronological record of his employment together with complete information
as to duties and type of work performed;
4. The classification of Certificate of Competency for which he is applying.
(b) Application for Certificates; Examination Fees. Each person desiring a Certificate of
Competency such as provided, whether for Master or Journeyman, will file with such
Examining Board at least 60 days prior to the date of examination, in order to allow the
Board ample time to investigate the applicant's record and qualifications, an application
for the certificate and notice of intent to take the required examination, and upon so
filing such notice of intent to take examination, will pay to the City an examination fee
in the amount duly established by the City Council from time to time. Each
examination fee will be in addition to the fee to be paid by an applicant for a Certificate
of Competency in the original issuance or the annual renewal thereof, in the amount
duly established by the Council from time to time.
Subd. 9. Renewal of License Applications. The Board will annually review all Certificates of
Competency and all Mechanical Contractor license applications. The Board may recommend to the
City Council that a Certificate of Competency or Mechanical Contractor License be suspended or
revoked if two or more violations of the following sections of this ordinance have occurred
within the previous licensing year:
(a) Subd. 2. Contractor's License Required.
(b) Subd. 14. Uses of Licenses.
(c) Subd. 16. Permits Required.
Subd. 10. Application Procedures and Requirements for Obtaining a Mechanical Contractor
License.(a) Any individual person, corporation, partnership or association of individual persons
desiring to engage in business as herein defined, within the City, will first obtain a
Mechanical Contractor's License for doing so from the City.
(b) A person desiring to obtain a Mechanical Contractor's License will make written
application to the City for such license, stating the name of the individual person,
corporation, partnership, or association of individual persons desiring such license and
his, its or their place of business.
(c) Upon the presentation to the City of the foregoing application and upon approval, the
City will issue to the applicant the Mechanical Contractor's License to the applicant:
(d) Filing with him the bond and insurance policy, or showing proof of State bond and
insurance as described in Subd. 11; and
(e) Paying the required license fee.
(f) When a Mechanical Contractor qualifies to receive a permit only by reason of a
member, an officer, or an employee holding a Certificate of Competency, such member,
officer, or employee will be in active charge of work of installation, with authority and
power to direct such work, all to the end that when the job is completed, it will comply
with such technical requirements as required by this ordinance. In all cases, however,
the person holding the permit for the particular job will be primarily responsible for
such compliance.
(g) Place of Business. Every licensee must maintain a place of business in the State of
Minnesota. A place of business will consist of a bona fide location where the business
for which the license is issued is transacted. A change of location of the place of
business shall be recorded with the City within 10 days.
Subd. 11. Bond and Insurance Requirements
(a) Every Mechanical Contractor, before being granted a license, will file with the Building
Official a bond, executed by the contractor, as principal, and by a corporate surety duly
authorized under the laws of the State of Minnesota to execute the bond, as surety, in the
sum of $25,000. The bond shall be payable to and for the benefit of the City and the
consumer and will be subject to approval by the City Attorney. The bond shall serve the
following purposes:
1. To keep and save the City from, and indemnified against, all claims of every kind
which may arise, directly or indirectly, out of the performance of any work done
by the commercial contractor within the City, including all costs and expenses
incurred in defending any actions that may be brought against it;
2. To ensure compliance with all ordinances, rules or regulations of the City
applicable to the work;
3. To ensure performance of the work in conformity with all the plans and
specifications, if any;
4. And to ensure the repair all damage to any public property caused in the
performance the work.
(b) In addition to the surety bond, the applicant for a license will furnish a general policy of
liability and property damage insurance, including products and completed operation
coverage which will have minimum limits of coverage of $100,000 for injuries to or
death of one person and not less than $500,000 on account of one accident and not less
than $250,000 for property damage. The bond will be effective for the period of January 1
through December 31 of the license year. The bonds and insurance will further provide
that no cancellation of said bond for any cause may be made by the principal or the surety
or insurance company, for any cause, without first giving ten days notice to the City, in
writing, of the intention to cancel. The notice will be addressed to the Building Official
by registered mail, or will be delivered to the Building Official personally.
(c) A license issued under this ordinance will become invalid at any time when the person to
whom it was issued ceases to maintain, in full force and effect, the bond and insurance
required by this ordinance.
Subd. 12. License Fees. The annual license fee will be in an amount duly established by the City
Council.
Subd. 13. Expiration of Licenses. Any such license will expire on the 31st of December of the year
for which it was issued.
Subd. 14. Uses of Licenses.
(a) Any ductwork on sheet metal work to be used in any heating or ventilating system or
any steam or hot water radiation to be installed with any system which requires a permit
under this ordinance will be done only by a licensed contractor and/or persons in his
employ and provided with proper supervision.
(b) A Ventilation Contractor's License may be issued to do the radiation, ductwork or duct
cleaning for any mechanical system within the City to a person not holding a Certificate
of Competency, provided such license is approved by the Board of Examiners for
Mechanical Installers. This license will not allow the holder to set clean, service or
install gas piping for fuel burning equipment or install flues, chimneys or other fuel
venting equipment.
(c) No person licensed under this ordinance, who holds a permit for a particular job, will
sublet or assign any work contemplated to any person not licensed under this ordinance
and any attempted sublet to any person not licensed under this ordinance will be void.
(d) A Ventilation Contractor desiring a permit for an installation which has fuel burning
equipment must have a Class A or B Certificate of Competency or will sublet the
combustion equipment to a Class A or B license holder. In this event, the Class A or B
license holder will be responsible for the fuel burning equipment only. The Ventilation
Contractor will be responsible for the balance of the system.
Subd. 15. Homeowner Exempted. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code of ordinances
to the contrary, and where permitted by state law, permits may be issued to make repairs, additions,
replacements, and alterations of any steam or hot water boiler, warm air furnace, air conditioning or
ventilating equipment of any single-family dwelling structure used exclusively for living purposes
or any accessory buildings provided there is no change in the required capacity of the systems
involved and that all related work will be performed only by the person who is the bona fide owner
and occupant of the dwelling as his residence or a member of said owner-occupant's immediate
family as herein defined. "Immediate family" includes only a parent, children by birth or adoption,
brother or sister, brother or sister- in- law or said children's spouse. The intent of this section is
that any work done by a non- occupant is not done for financial remuneration.
Subd. 16. Permits Required. It will be unlawful for any person to install, alter or repair any heating
or ventilating system such as is subject to regulation by the provisions of this ordinance, without
first making written application to, and obtaining, a permit from the City Health and Inspection
Department, or to fail or neglect to comply with the provisions of this ordinance and of the permit
so issued. However, no permit will be required for the following:
(a) In the case of service work or repairs to any heating and ventilating system where such
service work or repairs will involve minor work and no change in type of fuel to be
used, or in the existing combustion or temperature control equipment type and which
will not add to the capacity or B.T.U. input of such systems. A replacement heat
exchanger is considered minor work.
(b) Unless otherwise exempted, separate building, electrical and plumbing permits will be
required for the above-exempted items.
(c) Exemption from the permit requirement of this code will not be deemed to grant
authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of
this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Exemption from a permit
requirement specifically does not exempt any person from proper license requirements.
Subd. 17. License Required to Obtain Permit. No permit for the construction, installation,
alteration or repair of any heating system will be issued by the City Health and Inspection
Department to any person, unless they are duly licensed by the City as required by this ordinance to
do such work.
Subd. 18. Time of Permit. Each installation will be completed within 90 days unless otherwise
stated from the date of permit. Upon the expiration of said period, if the installer has not already
requested final inspection, the heating inspector will inspect the installation. If the Inspector finds
(a) that the work of installation is not completed, the Inspector will notify the permit holder to
complete the work within 15 days, or (b) if he finds that it does not comply with the provisions of
this ordinance, the Inspector will notify him in writing, specifying in what respects it does not
comply, and direct him to correct the deficiencies within 15 days. Upon the expiration of the 15
days, the Inspector will again inspect the installation, and if the Inspector finds that the work is not
completed or that it does not comply with the ordinance, the installer will not be eligible to receive
a permit for any new installation until the work is completed in conformity with the ordinance and
for a period of six months thereafter; provided, however, that the inspector may, for just cause
shown, extend the period of 15 days for such further period as he deems proper, but the cause must
be for something beyond the control of the permit holder.
Subd. 19. Permit Will be Obtained Before Work is Started. Should any person begin work of any
kind on any heating or ventilating systems for which a permit is required by this ordinance without
first having secured the necessary permit, the person will upon subsequently securing the permit for
such work, be required to pay double the fees herein provided for such permit, and additionally will
be subject to all penal provisions of this ordinance.
Subd. 20. Application of Ordinance. When any installation is made in such a manner that the same
could be used for heating or ventilating a building, it will be deemed that the installation is to be
used for such purposes, and a permit will be required and inspections made as provided.
Subd. 21. Report Test Results and Request Inspection. When all work to be performed under a
permit is completed and all tests required by the code have been made by the installer, the results of
such tests will be submitted to the Inspector for his review, and an inspection of the work will be
requested by the person holding the permit.
Subd. 22. Inspector May Enter Building. The inspector or authorized assistant, if any, are
authorized to enter any building or upon any premises in the City in the performance of their duties,
to inspect or re-inspect existing or new heating or ventilating systems. The inspector is further
authorized to order and compel, so far as it may be necessary, elimination or prevention of unsafe
conditions, the repair, alteration or reconstruction of a heating or ventilating system in order to
conform with the provisions of this ordinance and to prohibit the use of any material which is in
violation of the provisions of this ordinance.
Subd. 23. Test Data Required.
(a) When the installer has submitted the test results as required by the code and has
submitted a request for inspection, then the Inspector will make an inspection as may be
reasonably necessary to determine whether the materials furnished and the work
performed in installing, altering, repairing, or servicing of any heating or ventilating
system conforms with the requirements of this ordinance.
(b) The Inspector is authorized to make such tests as may be necessary to determine the
validity of the test results reported by the installer. If the test results reported by the
installer are verified by the Inspector, the cost of such testing will be borne by the City.
However, if substantial variation is found between the test results reported by the
Master Installer and the test results determined by the Inspector, and the results found
by the Inspector do not fall within the tolerance required by this ordinance, the Master
Installer will pay to the City the cost of performing the tests, plus an additional 100%,
and the Master Installer will take such action as may be necessary to correct the heating
or ventilating system so as to meet the requirements of this ordinance.
Subd. 24. Inspection Procedures. It will be the duty of the Inspector or an authorized assistant, to
enforce or cause to be enforced the provisions of this ordinance and to supervise all necessary tests
and make all necessary inspections of heating or ventilating systems that have been installed,
altered or repaired. The Inspector will require such tests to be made as may be necessary to
determine the tightness of any portion of a gas system and will require the immediate removal of
any material of construction found to have been installed as to conceal or cover up, before its
inspection and approval by the inspector, any newly installed portion of any gas system.
Subd. 25. Work Not To Be Covered Up. In any new building, and in any new addition to an older
building, immediately upon the completion of those portions of the heating and ventilating system
which are to be concealed or covered up, the person holding the permit will notify the inspector that
those portions of the installation are ready for inspection.
Subd. 26. Permit Fee Required. The Inspector will, before issuing any permit for the construction,
installation, alteration, or repair of any heating system, require payment by the applicant for the
permit of a fee in the amount set forth in Section 534 of the Code of Ordinances.
Subd. 27. Duplicate Permit Exempted or Required.
(a) No additional permits are required for replacement only of domestic-type gas storage
hot water heaters for which a permit has been issued under Section 335:00 et seq
adopting the State Plumbing Code.
(b) For the installation of combustion equipment in connection with pollution control
equipment, the permit and fee will be set forth as in Section 560:10, "Gas Oil or Dual
Fuel Burners".
Subd. 28. Suspension and Revocation of Licenses. Upon notice to the City Council that a person
holding a Mechanical Contractor's License has been convicted of a violation of this ordinance, the
City Council may suspend the Mechanical Contractor's License for a period of time and order that
no new license be granted for a period not to exceed six months from the date that the action is
ordered by the Council. The City Council will give ten days written notice by regular mail
addressed to their place of business or by serving the notice personally upon them in the manner
prescribed by statute for serving summons.
History: Ord. 2375 9-24-07.
ELECTRICAL CODE
300:30. Electrical Code
Subd. 1. Definitions.
(a) “Inspector” means the Chief Building Official, or his/her assign authorized as an
Electrical Inspector by the St. Cloud City Council.
(b) “Electrical Code” means the State Electrical Code, including the appendices and
amendments as adopted by reference by the City of St. Cloud in Section 300, the
Building Code.
Subd. 2. Enforcement.
(a) Supervision of Electrical Systems. The Chief Electrical Inspector and Electrical
Inspectors shall regulate, determine and have general supervision over all electrical
apparatus and machinery, and the placing and attaching of electric light and power,
telephone, telegraph and all other electric wires of any other nature, now or hereafter
placed, in or in any manner directly attached to, any building, or any tent or other
temporary structure. They shall inspect and re-inspect all such electrical apparatus,
machinery and wires so as to prevent fires, accidents or injuries to persons or property,
and shall cause all electrical apparatus, machinery and wires to be so constructed,
placed, supported and guarded as not to cause fire or accident or endanger life or
property. Any and all electrical apparatus, machinery and wires now existing or to be
constructed and placed shall be subject to such supervision and inspection.
(b) Electrical Inspectors. The Electrical Inspectors, are vested with full authority to enter
any building or premises and any manhole or subway at any reasonable time in the
discharge of their duties, and to enforce compliance with the terms of this ordinance.
(c) Inspections Required. No electrical work or wiring for which a permit is issued or
required shall be considered complete until inspected and approved by the Inspector.
(d) Improper Installation. And when such electrical work or wiring is found to have been
installed without a proper permit and not in accordance with the provisions of the
Electrical Code, the Electrical Inspectors are authorized and empowered to remove the
fuses, cut the wires, or otherwise render the system inoperative until such permit has
been secured, and the work or wiring is re-inspected and approved.
(e) Requests for Inspection. The electrical contractor shall file a request for inspection
with the Electrical Inspectors before any electrical work performed is covered up or
concealed and shall file a request for final approval within 48 hours after the
completion of any electrical work done by said electrical contractor.
(f) Installations to be Complete. The electric work or wiring performed under permits
must be complete before it is approved or any certificate of acceptance is granted.
(g) Remodeling, Occupancy, Moved Building, Etc. When a building is altered by
substantial remodeling, a change in the type of occupancy, an increase in the number of
dwelling units, by moving the building, or by extensive fire repairs, the wiring system
shall also be remodeled to conform to the provisions of the Electrical Code. Permanent
service connection will not be released to the local utility on moved buildings until
wiring is completed and passes inspection, unless a separate temporary permit is filed,
in which case temporary service will be released after inspection of service installation.
(h) Temporary Permits. The Electrical Inspectors may, in their discretion, issue a
temporary permit for a period not to exceed 90 days for the temporary use of electric
wiring that is not in full compliance with the requirements of the Electrical Code. The
temporary permit shall state the methods and materials to be employed and the date
upon which the temporary permit shall expire and the wiring be removed.
(i) Unauthorized Concealment. No person having charge of the construction, alteration or
repair of any building, nor any other person, shall cover or conceal or cause to be so
covered or concealed, any wiring for which a permit has been issued or required, before
wiring has been inspected and approved, without having officially notified the
Electrical Inspectors at least 48 hours previously.
(j) Disturbing Wiring, Etc. No unauthorized person shall cut, disturb, alter, change or
cause to be cut, disturbed, altered or changed any electric wire cutout, fuse, apparatus,
machinery or material in such a manner as to render it inoperative, defective or not in
accordance with the provisions of the Electrical Code.
(k) Condemning Defective Wires, Etc. Any and all generators, motors, wires or other
machinery apparatus, or material used for electrical purposes which may at any time
become so defective as to be likely, in the opinion of the Inspector, to cause potential
fires or accidents, or to endanger persons or property, shall be condemned by the
Inspector. When, in the Inspector’s opinion, it is deemed necessary, in order to prevent
such accident or danger, the Inspector is authorized to disconnect such wires or
apparatus or to cause the same to be disconnected, from service. Upon condemnation,
the person or persons owning or using the same shall immediately cause the same to be
put in safe condition.
(l) Reconnecting Condemned Wiring, Etc. In case of person or persons owning or using
any electrical wires, generators, motors, or any other electrical apparatus or material of
any other nature, which have been condemned by the Inspector shall fail to have the
same put in safe condition and accepted by the Inspector within 48 hours after the same
have been condemned, or within such other reasonable length of time as shall be
prescribed by the Inspector, then the Inspector shall remove the fuses, cut the wires, or
by other means completely disconnect or cause to be disconnected, the condemned
wires, apparatus, or material from the source of electrical energy.
(m)Acceptance Before Reconnection. When any electric wires, generators, motors, or
electrical apparatus or material of any nature have been in any manner disconnected or
rendered inoperative by the Inspector, as set forth in the foregoing sections, no person
shall in any manner reconnect the same or cause the same to be reconnected to any
source of electrical energy, or use the same as a part of any electrical system, until they
have been put in safe condition and a certificate of acceptance has been issued by the
Inspector.
Subd. 3. Permits and Licenses.
(a) Permits Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to install, alter or repair any
electrical installation, work or wiring without first making written application to, and
obtaining a permit from the City, or to fail or neglect to comply with the provisions of
this ordinance and of the permit so issued. Provided, however, that no permit shall be
required for the following:
1. Installations operated and maintained by public utilities in the exercise of their
utility function.
2. Minor repair work which shall mean the adjustment or repair and replacement
of worn or defective parts of electrical fixtures, switches and receptacles,
provided that such minor repairs are made in compliance with accepted
standards of construction for safety to life and property, and do not require
replacement of wiring to them.
Unless otherwise exempted, separate building, plumbing and mechanical
permits will be required for the above-exempted items.
Exemption from the permit requirement of this code shall not be deemed to
grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the
provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
(b) Exceptions for Public Utilities. No permit shall be required for installations operated
and maintained by public utilities in the exercise of their utility function or for minor
repair work which shall mean the adjustment or repair and replacement of worn or
defective parts of electrical fixtures, switches and receptacles, provided that such minor
repairs are made in compliance with accepted standards of construction for safety to
life and property, and do not require replacement of wiring to them.
(c) Life of Permit. If authorized work under a permit is not commenced within 12 months
after the issuance of the permit, or if after partial completion the work is discontinued
for a period of one year, the permit shall become void and no work shall be done until a
new permit is secured.
(d) Permits to Licensee Only. No permit for the erection, construction, alteration or change
of any electrical work or wiring shall be issued to any person unless he has a valid and
subsisting bonded Class "A" Master and Contractor Electrician's License issued by the
Minnesota State Board of Electricity. No holder of any such license shall allow his
name to be used by any other party for the purpose of doing work or obtaining a permit.
(e) Homeowner Exempted. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code of
ordinances to the contrary, and where permitted by state law, permits may be issued to
make repairs, additions, replacements, and alterations of the electrical system of any
single-family dwelling structure used exclusively for living purposes or any accessory
buildings, provided there is no change in the required capacity of the systems involved
and that all such work shall be performed only by the person who is the bona fide
owner and occupant of such dwelling as his residence.
Subd. 4. Electrical Permit Fees.
(a) Fee Procedure. The fees established as set forth in Section 550 of this Code, shall be
collected by the Chief Electrical Inspector before the issuance of any permits for which
fees are required. Every person, at the time of applying for any permit for which a fee
is required , except in the case of street permits, shall make a statement in writing, upon
blanks and forms to be furnished by the Inspector for that purpose. The statement shall
contain a declaration that the facts and representations therein made are true and
correct, which statement shall be subscribed to by the person or persons, or officer or
agent of the corporation applying for said permit. The statement form shall contain
information as to the location, nature, extent and cost of the proposed structure, work
installation or other purpose, as well as all other information which the Chief Electrical
Inspector shall have the right to require under the St. Cloud Electrical Code. Upon
such statement being filed as above required and upon the payment to the Inspector by
the application for said permit of the required fee for said permit, said Inspector shall
issue such permit.
(b) Minimum Fee. Minimum fee for each separate inspection of an installation,
replacement, alteration, or repair limited to one inspection only shall be set forth in
Section 550 of this Code.
(c) Investigation Fees. Should any person begin work of any kind for which a permit is
required by the St. Cloud Code, without having secured the necessary permit, either
previous to or during the day of commencement of such work, or on the next
succeeding business day where such work is commenced on a Saturday or on a Sunday
or a holiday, when subsequently securing such permit, the investigation fee shall be
equal to the amount of the fee required in Section 540 of this Code. The payment of
the investigation fee does not exempt any person from compliance with all other
provisions of the ordinance or statutes nor from any penalty prescribed by law.
(d) False Statements. No person shall make any false statements in connection with the
securing of any permit from the Inspector.
(e) Services. Services, change of services, temporary services, additions, alterations, or
repairs of either primary or secondary services shall be computed separately.
Section 300:41 - International Property Maintenance Code
(Shown for reference and information only and not included as a part of this Ordinance Code.
This Section is available online and at the Health and Inspections Department.)
FIRE CODE
300:50. Fire Code. The 2007 Minnesota State Fire Code, which adopts the 2006 International
Fire Code including Appendix Chapters B,C,D,H, and I, is adopted as the Fire Code for the City
of St. Cloud, Minnesota, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous
to life and property from fire or explosion, except such portions as are modified or amended by this
ordinance:
APPENDIX B – FIRE-FLOW REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS.
APPENDIX C – FIRE HYDRANT LOCATIONS AND DISTRIBUTION.
APPENDIX D – FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS.
APPENDIX H – OPEN FLAME AND FUEL STORAGE PROHIBITED ON
BALCONIES OR PATIOS
APPENDIX I - SPECIAL LOCKING ARRANGEMENTS FOR GROUP I
OCCUPANCIES
Subd. 1. Enforcement.
(a) The Chief of the Fire Department serving the City of St. Cloud, Minnesota, or
authorized representative will enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
(b) The Chief of the Fire Department may detail members of the Fire Department as
inspectors as necessary. The Chief of the Fire Department may recommend the
employment of technical inspectors, who, when such authorization is made, will be
selected in accordance with the applicable employment policies of the City of St.
Cloud.
Subd. 2. Definitions.
(a) “Jurisdiction” means the City of St. Cloud.
Subd. 3. Open Burning. An operational permit is required for the kindling or maintaining of an
open fire or fire on any public street, alley, road, or other public or private ground. The permit
holder must adhere to all permit instructions and stipulations.
Subd. 4. Prohibited open burning. Open burning that will be offensive or objectionable due to
smoke or odor emissions when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires
hazardous will be prohibited. The Fire Chief or his designee is authorized to order the
extinguishment by the permit holder or the fire department of open burning when it creates or
adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation. Open burning of debris piles, leaves, yard waste
and burning in barrels is prohibited.
Exception: Permitted burning within areas zoned Agricultural.
Subd. 5. Open-flame Cooking Devices. Charcoal burners and other open-flame cooking devices
will not be operated on combustible balconies or within 15 feet of combustible construction.
Exception: One and two family dwellings.
Subd. 6. Liquefied-petroleum-gas-fueled cooking devices. LP gas burners will not be located on
combustible balconies or within 15 feet of combustible construction.
Exception: One and two family dwellings.
Subd. 7. Recreational Fires and Portable Outdoor Fireplaces.
A. General.
A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize to be kindled or maintained any
recreational fire unless conducted and approved in accordance with paragraphs B
through E, as follows. A recreational fire is a fire set for cooking, warming or
ceremonial purposes, which is not more than three feet in diameter by two feet
high, and has had the ground five feet from the base of the fire cleared of all
combustible material.
B. Permit required.
1. Requirement. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official prior
to kindling a recreational fire. The application for a permit must be made
and filed by the property owner on a form furnished by the City for such
purpose. Only the owner of the property upon which the fire is to be
kindled may submit an application. If the owner does not occupy the
property for which a permit is sought, the permit application shall be
submitted with a property owner’s authorization form as furnished by the
City. The application must set forth the following information:
a. Name of property owner and the property address.
b. Telephone number for the property owner.
c. Names and valid contact information for non-property owners
designated by the owner to have permission to kindle a recreational
fire under the permit.
d. Verification the owner and any designee is 18 years of age or older.
2. Annual permit fee amount as determined in the St. Cloud fee schedule
found in Ordinance 525, Section 525:10.
3. Permit Expiration. Permits are valid from January 1st through midnight of
December 31st of the year issued.
4. The property owner shall remain responsible for all recreational fire permit
violations, whether present on the property or absent at the time of the
violation.
5. A permit shall not be issued to an apartment or business until a
preliminary inspection of the property is completed.
6. Permitted recreational fires are allowed only between noon and midnight.
7. Only the burning of clean, natural and unpainted wood is allowed under
the permit. The burning of leaves, paper, yard waste or garbage is strictly
prohibited.
C. Recreational Fire Locations.
1. A recreational fire shall be contained within a non-combustible ring or pit
at least 25 feet from any buildings, structures and property lines. Conditions,
such as overhanging trees, which could cause a fire to spread within 25 feet
(7620 mm) of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition.
2. A recreational fire shall be contained within an approved manufactured
fireplace at least 15 feet from any buildings, structures and property lines.
Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 15 feet (7620 mm) of a
structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition.
a. An approved manufactured fireplace is a fireplace sold with spark arrestors, and
covers or chimneys which minimize airborne burning embers.
3. This provision does not apply to barbecue grills, cooking or hard piped
compressed gas installations installed under a mechanical permit that use no
solid fuels.
4. The recreational fire burning permit issued pursuant to this ordinance does
not allow for a recreational fire on a street, sidewalk or other public right-ofway.
D. Attendance.
Recreational fires shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. A
minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with a minimum 4-A rating
or other approved on-site fire-extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water
barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for immediate utilization.
An unattended recreational fire is a violation of this ordinance.
E. Seasonal Fire Conditions or Air Quality Concerns
The Fire Code Official may suspend or restrict a permit due to seasonal fire
conditions or air quality concerns, including excessive smoke drifting onto
adjoining properties which adversely affect the quiet enjoyment of the adjoining
property.
Notification will be sent through the following media outlets: e-mail addresses
provided on the permit application; twitter; facebook; St. Cloud City’s website;
St. Cloud Times’ website; and the St. Cloud City’s cable television channel.
F. Penalty Provision.
Any person violating this ordinance will be subject to a warning for the first
violation with the exception of those ordinance sections that follow.
(a) Exception. No warning is required for violations of Section 300:50, Subd.
7B recreational burning permit; Section 300:50, Subd. 7C recreational fire
burning location; and Section 300:50, Subd. 7D recreational fire burning
attendance.
(b) Subsequent violations. A person violating this Section for a second and
subsequent time will be subject to an administrative penalty in accordance
with the administrative fine schedule and / or subject to criminal
prosecution.
(c) A violation of this ordinance may result in the revocation of the
recreational burning permit by the Fire Code Official.
Subd. 8. Stop Work Order. Any person who will continue any work after having been served
with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, will be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Subd. 9. Amendments to the 2007 Minnesota State Fire Code and 2006 International Fire Code.
(a) Section 314.9, 2007 Minnesota State Fire Code. Solid Fuel Burning Appliances in
Exhibit Halls and Assembly Occupancies. Use of solid fuel burning appliances for
display purposes will not be allowed in assembly occupancies other than cooking fuel
as described in NFPA 101, 2000 Edition, Section 12.7.1.4. Solid fuel burning
appliances may be defined as any appliance that uses decomposition of cellulose
material, hydrocarbon solids, animal fat or proteins to produce heat or leaves an ash
residue. This would include plant products or materials, wood, coal, mesquite, etc.
(b) Section 314.10, 2007 Minnesota State Fire Code. Compressed flammable gas
cylinders and flammable or combustible liquids used for display purposes will be
prohibited within exhibit hall and assembly occupancies.
(c) Amendments to Chapter 5 – Fire Service Features
1. Section 503.4, 2007 Minnesota State Fire Code – Obstruction of fire apparatus
access roads is amended to add the following language:
Parking of motor vehicles in, or otherwise obstructing fire lanes will be
prohibited at all times. Any vehicle so parked is the act of a registered
owner as well as the act of the person actually parking the vehicle. For purposes
of this section, registered owner is defined to include motor vehicle leasing
agencies and corporate owners. It will be a defense to any violation if the
registered owner shows that on the date of the offense, title has been transferred to
another.
(d) Section 506.1 2007 Minnesota State Fire Code, Key Boxes Where Required is
amended to add the following language: An approved DAMA® brand emergency
key-box shall be permanently installed adjacent to the main entrance of the structure
at eye level unless approved otherwise by the fire official.
(e) Section 907.9.1 2007 Minnesota State Fire Code Zoning indicator panel is amended
to add the following language: The fire alarm panel or annunciator shall be located at
the main entrance of the structure unless approved otherwise by the fire official.
(f) Section 907.15 2007 Minnesota State Fire Code Monitoring is amended to add the
following language: Fire alarms requiring electronic monitoring shall be monitored by
an alarm service listed for Central Station Service unless approved otherwise by the
fire official.
(g) Section 912.2 Minnesota State Fire Code Fire Department Connection Locations is
amended to add the following language: The fire department connection shall be
located adjacent to the main entrance of the structure unless approved otherwise by
the fire official.
(h) Section 3308.2.2 Minnesota State Fire Code Proximate audience displays is
amended to add the following language: Indoor displays of fireworks, pyrotechnics
and open flame performances to proximate audiences is prohibited within the city.
(i) Section 3406.2.4.4 Minnesota State Fire Code Locations where above ground tanks
are prohibited is amended to add the following language: new installations of fuel
and storage tanks for flammable and combustible liquids and gases are prohibited
from building rooftops and floors other than the lowest floor of buildings, unless
approved otherwise by the fire official.
(j) Amendments to Appendix D, 2007 Minnesota State Fire Code – Fire Apparatus
Access Roads
1. Figure D103.1 – DEAD-END FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROAD
TURNAROUND is amended as follows:
A Cul-de-sac will have the minimum diameter of 90 feet with posted no parking
lane or will have a minimum diameter of 120 feet where parking is provided.
History: Ord. 2370 9-13-07; Ord. 2638 12-7-15; Ord. 2681 9-26-16
International Property Maintenance Code of St. Cloud
Section 300:41
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 101
GENERAL
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the
International Property Maintenance Code of St. Cloud,
hereinafter referred to as “this code.”
101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all
existing residential and nonresidential structures and all
existing premises and constitute minimum requirements
and standards for premises, structures, equipment and
facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation,
protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire
and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance;
the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the
occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for
administration, enforcement and penalties.
101.3 Intent. This code shall be construed to secure its
expressed intent, which is to ensure public health, safety
and welfare in so far as they are affected by the continued
occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises.
Existing structures and premises that do not comply with
these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a
minimum level of health and safety as required herein.
101.4 Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence,
clause or phrase of this code is, for any reason, held to be
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions of this code.
SECTION 102
APPLICABILITY
102.1 General. The provisions of this code shall apply to
all matters affecting or relating to structures and premises,
as set forth in Section 101. Where, in a specific case,
different sections of this code specify different
requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
102.2 Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and
safeguards required by this code or a previous regulation
or code under which the structure or premises was
constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in
good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall
cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is
required under this section to be removed from or shut off
from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except
for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs
or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this
code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or
abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and
devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise
specified herein, the owner or the owner’s designated
agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of
buildings, structures and premises.
102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or
alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall
be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions
of the Minnesota State Building Code and the Minnesota
State Fire Code. Nothing in this code shall be construed to
cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the City of St.
Cloud Zoning Ordinance.
102.4 Existing remedies. The provisions in this code
shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing
remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies
relating to the removal or demolition of any structure
which is dangerous, unsafe and insanitary.
102.5 Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work,
alterations or installations which are caused directly or
indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be
executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and
installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s
installation instructions.
102.6 Historic buildings. The provisions of this code
shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures
designated as historic buildings when such buildings or
structures are judged by the code official to be safe and in
the public interest of health, safety and welfare.
102.7 Referenced codes and standards. All references
to other codes and standards within this code shall mean
the applicable provisions of the City of St. Cloud Code of
Ordinances, the City of St. Cloud Zoning Ordinance, the
Minnesota State Fire Code or the Minnesota State
Building Code, whichever is the most restrictive
requirement permitted under statute.
102.8 Requirements not covered by code. Requirements
necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of
an existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the
public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically
covered by this code, shall be determined by the code
official.
SECTION 103
DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY
MAINTENANCE INSPECTION
103.1 deleted
103.2 deleted
103.3 deleted
103.4 Liability.The code official, officer or employee
charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting
for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable
personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal
liability for any damage accruing to persons or property
as a result of an act required or permitted in the discharge
of official duties.
Any suit instituted against any officer or employee
because of an act performed by that officer or employee
in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions
of this code shall be defended by the legal representative
of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the
proceedings. The code official or any subordinate shall
not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that
is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code;
and any officer of the department of property maintenance
inspection, acting in good faith and without malice, shall
be free from liability for acts performed under any of its
provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the
performance of official duties in connection therewith.
103.5 deleted
SECTION 104
DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CODE
OFFICIAL
104.1 General. The code official shall enforce the
provisions of this code.
104.2 Rule-making authority. The code official shall
have authority as necessary in the interest of public
health, safety and general welfare, to adopt and
promulgate rules and procedures; to interpret and
implement the provisions of this code; to secure the intent
thereof; and to designate requirements applicable because
of local climatic or other conditions. Such rules shall not
have the effect of waiving structural or fire performance
requirements specifically provided for in this code, or of
violating accepted engineering methods involving public
safety.
104.3 Inspections. The code official shall make all of the
required inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection
by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such
inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a
responsible officer of such approved agency or by the
responsible individual. The code official is authorized to
engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report
upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the
approval of the appointing authority.
104.4 Right of entry. The code official is authorized to
enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to
inspect subject to constitutional restrictions on
unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or
not obtained, the code official is authorized to pursue
recourse as provided by law.
104.5 Identification. The code official shall carry proper
identification when inspecting structures or premises in
the performance of duties under this code.
104.6 Notices and orders. The code official shall issue
all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with
this code.
104.7 Department records. The code official shall keep
official records of all business and activities of the
department specified in the provisions of this code. Such
records shall be retained in the official records as long as
the building or structure to which such records relate
remains in existence, unless otherwise provided for by
other regulations.
SECTION 105
APPROVAL
105.1 Modifications. Whenever there are practical
difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this
code, the code official shall have the authority to grant
modifications for individual cases, provided the code
official shall first find that special individual reason
makes the strict letter of this code impractical and the
modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose
of this code and that such modification does not lessen
health, life and fire safety requirements. The details of
action granting modifications shall be recorded and
entered in the department files.
105.2 Alternative materials, methods and equipment.
The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the
installation of any material or to prohibit any method of
construction not specifically prescribed by this code,
provided that any such alternative has been approved. An
alternative material or method of construction shall be
approved where the code official finds that the proposed
design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the
provisions of this code, and that the material, method or
work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the
equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality,
strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and
safety.
105.3 Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient
evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code,
or evidence that a material or method does not conform to
the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate
claims for alternative materials or methods, the code
official shall have the authority to require tests to be made
as evidence of compliance at no expense to the
jurisdiction.
105.3.1 Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified
in this code or by other recognized test standards. In the
absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the
code official shall be permitted to approve appropriate
testing procedures performed by an approved agency.
105.3.2 Test reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by
the code official for the period required for retention of
public records.
105.4 Material and equipment reuse. Materials,
equipment and devices shall not be reused unless such
elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned
and tested when necessary, placed in good and proper
working condition and approved.
SECTION 106
VIOLATIONS
106.1 Unlawful acts.It shall be unlawful for a person,
firm or corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of
any of the provisions of this code.
106.2 Notice of violation. The code official shall serve a
notice of violation or order in accordance with Section
107.
106.3 Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to
comply with a notice of violation or order served in
accordance with Section 107 shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor or civil infraction as determined by the local
municipality, and the violation shall be deemed a strict
liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied
with, the code official shall institute the appropriate
proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
such violation, or to require the removal or termination of
the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the
provisions of this code or of the order or direction made
pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having
jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the
real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be
a lien upon such real estate.
106.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with
any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted
within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day
that a violation continues after due notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense.
106.5 Abatement of violation. The imposition of the
penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the legal
officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate
action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or
utilization of the building, structure or premises.
SECTION 107
NOTICES AND ORDERS
107.1 Notice to person responsible. Whenever the code
official determines that there has been a violation of this
code or has grounds to believe that a violation has
occurred, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed
in Sections 107.2 and 107.3 to the person responsible for
the violation as specified in this code. Notices for
condemnation procedures shall also comply with Section
108.3.
107.2 Form. Such notice prescribed in Section 107.1
shall be in accordance with all of the following:
1. Be in writing.
2. Include a description of the real estate sufficient
for identification.
3. Include a statement of the violation or violations
and why the notice is being issued.
4. Include a correction order allowing a reasonable
time to make the repairs and improvements required to
bring the dwelling unit or structure into compliance with
the provisions of this code.
5. Inform the property owner of the right to appeal.
6. Include a statement of the right to file a lien in
accordance with Section 106.3.
107.3 Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to
be properly served if a copy thereof is:
1. Delivered personally;
2. Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to
the last known address; or
3. If the notice is returned showing that the letter
was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by
such notice.
107.4 Penalties. Penalties for noncompliance with orders
and notices shall be as set forth in Section 106.4.
deleted
SECTION 108
UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT
108.1 General. When a structure or equipment is found
by the code official to be unsafe, or when a structure is
found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful,
such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the
provisions of this code.
108.1.1 Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one
that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property
or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by
not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn
occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure
contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed,
dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty
construction or unstable foundation, that partial or
complete collapse is possible.
108.1.2 Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes
any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway,
electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or
other equipment on the premises or within the structure
which is in such disrepair or condition that such
equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of
the public or occupants of the premises or structure.
108.1.3 Structure unfit for human occupancy. A
structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the code
official finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or,
because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair
or lacks maintenance, is insanitary, vermin or rat infested,
contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation,
illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other
essential equipment required by this code, or because the
location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the
occupants of the structure or to the public.
108.1.4 Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one
found in whole or in part to be erected, altered or
occupied contrary to law.
108.2 Closing of vacant structures. If the structure is
vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and
is not in danger of structural collapse, the code official is
authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the
premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be
an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close
up the premises within the time specified in the order, the
code official shall cause the premises to be closed and
secured through any available public agency or by
contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost
thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which
the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real
estate and may be collected by any other legal resource.
108.3 Notice. Whenever the code official has condemned
a structure or equipment under the provisions of this
section, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or
about the structure affected by such notice and served on
the owner or the person or persons responsible for the
structure or equipment in accordance with Section 107.3.
If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall also be placed
on the condemned equipment. The notice shall be in the
form prescribed in Section 107.2.
108.4 Placarding. Upon failure of the owner or person
responsible to comply with the notice provisions within
the time given, the code official shall post on the premises
or on defective equipment a condemnation placard and a
statement of the penalties provided for occupying the
premises, operating the equipment or removing the
placard.
108.4.1 Placard removal. The code official shall remove
the condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects
upon which the condemnation and placarding action were
based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or
removes a condemnation placard without the approval of
the code official shall be subject to the penalties provided
by this code.
108.5 Prohibited occupancy. Any occupied structure
condemned and placarded by the code official shall be
vacated as ordered by the code official. Any person who
shall occupy a placarded premises or shall operate
placarded equipment, and any owner or any person
responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy
a placarded premises or operate placarded equipment
shall be liable for the penalties provided by this code.
SECTION 109
EMERGENCY MEASURES
109.1 Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the
code official, there is imminent danger of failure or
collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or
when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and
life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or
when there is actual or potential danger to the building
occupants or those in the proximity of any structure
because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the
presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation
of defective or dangerous equipment, the code official is
hereby authorized and empowered to order and require
the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The code
official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such
structure a notice reading as follows: “This Structure Is
Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the
Code Official.” It shall be unlawful for any person to
enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the
structure, making the required repairs, removing the
hazardous condition or of demolishing the same.
109.2 Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other
provisions of this code, whenever, in the opinion of the
code official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe
condition, the code official shall order the necessary work
to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to
render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the
legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and
shall cause such other action to be taken as the code
official deems necessary to meet such emergency.
109.3 deleted
109.4 Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this
section, the code official shall employ the necessary labor
and materials to perform the required work as
expeditiously as possible.
109.5 Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the
performance of emergency work shall be paid by the
jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall
institute appropriate action against the owner of the
premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for
the recovery of such costs.
109.6 Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency
measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any
affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to
the appeals board, be afforded a hearing as described in
this code.
SECTION 110
DEMOLITION
110.1 General. The code official may order the owner of
any premises upon which is located any structure, which
in the code official’s judgment is so old, dilapidated or
has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe,
insanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or
occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the
structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or if
such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to
repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and
remove at the owner’s option; or where there has been a
cessation of normal construction of any structure for a
period of more than two years, to demolish and remove
such structure.
110.2 Notices and orders. All notices and orders shall
comply with Section 107.
110.3 Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails
to comply with a demolition order within the time
prescribed, the code official shall cause the structure to be
demolished and removed, either through an available
public agency or by contract or arrangement with private
persons, and the cost of such demolition and removal
shall be charged against the real estate upon which the
structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real
estate.
110.4 Salvage materials. When any structure has been
ordered demolished and removed, the governing body or
other designated officer under said contract or
arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the
salvage and valuable materials at the highest price
obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting
the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be
promptly remitted with a report of such sale or
transaction, including the items of expense and the
amounts deducted, for the person who is entitled thereto,
subject to any order of a court. If such a surplus does not
remain to be turned over, the report shall so state.
SECTION 111
MEANS OF APPEAL
111.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly
affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or
order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal
to the board of appeals or through the provisions of
Section 1150 of the City of St. Cloud Code of Ordinances,
whichever is applicable, provided that a written
application for appeal is filed within 25 days after the day
the decision, notice or order was served. An application
for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of
this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have
been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do
not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are
adequately satisfied by other means.
When someone files an appeal, does that automatically
stop the enforcement of the order? For example, a yard
full of junk, or an appeal that has no merit. Legal?
111.2 Membership of board. The membership of the
board of appeals, known as the Health and Housing
Advisory and Appeals Committee, shall be as set forth in
Section 205 of the City of St. Cloud Code of Ordinances.
111.2.1 deleted
111.2.2 deleted
111.2.3 deleted
111.2.4 deleted
111.2.5 deleted
111.3 deleted
111.4 Open hearing. All hearings before the board shall
be open to the public.
111.4.1 Procedure. The board shall adopt and make
available to the public through the secretary procedures
under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures
shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence,
but shall mandate that only relevant information be
received.
111.5 Postponed hearing. When the full board is not
present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the
appellant’s representative shall have the right to request a
postponement of the hearing.
111.6 Board decision. The board shall modify or reverse
the decision of the code official only by a concurring vote
of a majority of the total number of appointed board
members.
111.6.1 Records and copies. The decision of the board
shall be recorded. Copies shall be furnished to the
appellant and to the code official.
111.6.2 Administration. The code official shall take
immediate action in accordance with the decision of the
board.
111.7 Court review. Any person, whether or not a
previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply
to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct
errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the
manner and time required by law following the filing of
the decision in the office of the chief administrative
officer.
111.8 Stays of enforcement. Appeals of notice and
orders (other than Imminent Danger notices) shall stay the
enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is
heard by the appeals board.
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 201
GENERAL
201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the
following terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the
meanings shown in this chapter.
201.2 Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense
include the future; words stated in the masculine gender
include the feminine and neuter; the singular number
includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not
defined in this code and are defined in the City of St. Cloud
Code of Ordinances, City of St. Cloud Zoning Ordinance,
the Minnesota State Fire Code or the Minnesota State
Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed
to them as stated in those codes.
201.4 Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined
through the methods authorized by this section, such terms
shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context
implies.
201.5 Parts. Whenever the words “dwelling unit,”
“dwelling,” “premises,” “building,” “rooming house,”
“rooming unit” “housekeeping unit” or “story” are stated in
this code, they shall be construed as though they were
followed by the words “or any part thereof.”
SECTION 202
GENERAL DEFINITIONS
APPROVED. Approved by the code official.
BASEMENT. That portion of a building which is partly or
completely below grade.
BATHROOM. A room containing plumbing fixtures
including a bathtub or shower.
BEDROOM. Any room or space used or intended to be
used for sleeping purposes in either a dwelling or sleeping
unit.
CODE OFFICIAL. The official who is charged with the
administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly
authorized representative.
CONDEMN. To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
[B] DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete,
independent living facilities for one or more persons,
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating,
cooking and sanitation.
EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for
present or future use by a person or agency other than the
legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be
permitted to be for use under, on or above a said lot or lots.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the
premises and on adjoining property under the control of
owners or operators of such premises.
EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of
insects, rats or other pests by eliminating their harborage
places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that
serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping
or by any other approved pest elimination methods.
GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
GUARD. A building component or a system of building
components located at or near the open sides of elevated
walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall
from the walking surface to a lower level.
HABITABLE SPACE. Space in a structure for living,
sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms,
closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are
not considered habitable spaces.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. A room or group of rooms
forming a single habitable space equipped and intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which does
not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory and bathtub
or shower.
IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause
serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time.
INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to, a
structure or premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle which
cannot be driven upon the public streets for reason including
but not limited to being unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in
a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its
own power.
LABELED. Devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to
which has been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other
identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing
laboratory, inspection agency or other organization
concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic
inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and
by whose label the manufacturer attests to compliance with
applicable nationally recognized standards.
LET FOR OCCUPANCY OR LET. To permit, provide or
offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit, building, premise or structure by a person
who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant
to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or
pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract
for the sale of land.
OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or
portion thereof is utilized or occupied.
OCCUPANT. Any individual living or sleeping in a
building, or having possession of a space within a building.
OPENABLE AREA. That part of a window, skylight or
door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and
which opens directly to the outdoors.
OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control
of a structure or premises which is let or offered for
occupancy.
OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation
having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or
recorded in the official records of the state, county or
municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the
estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator
of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of
real property by a court.
PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any
other group acting as a unit.
PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or
public way, including any structures thereon.
PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land
essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which
is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated
to the public for public use.
ROOMING HOUSE. A building arranged or occupied for
lodging, with or wi thout meals, for compensation and not
occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling.
ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a
single habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for
sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes.
RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste
materials, except garbage; the term shall include the residue
from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible
materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other
similar materials.
[B] SLEEPING UNIT. A room or space in which people
sleep, which can also include permanent provisions for
living, eating and either sanitation or kitchen facilities, but
not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a
dwelling unit are not sleeping units.
STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the
prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove
criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that
the defendant either did an act which was prohibited, or
failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required
to do.
STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed or a
portion thereof.
TENANT. A person, corporation, partnership or group,
whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a
building or portion thereof as a unit.
TOILET ROOM. A room containing a water closet or
urinal but not a bathtub or shower.
VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of
supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing
such air from, any space.
WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g.,
generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and
without marring adjacent work.
YARD. An open space on the same lot with a structure.
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 301
GENERAL
301.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the
minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for
maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property.
301.2 Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall
maintain the structures and exterior property in compliance
with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in
this code. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or
permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a
sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with
the requirements of this chapter. Occupants of a dwelling
unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for
keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of
the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or
premises which they occupy and control.
301.3 Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures
and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a
clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein
so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the
public health or safety.
SECTION 302
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS
302.1 Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall
be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The
owner shall keep the exterior property in a clean and
sanitary condition.
302.2 Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded
and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent
the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any
structure located thereon.
Exception: Approved retention areas and reservoirs.
302.3 Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways,
stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be
kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from
hazardous conditions.
302.4 deleted
302.5 Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior
property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and
infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly
exterminated by approved processes which will not be
injurious to human health. After extermination, proper
precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and
prevent reinfestation.
302.6 Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or
blowers shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air,
grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes
directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private property
or that of another tenant.
302.7 Accessory structures. All accessory structures,
including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be
maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
302.8 Motor vehicles. Except as provided for in other
regulations, no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall
be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle
shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly,
disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled.
302.9 deleted
302.10 Rental Parking Areas. Provide adequate artificial
lighting of off-street residential parking areas on rental
properties when necessary to supplement lighting from
adjacent public rights of way or private property.
SECTION 303
SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS
303.1 Swimming pools. Swimming pools shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in good
repair.
303.2 Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and
spas, containing water more than 24 inches (610 mm) in
depth shall be completely surrounded as set forth in the City
of St. Cloud Zoning Ordinance. Gates and doors in such
barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the
self-latching device is less than 54 inches (1372 mm) above
the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be
located on the pool side of the gate. Self-closing and selflatching
gates shall be maintained such that the gate will
positively close and latch when released from an open
position of 6 inches (152 mm) from the gatepost. No
existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or
changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a
safety barrier.
Exception: Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that
complies with ASTM F 1346 shall be exempt from the
provisions of this section.
SECTION 304
EXTERIOR STRUCTURE
304.1 General. The exterior of a structure shall be
maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so
as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare.
304.2 Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including
but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices,
porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences shall be
maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other
than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the
elements and decay by painting or other protective covering
or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be
eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry
joints as well as those between the building envelope and
the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be
maintained weather resistant and water tight. All metal
surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit
such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or
corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust
and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from
exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by
oxidation are exempt from this requirement.
[F] 304.3 deleted
304.4 Structural members. All structural members shall be
maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of
safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads.
304.5 Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be
maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and
shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of
rodents and other pests.
304.6 Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from
holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials; and maintained
weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to
prevent deterioration.
304.7 Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be
sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof
drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or
deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure.
Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in
good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not
be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
304.8 Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses,
corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative
features shall be maintained in good repair with proper
anchorage and in a safe condition.
304.9 Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions
including, but not limited to canopies, marquees, signs,
metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts
shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored
so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all
exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from
the elements and against decay or rust by periodic
application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or
similar surface treatment.
304.10 Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every
exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all
appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained
structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage
and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
304.11 Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling
towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be
maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair.
All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected
from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic
application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or
similar surface treatment.
304.12 Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard
shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally
imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
304.13 Window, skylight and door frames. Every
window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound
condition, good repair and weather tight.
304.13.1 Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained
free from cracks and holes.
304.13.2 Openable windows. Every window, other than a
fixed window, shall be easily openable and capable of being
held in position by window hardware.
304.14 Insect screens. During the period from April 15 to
October 15, every door, window and other outside opening
required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation
areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be
included or utilized in food for human consumption are
processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, and all
openable windows in residential structures shall be supplied
with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16
mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door
used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in
good working condition.
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other
approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans,
are employed.
304.15 Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and
hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all
entrances to dwelling units and sleeping units shall tightly
secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors shall be in
accordance with Section 702.3.
304.16 Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway
shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain
and surface drainage water.
304.17 Guards for basement windows. Every basement
window that is openable shall be supplied with rodent
shields, storm windows or other approved protection against
the entry of rodents.
304.18 Building security. Doors, windows or hatchways
for dwelling units, room units or housekeeping units shall be
provided with devices designed to provide security for the
occupants and property within.
304.18.1 Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit,
rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or
let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock designed to be
readily openable from the side from which egress is to be
made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort
and shall have a lock throw of not less than 1 inch (25 mm).
Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to the
manufacturer’ s specifications and maintained in good
working order. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt
shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock.
304.18.2 Windows. Operable windows located in whole or
in part within 6 feet (1828 mm) above ground level or a
walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling
unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased
or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking device.
304.18.3 Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that
provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or
housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be
equipped with devices that secure the units from
unauthorized entry.
SECTION 305
INTERIOR STRUCTURE
305.1 General. The interior of a structure and equipment
therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally
sound and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that
part of the structure which they occupy or control in a clean
and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure
containing a rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a
dormitory, two or more dwelling units or two or more
nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and
sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure
and exterior property.
305.2 Structural members. All structural members shall be
maintained structurally sound, and be capable of supporting
the imposed loads.
305.3 Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including
windows and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and
sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded
paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or
loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface
conditions shall be corrected.
305.4 Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp,
landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall
be maintained in sound condition and good repair.
305.5 Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard
shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally
imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
305.6 Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit
reasonably well within its frame and shall be capable of
being opened and closed by being properly and securely
attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the
manufacturer of the attachment hardware.
SECTION 306
HANDRAILS AND GUARDRAILS
306.1 General. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs
having more than four risers shall have a handrail on one
side of the stair and every open portion of a stair, landing,
balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which
is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade
below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 34
inches high or more than 38 inches high measured vertically
above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of
the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less
than 34 inches high above the floor of the landing, balcony,
porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface.
Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by
the adopted building code.
SECTION 307
RUBBISH AND GARBAGE
307.1 Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior
property and premises, and the interior of every structure,
shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
307.2 Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure
shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner
by placing such rubbish in approved containers.
307.2.1 Rubbish storage facilities. The owner of every
occupied premises shall supply approved covered containers
for rubbish, and the owner of the premises shall be
responsible for the removal of rubbish.
307.2.2 Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment
not in operation shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored
on premises without first removing the doors.
307.3 Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure
shall dispose of garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by
placing such garbage in an approved garbage disposal
facility or approved garbage containers.
307.3.1 Deleted
307.3.2 Containers. The operator of every establishment
producing garbage shall provide, and at all times cause to be
utilized, approved leakproof containers provided with closefitting
covers for the storage of such materials until removed
from the premises for disposal.
SECTION 308
EXTERMINATION
308.1 Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from
insect and rodent infestation by the owner. All structures in
which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly
exterminated by approved processes that will not be
injurious to human health. After extermination, proper
precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation.
308.2 Owner. The owner of any structure shall be
responsible for extermination within the structure prior to
renting or leasing the structure.
308.3 deleted
308.4 Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure
containing two or more dwelling units, a multiple
occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure
shall be responsible for extermination in the public or shared
areas of the structure and exterior property.
308.5 deleted
SECTION 309
BOARDING STANDARDS
309.1 General. When boarding is used, windows and doors
shall be boarded in an approved manner to prevent entry by
unauthorized persons and shall be painted to correspond to
the color of the existing structure.
309.2 Materials. Boarding sheet material must be a
minimum of ½ inch thick exterior grade-finished plywood
or Medium Density Overlaid plywood (MDO). Panels must
be painted to match the building exterior or covered with a
reflective material such as plexi-glass to simulate windows.
309.2.1 Artistic board-up. With prior approval of the
compliance official, artistic options may be utilized to
secure a vacant building.
309.3 Installation. When boarding is used, it shall be of
trim fit.
309.4 Temporary securing. Untreated plywood or similar
structural panels may be used to secure windows, doors and
other openings for a maximum period of 15 days.
CHAPTER 4
LIGHT, VENTILATION AND
OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS
SECTION 401
GENERAL
401.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the
minimum conditions and standards for light, ventilation and
space for occupying a structure.
401.2 Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall
provide and maintain light, ventilation and space conditions
in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not
occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another person to
occupy, any premises that do not comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
401.3 Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural
light and ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or
mechanical ventilation complying with the International
Building Code shall be permitted.
SECTION 402
LIGHT
402.1 Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at
least one window of approved size facing directly to the
outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area for
every habitable space shall be 8 percent of the floor area of
such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure
face a window of any room and such obstructions are
located less than 3 feet (914 mm) from the window and
extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such
window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors
nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the
required minimum total window area for the room.
Exception: Where natural light for rooms or spaces without
exterior glazing areas is provided through an adjoining
room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall
be at least 8 percent of the floor area of the interior room or
space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The
exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area
being served.
402.2 Common halls and stairways. Every common hall
and stairway in residential occupancies, other than in oneand
two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with
at least a 60-watt standard incandescent light bulb for each
200 square feet (19 m2) of floor area or equivalent
illumination, provided that the spacing between lights shall
not be greater than 30 feet (9144 mm). In other than
residential occupancies, means of egress, including exterior
means of egress, stairways shall be illuminated at all times
the building space served by the means of egress is occupied
with a minimum of 1 footcandle (11 lux) at floors, landings
and treads.
402.3 Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided
with natural or artificial light sufficient to permit the
maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy
of the space and utilization of the appliances, equipment and
fixtures.
SECTION 403
VENTILATION
403.1 Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at
least one openable window. The total openable area of the
window in every room shall be equal to at least 45 percent
of the minimum glazed area required in Section 402.1.
Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to
the outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the
unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least
8 percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but
not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The ventilation
openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area
being ventilated.
403.2 Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Every bathroom and
toilet room shall comply with the ventilation requirements
for habitable spaces as required by Section 403.1, except
that a window shall not be required in such spaces equipped
with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a
mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet
room shall discharge to the outdoors and shall not be
recirculated.
403.3 Cooking facilities. Unless approved through the
certificate of occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in
any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or
appliance shall not be permitted to be present in the rooming
unit or dormitory unit.
Exceptions:
1. Where specifically approved in writing by the code
official.
2. Devices such as coffee pots and microwave ovens
shall not be considered cooking appliances.
403.4 Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating
or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a
local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove
the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted
to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space.
403.5 Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust
systems shall be independent of all other systems and shall
be exhausted in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions. Exhaust systems shall comply with the
provisions in the Minnesota State Building Code.
SECTION 404
OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS
404.1 Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping
units, rooming units and dormitory units shall be arranged to
provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining
spaces.
404.2 Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other
than a kitchen, shall not be less than 7 feet (2134 mm) in
any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway
of not less than 3 feet (914 mm) between counterfronts and
appliances or counterfronts and walls.
404.3 Minimum ceiling heights. Habitable spaces shall
have a clear ceiling height of not less than 7 feet 6 inches
(2286 mm). Hallways, corridors, bathrooms, toilet rooms,
kitchens, storage rooms, and laundry rooms shall be
permitted to have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet
(2134 mm).
Exceptions:
1. Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings
having a ceiling height of not less than 6 feet 8 inches (2033
mm) with not less than 6 feet 4 inches (1932 mm) of clear
height under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions.
2. If any room in a building has a sloping ceiling, the
prescribed ceiling height for the room is required in one-half
the area thereof. In calculating the floor area of such rooms,
only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling
height of 5 feet (1524 mm) or more shall be included.
404.4 Bedroom and living room requirements. Every
bedroom and living room shall comply with the
requirements of Sections 404.4.1 through 404.4.5.
404.4.1 Room area. Every living room shall contain at least
120 square feet (11.2 m2) and every bedroom shall contain
at least 70 square feet (6.5 m2).
404.4.2 Access from bedrooms. Bedrooms shall not
constitute the only means of access to other bedrooms or
habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of
egress from other habitable spaces.
Exception: Units that contain fewer than two bedrooms.
404.4.3 Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall
have access to at least one water closet and one lavatory
without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom
in a dwelling unit shall have access to at least one water
closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom
or an adjacent story.
404.4.4 Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable
spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes.
404.4.5 Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with
the applicable provisions of this code including, but not
limited to, the light, ventilation, room area, ceiling height
and room width requirements of this chapter; the plumbing
facilities and water-heating facilities requirements of
Chapter 5; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle
requirements of Chapter 6; and the smoke detector and
emergency escape requirements of Chapter 7.
404.5 Overcrowding. The number of persons occupying a
dwelling unit shall not create conditions that, in the opinion
of the code official, endanger the life, health, safety or
welfare of the occupants.
404.6 deleted
404.7 Food preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food
preparation purposes shall contain suitable space and
equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary
manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for
the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including
facilities for temporary storage.
CHAPTER 5
PLUMBING FACILITIES AND
FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 501
GENERAL
501.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the
minimum plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing
fixtures to be provided.
501.2 Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall
provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing
fixtures in compliance with these requirements. A person
shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another
person to occupy any structure or premises which does not
comply with the requirements of this chapter.
[P] SECTION 502
REQUIRED FACILITIES
502.1 Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its
own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen
sink which shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe working
condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room as
the water closet or located in close proximity to the door
leading directly into the room in which such water closet is
located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for
the required lavatory.
502.2 Rooming houses. At least one water closet, lavatory
and bathtub or shower shall be supplied for each four
rooming units.
502.3 Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and
baths are not provided, one water closet, one lavatory and
one bathtub or shower having access from a public hallway
shall be provided for each ten occupants.
502.4 Employees’ facilities. A minimum of one water
closet, one lavatory and one drinking facility shall be
available to employees.
502.4.1 Drinking facilities. Drinking facilities shall be a
drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler or
disposable cups next to a sink or water dispenser. Drinking
facilities shall not be located in toilet rooms or bathrooms.
[P] SECTION 503
TOILET ROOMS
503.1 Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide
privacy and shall not constitute the only passageway to a
hall or other space, or to the exterior. A door and interior
locking device shall be provided for all common or shared
bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling.
503.2 Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel
units, rooming units or dormitory units or housekeeping
units, shall have access by traversing not more than one
flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or
passageway.
503.3 deleted
503.4 Floor surface. In other than dwelling units, every
toilet room floor shall be maintained to be a smooth, hard,
nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be easily kept
in a clean and sanitary condition.
[P] SECTION 504
PLUMBING SYSTEMS AND FIXTURES
504.1 General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly
installed and maintained in working order, and shall be kept
free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of
performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures
are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a
safe, sanitary and functional condition.
504.2 Fixture clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have
adequate clearances for usage and cleaning.
504.3 Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a
plumbing system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the
occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service,
inadequate venting, cross connection, backsiphonage,
improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar
reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be
corrected to eliminate the hazard.
SECTION 505
WATER SYSTEM
505.1 General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower,
drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture
shall be properly connected to either a public water system
or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks,
lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be
supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in
accordance with the Minnesota Building Code.
[P] 505.2 Contamination. The water supply shall be
maintained free from contamination, and all water inlets for
plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim
of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets
and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached
and left in place, shall be protected by an approved
atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved
permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.
505.3 Supply. The water supply system shall be installed
and maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing
fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and
at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function
properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks.
505.4 Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities
shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of
providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every
required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility
at a temperature of not less than 110°F (43°C). A gasburning
water heater shall not be located in any bathroom,
toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept
closed. An approved combination temperature and pressurerelief
valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained on water heaters.
[P] SECTION 506
SANITARY DRAINAGE SYSTEM
506.1 General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly
connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved
private sewage disposal system.
506.2 Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and
sewer line shall function properly and be kept free from
obstructions, leaks and defects.
[P] SECTION 507
STORM DRAINAGE
507.1 General. Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards
and courts, and other open areas on the premises shall not be
discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
CHAPTER 6
MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL
REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 601
GENERAL
601.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the
minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment
to be provided.
601.2 Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall
provide and maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and
equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person
shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another
person to occupy any premises which does not comply with
the requirements of this chapter.
SECTION 602
HEATING FACILITIES
602.1 Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be
provided in structures as required by this section.
602.2 Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be
provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a
room temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and toilet rooms. Cooking appliances shall not be
used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of
this section.
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any
building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units
or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to
furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat
during the period from October 15 to April 15 to maintain a
temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable
rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms.
Exception: When the outdoor temperature is below the
winter outdoor design temperature for the locality,
maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be
required provided that the heating system is operating at its
full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature
for the locality shall be as indicated in the Minnesota State
Building Code.
602.4 deleted
602.5 Room temperature measurement. The required
room temperatures shall be measured 3 feet (914 mm) above
the floor near the center of the room and 2 feet (610 mm)
inward from the center of each exterior wall.
SECTION 603
MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT
603.1 Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances,
fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances
and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and
maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable
of performing the intended function.
603.2 Removal of combustion products. All fuel-burning
equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved
chimney or vent.
603.3 Clearances. All required clearances to combustible
materials shall be maintained.
603.4 Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning
equipment shall be maintained in effective operation.
603.5 Combustion air. A supply of air for complete
combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the space
containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided for
the fuel-burning equipment.
603.6 Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to
reduce fuel consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning
appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent
outlet or vent piping therefrom, shall not be installed unless
labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically
approved.
SECTION 604
ELECTRICAL FACILITIES
604.1 Facilities required. Every occupied building shall be
provided with an electrical system in compliance with the
requirements of this section and Section 605.
604.2 Service. The size and usage of appliances and
equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for
additional facilities in accordance with the Minnesota
Building Code.
604.3 Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the
electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the
occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service,
improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets,
improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or
for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects
to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
SECTION 605
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
605.1 Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and
appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a
safe and approved manner.
605.2 Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling
shall contain at least two separate and remote receptacle
outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one
grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault
circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one
receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have
ground fault circuit interrupter protection. All new and
replacement receptacles shall conform to the requirements
of the Minnesota State Building Code.
605.3 Luminaires. Every public hall, interior stairway,
toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room
and furnace room shall contain at least one electric
luminaire.
SECTION 606
ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS AND
DUMBWAITERS
606.1 General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall
be maintained in compliance with ASME A17.1. The most
current certification of inspection shall be on display at all
times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or
dumbwaiter, or the certificate shall be available for public
inspection in the office of the building operator. The
inspection and tests shall be performed at not less than the
periodical intervals listed in ASME A17.1, Appendix N,
except where otherwise specified by the authority having
jurisdiction.
606.2 Elevators. In buildings equipped with passenger
elevators, at least one elevator shall be maintained in
operation at all times when the building is occupied.
Exception: Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall
be permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service
for testing or servicing.
SECTION 607
DUCT SYSTEMS
607.1 General. Duct systems shall be maintained free of
obstructions and shall be capable of performing the required
function.
CHAPTER 7
FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 701
GENERAL
701.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the
minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to
structures and exterior premises, including fire safety
facilities and equipment to be provided.
701.2 Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall
provide and maintain such fire safety facilities and
equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person
shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another
person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
[F] SECTION 702
MEANS OF EGRESS
702.1 General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of
travel shall be provided from any point in a building or
structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply
with the Minnesota State Fire Code.
702.2 Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance
with the Minnesota State Fire Code shall be unobstructed.
702.3 Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be
readily openable from the side from which egress is to be
made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort,
except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted
by the Minnesota State Building Code.
702.4 Emergency escape openings. Required emergency
escape openings shall be maintained in accordance with the
code in effect at the time of construction, and the following.
Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be
operational from the inside of the room without the use of
keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are
permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue
openings provided the minimum net clear opening size
complies with the code that was in effect at the time of
construction and such devices shall be releasable or
removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or
force greater than that which is required for normal
operation of the escape and rescue opening.
[F] SECTION 703
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS
703.1 Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The required fireresistance
rating of fire-resistance-rated walls, fire stops,
shaft enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained.
703.2 Opening protectives. Required opening protectives
shall be maintained in an operative condition. All fire and
smokestop doors shall be maintained in operable condition.
Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or
obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.
[F] SECTION 704
FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
704.1 General. All systems, devices and equipment to
detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire
or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an
operable condition at all times in accordance with the
Minnesota State Fire Code.
704.2 Smoke alarms. Single or multiple-station smoke
alarms shall be installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3,
R-4 and in dwellings not regulated in Group R occupancies,
regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations:
1. On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate
sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms.
2. In each room used for sleeping purposes.
3. In each story within a dwelling unit, including
basements and cellars but not including crawl spaces and
uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split
levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent
levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall
suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower
level is less than one full story below the upper level.
Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in
other groups in accordance with the Minnesota State Fire
Code.
704.3 Power source. In Group R occupancies and in
dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, singlestation
smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from
the building wiring provided that such wiring is served from
a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery
backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries
are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a
disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent
protection.Battery backup is also required in all cases where
arc fault protection is used.
Exception: Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery
operated in buildings where no construction is taking place,
buildings that are not served from a commercial power
source and in existing areas of buildings undergoing
alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal of
interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure,
unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available
which could provide access for building wiring without the
removal of interior finishes.
The Minnesota State Fire Code also does not require battery
backup in sprinkled Group R2 occupancies.
704.4 Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm
is required to be installed within an individual dwelling unit
in Group R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated as
Group R occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be
interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one
alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit.
The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over
background noise levels with all intervening doors closed.
Exceptions:
1. Interconnection is not required in buildings which
are not undergoing alterations, repairs, or construction of
any kind.
2. Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to
be interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result
in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing
the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or
basement available which could provide access for
interconnection without the removal of interior finishes.
CHAPTER 8
REFERENCED STANDARDS
This chapter lists the standards that are referenced in various sections of this document. The standards are
listed herein by the promulgating agency of the standard, the standard identification, the effective date and
title and the section or sections of this document that reference the standard. The application of the
referenced standards shall be as specified in Section 102.7. Whenever this code refers to the International
Codes, such references shall be deemed to be the comparable, applicable code as adopted by the State of
Minnesota. Whenever this code shall refer to the International Zoning Code, such references shall be
deemed to be the City of St. Cloud Zoning Ordinance.
ASME American Society of Mechanical Engineers
Three Park Avenue
New York, NY 10016-5990
Standard
Reference
Referenced in code
Number Title section
number
A17.1—2000 Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators with A17.1a 2002 Addenda
606.1
ASTM ASTM International
100 Barr Harbor Drive
West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959
Standard
Reference
Referenced in code
Number Title section
number
F1346—91 (2003) Performance Specifications for Safety Covers and Labeling
Requirements for All Covers for Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs 303.2
ICC International Code Council
5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 600
Falls Church, VA 22041
Standard
Reference
Referenced in code
Number Title section
number
ICC EC—06 ICC Electrical Code® — Administrative Provisions
201.3, 604.2
IBC—06 International Building Code® 102.3, 201.3,
401.3, 702.3
IFC—06 International Fire Code® 201.3, 702.1, 702.2,
704.1, 704.2
IFGC—06 International Fuel Gas Code®
102.3
IMC—06 International Mechanical Code®
102.3, 201.3
IPC—06 International Plumbing Code® 201.3, 505.1,
602.2, 602.3
IZC—06 International Zoning Code®
102.3, 201.3
History: Ord. 2338 2-26-07; Ord. 2667 7-11-16;
Section 302 - Cable Television Regulatory Ordinance
(Shown for reference and information only
and not included as a part of this Ordinance Code)
Ordinance No. 1881, as amended, is published as a pamphlet and is available from the Office of
the City Clerk.
Section 310 – Vacant Building Registration
Section 310:00. Purpose and Policy. The purpose of Section 310 is to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare by establishing a program for the identification and regulation of vacant
buildings within the City. Section 310 also determines the responsibilities of owners of vacant
buildings and provides for administration, enforcement, and penalties associated with the same.
Section 310:05. Findings of the City Council. The City Council makes the following findings
regarding vacant buildings within the City of St. Cloud:
(a) Vacant buildings have become a major cause of and source of blight in residential
and non-residential neighborhoods, especially when the owner or responsible
party of the building fails to actively maintain and manage the building to ensure
they do not become a liability to neighborhoods and the community.
(b) Vacant buildings may attract transients, homeless people, trespassers, and
criminals, including drug abusers. Neglect of vacant buildings, as well as use of
vacant buildings by transients and criminals, creates a risk of fire, explosion, or
flooding for the vacant building and adjacent properties.
(c) Vacant properties are often used as dumping grounds for junk and debris and are
often overgrown with weeds and grass.
(d) Vacant buildings that are boarded up to prevent entry by transients and other
long-term vacancies discourage economic development and retard appreciation of
property values.
(e) There is a substantial cost to the City for monitoring vacant buildings regardless
of whether those buildings are boarded or not. This cost should not be borne by
the general taxpayers of the community but rather these costs should be borne by
those who are responsible for vacant buildings. It is a responsibility of property
ownership to prevent property from becoming a burden to the neighborhood and
community and a threat to the public health, safety, or welfare.
Section 310:10. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this subsection:
Subd. 1. Compliance Official. The Health Director or the Health Director's designee.
Subd. 2. Owner. Those shown to be the owner or owners on city or county records;
those identified as the owner or owners on a vacant building registration form, a holder
of an unrecorded contract for deed, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, a mortgagor or
vendor in possession, an assignee of rents, a receiver, an executor, a trustee, a lessee,
other person, firm or corporation in control of the freehold of the premises or lesser
estate therein. An owner also means any person, partnership, association, corporation, or
fiduciary having a legal or equitable title or any interest in the property or building. This
includes any partner, officer, or director of any partnership, corporation, association or
other legally-constituted business entity. All owners shall have joint and several
obligations for compliance with the provisions of this subsection.
Subd. 3. Premises. Any real property and any appurtenant building or structure.
Subd. 4. Responsible party. An owner, legal occupant or an entity or person acting as an
agent for an owner by agreement, which has authority over the real property or is
responsible for the property’s maintenance or management. Irrespective of any
arrangement to the contrary with any other party, each property owner shall always be a
responsible party for the purposes of this section. There may be more than one
responsible party for a particular property.
Subd. 5. Secure. Includes, but is not limited to, installing locks, repairing windows and
doors, boarding windows and doors, posting "no-trespassing" signs, installing exterior
lighting or motion-detecting lights, fencing the property, and installing a monitored alarm
or other security system consistent with Minn. Stat. § 463.251.
Subd. 6. Unoccupied building. A building which is not being used for a legal
occupancy.
Subd. 7. Unsecured building. A building or portion of a building that is open to entry
by unauthorized persons without the use of tools.
Subd. 8. Vacant building. A building or portion of a building that meets one or more of
the following conditions:
(a) Unoccupied and foreclosed upon; or
(b) Unoccupied and has delinquent fees or taxes owed to the city; or
(c) Unoccupied and the Police Department or Health & Inspections Department
has received at least two reports of trespassers on the premises, or of vandalism
or other illegal acts being committed on the premises; or
(d) Unoccupied and the premises has accumulated three or more property related
violations within a 12-month period; or
(e) Unoccupied and the premises has had multiple property related violations
existing for 30-days or more after issuance of a notice of violation; or
(f) Unoccupied and the premises is posted as unsafe to occupy.
Section 310:15. Vacant building registration.
Subd. 1. Application. The owner or responsible party must register a vacant building
with the City no later than 90 days after the building becomes vacant. Registration is
valid for a 12-month period following application. The registration must be submitted
on a form provided by the City and shall include the following information supplied by
the owner:
(a) The name, address, and telephone number of each owner or the owner's
representative;
(b) The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all known lien holders and
all other parties with any legal interest in the building;
(c) The name, address, telephone number, and email address of a local agent,
maintenance company, or person responsible for managing or maintaining the
property;
(d) The legal description, tax parcel identification number, and street address of
the premises on which the building is situated;
(e) A description of the premises, including the common address of the property;
(f) The date the building became vacant, the period of time the building is
expected to remain vacant, and a property plan and timetable for returning the
building to appropriate occupancy or use and for correcting code violations
and nuisances, or for demolition of the building;
(g) The status of water, sewer, natural gas and electric utilities;
(h) The owner must notify the compliance official of any changes in information
supplied as part of the vacant building registration within 15 days of any
change;
(i) If the property is abandoned or the owner or responsible party fails to
complete the registration process, the property will be administratively
registered as a vacant property.
(j) Evidence of liability insurance in an amount not less than $300,000 covering
damage to any person or any property caused by any physical condition of or
in the building.
Subd. 2. Fees. The owner must pay an annual registration fee. The registration fee will
be in an amount adopted by the City Council. The fee must be paid in full prior to the
issuance of any licenses.
Subd. 3. Assessment. The amount of unpaid fees will be recovered by assessing the
registration fee against the real property upon which the registration was required and
to certify the same for collection in the same manner as taxes and special assessments
are certified and a debt owed to the city by the responsible person or persons.
Subd. 4. Issuance of permit. Upon completion of the registration process and payment of
the fee, the City will issue a Vacant Building Permit to the owner. The owner must
securely post the permit on the vacant building on a side or rear entrance door that is not
generally visible from the public street. If no side or rear entrance door is available, the
permit must be securely posted on another available entrance door on that vacant
building.
Section 310:20. Property Plan.
Subd. 1. Plan Requirements. The property plan identified in section 310:15, Subd. 1(f)
must meet the following requirements:
(a) General provisions. The plan must comply with all applicable regulations and
meet the approval of the compliance official. It must contain a timetable
regarding use or demolition of the property. The plan must be submitted with
the vacant building application.
(b) Maintenance of building. The plan must identify the means and timetable for
addressing all maintenance and nuisance-related items identified in the
application. Any repairs, improvements or alterations to the property must
comply with the applicable building codes and City regulations.
(c) Plan changes. If the property plan or timetable for the vacant building is
revised in any way, the revisions must meet the approval of the compliance
official.
(d) Demolition required. If a building has remained vacant for a period of 365
consecutive days, and the compliance official has not approved an alternative
schedule in the property plan, the owner may be required to demolish the
building in accordance with City code and State Statutes 463.15-463.26.
Section 310:25. Change of ownership. A new owner(s) must register or re-register a vacant
building within 15 days of any transfer of an ownership interest in a vacant building. No fee will
be required of the new owner provided the registration fee has been paid. The new owner(s)
must comply with the approved property plan and timetable submitted by the previous owner.
Any proposed changes in the property plan must be submitted and approved by the compliance
official.
Section 310:30. Inspections. The compliance official may inspect any vacant building in the
City for the purpose of enforcing and assuring compliance with this chapter and other applicable
regulations. Upon the request of the compliance official, an owner or responsible party must
provide access to all interior portions of the building and the exterior of the property in order to
complete an inspection. If the owner or responsible party is not available to provide access to the
interior of the building, the City may use any legal means to gain entrance to the building for
inspection purposes. Prior to any re-occupancy, a vacant building must be inspected by the City
and found to be in compliance with the City Code and all other applicable regulations.
Section 310:35. Maintenance of registered vacant buildings. The owner must comply with and
address the following items in the property plan:
Subd. 1. Appearance. All vacant buildings must be so maintained and kept that they
appear to be occupied. Including but not limited to the following items:
(a) Maintenance and upkeep of landscaping, including trimming of trees,
shrubbery and other vegetation.
(b) Mowing of grass and weeds to be maintained below 10 inches in length.
(c) Free of all graffiti as defined in St. Cloud City Ordinance 1007.
(d) Free of nuisance conditions as defined in St. Cloud City Ordinance 1005.
Subd. 2. Securing. All vacant buildings must be secured from outside entry by
unauthorized persons or pests. Security must be by the normal building amenities such as
windows and doors having adequate strength to resist intrusion. All doors and windows
must remain locked. There shall be at least one (1) operable door into every building and
into each housing unit. Vacant buildings shall be boarded when the building can no
longer be secured against intrusion by the closing and locking of doors and windows in
accordance with this chapter. When boarding is used, it must comply with the standard
set in St. Cloud City Ordinance Section 300:41.
Subd. 3. Termination of utilities. The compliance official may require that water, sewer,
electricity, or gas service to the vacant building be terminated or disconnected. No utility
may be restored until consent is given by the compliance official. Utilities may be
discontinued at the request of the owner or responsible party as part of the approved
vacant building property plan. The compliance official may authorize immediate
termination of utilities at his or her discretion in emergency circumstances.
Subd. 4. Police and fire alarm systems. The owner must properly maintain all alarm
systems in any vacant building or portion thereof in operating condition; or, discontinue
their service unless such service is required by code.
Subd. 5. Loitering and/or criminal activities. Loitering or engaging in criminal activities
is not allowed in the vacant building or on the real property upon which the vacant
building is located. The owner or responsible party must not allow these activities and
take immediate actions to eliminate these conditions once notified by the City.
Subd. 6. Other codes. A plan for compliance with all applicable provisions of City code
and other applicable regulations.
Section 310:40. Abatement of violations. If, after service of a notice of violation under Section
310, the owner fails to abate the violation or make the necessary repairs, alterations or changes
as required by the order of the Health and Inspections Department, the same may be abated
under the direction of the Health Director.
Section 310:45. Expense of abatement. The expenses of any abatement pursuant to this section
are the responsibility of the property owner. The expense for abatement will include a $75.00
administrative fee in addition to the actual cost of abatement. Abatement actions that require the
presence of City Staff for more than 1-hour during the abatement or other extraordinary
coordination efforts will be additionally billed to the affected property owner at the rate of
$60.00 per hour. Abatement expenses may be levied against the property as a special assessment
and collected as in the case of other special assessments.
Subd. 1. Certification fee. A $50.00 charge will be added to all accounts certified to the
County Auditor’s Office for collection. This fee is to be considered separate and distinct
from any penalty or interest that may be charged by the County as a result of certification.
Section 310:50. No Occupancy or trespass. No person may trespass, occupy or reside in, on a
temporary or permanent basis, any vacant building without the owner's consent.
Section 310:55. Vandalism or removal of items prohibited. No person may vandalize or remove
items from a vacant building or the property upon which it is located, including, but not limited
to, appliances, fixtures, electrical wiring, copper, or other similar items without the owner's
consent.
Section 310:60. Appeal. Any person or responsible party aggrieved by a decision under
sections of this chapter may appeal to the City Council. The appeal must be in writing, must
specify the grounds for the appeal, and must be submitted to the compliance official within ten
(10) business days of the decision that is basis of the appeal.
Section 310:65. Penalties. Any person or responsible party who violates any provision of this
section is subject to a misdemeanor penalty and any administrative fees as provided under City
code and this section. Imposition of such penalties, however, is not deemed to impair other
remedies or civil penalties available to the City under this code or state law.
HISTORY: ORD 2661 6-16-2016; 2755 6-18-2018; 2798 12-2-2019
Section 360 – Wastewater Treatment System Use Code
Section 360:00. Purpose and Policy. This ordinance sets forth uniform requirements for discharges
into the St. Cloud Wastewater Treatment System (SCWWTS), a publicly owned system of sewer
interceptors, structures, and a Wastewater Treatment Facility (WWTF), for the conveyance,
treatment and disposal of wastewater from residential, commercial, institutional and industrial
users in the SCWWTS service area.
The objectives of this ordinance are:
a) To prevent the introduction of pollutants to the SCWWTS that will interfere with the
treatment process or the beneficial reuse or disposal of biosolids;
b) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the SCWWTS that will pass through the
system inadequately treated, into receiving waters, the atmosphere or otherwise be
incompatible with the system;
c) To comply with federal, state and local rules and regulations to maintain eligibility for
federal and state grants and loans for improvements or upgrades; and
d) To improve the ability to recycle and reclaim wastewater and biosolids from the system.
The ordinance provides for the regulation of discharges to the SCWWTS through; the issuance of
permits to specific users and through enforcement of the general requirements for all users,
authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, provides for penalty relief, requires user
reporting, and provides for the method of setting fees necessary to carry out the program established
herein.
The ordinance shall apply to the City of St. Cloud and to persons outside the City who are, by
contract or agreement with the City, users of the SCWWTS. Except as otherwise provided herein,
the Director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
Section 360:05. Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following
terms, as used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings designated.
Subd. 1. “Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, commonly
referred as the Clean Water Act, United States Code, Title 33, Sections 1251, et.seq.
Subd. 2. “Biosolids” means the nutrient rich organic, treated and tested residuals from the
wastewater treatment process that meet federal and state standards for beneficial reuse as a
fertilizers and as a soil conditioner.
Subd. 3. “Best Management Practices (BMP’s)” means schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to
implement the prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5. BMP’s also include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or
leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
Subd. 4. “Building Drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5
meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
Subd. 5. “Building Sewer” means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer
or other place of disposal. The building sewer is owned and maintained by the property
owner.
Subd. 6. “Carbonaceous Biochemical Oxygen Demand (CBOD5)” means the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter, in the presence of a
nitrification inhibitor, under standard laboratory procedures in five (5) days at 20 degrees
Centigrade expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter-mg/L).
Subd. 7. “Capital Costs” means all reasonable and necessary costs and expenses incurred by
the City in planning, designing, financing, rehabilitating, expanding and improving the St.
Cloud Wastewater Treatment System, including but not limited to costs and expenses for
obtaining necessary permits, licenses, approvals and grants for design and construction;
costs; fees for legal and consulting services; acquisition.
Subd. 8. “CFR” – The Code of Federal Regulations, which is the codification of general
and permanent rules of departments and agencies of the federal government.
Subd. 9. “Chemical Oxygen Demand” means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the
chemical oxidation of organic matter, expressed in milligrams per liter, as determined in
accordance with standard laboratory procedure as set out in the latest edition of Standard
Methods of the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
Subd. 10. “City” means the City of St. Cloud or the City Council of St. Cloud or the
Public Utility.
Subd. 11. “Cooling Water” means the water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or during which the only pollutant added to the
water is heat.
Subd. 12. “Control Authority” means the City of St. Cloud.
.
Subd. 13. “Contract User” means all users who have a written contract with the City to use
the St. Cloud Wastewater Treatment System.
Subd. 14. “Debt Service” means the principal and interest necessary to pay bonded
indebtedness.
Subd. 15. “Director” means the City of St. Cloud’s Public Utilities Director or authorized
agent.
Subd. 16. “Domestic User” means those establishments of which its related occupations, if
any, are usually considered as domestic and whose discharge consists solely of sanitary
wastes.
Subd. 17. “Domestic Waste” means wastes from residential users and from the sanitary
conveniences of multiple dwellings, commercial buildings, institutions and industrial
facilities. Domestic concentrations of cBOD5 shall be 218 milligrams per liter, and
domestic concentration of TSS shall be 240 milligrams per liter.
Subd. 18. “EPA” means the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Subd. 19. “Flow” means the quantity of wastewater expressed in gallons or cubic feet per
twenty-four (24) hours.
Subd. 20. “General Municipal Flow” means wastes from residential users and from the
sanitary conveniences of multiple dwellings, commercial buildings, institutions and
industrial facilities. General Municipal Flow based on the design of the wastewater
treatment facility is further defined as flows containing 5-day cBOD5 concentrations no
greater than 218 milligrams per liter (mg/L) and total suspended solids concentrations no
greater than 240 milligrams per liter (mg/L).
Subd. 21. “General Municipal User” means any user discharging wastewater other than
industrial users, municipalities and other contract users. This category of user includes as
sub-categories: Domestic Users, Commercial Users, Institutional Users, and Governmental
Users, which are not Contract Users.
Subd. 22. “General Pretreatment Regulations” means the general pretreatment regulations
for existing and new sources of pollution promulgated by the EPA under Section 307(b)
and (c) of the Act and found at 40 CFR Part 403.
Subd. 23. “Indirect Discharge” means the introduction of pollutants or wastes into the
SCWWTS from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 301 (b), (c), or (d) of
the Act.
Subd. 24. “Individual Sewage Treatment System Permits” means the permit required of a
person to construct a private wastewater disposal system.
Subd. 25. “Industrial Discharge Permit or Permit” means a permit issued by the City of St.
Cloud to an Industrial User authorizing them to use the SCWWTS as established herein.
Subd. 26. “Industrial Waste” means solid, liquid, or gaseous wastes, excluding domestic
waste, resulting from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial, institutional or business
activity, or from the development, recovery, or processing of a natural resource.
Subd. 27. “Industrial User” means any person who discharges industrial waste into the
SCWWTS.
Subd. 28. “Institutional User” means those establishments engaged in activities of a noneconomic
nature, frequently being the performance of services for the general public
(health, educational, social) and not classified as a governmental or commercial user in this
ordinance.
Subd. 29. “Interference” means a discharge which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the SCWWTS, its
treatment processes, operations or solids processes, use or disposal and, therefore, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the St. Cloud WWTF’s NPDES Permit or of
the prevention of biosolids use or disposal with statutory provisions and regulations or
permits.
Subd. 30. “Leachate” means wastewater resulting from the percolation of rain water and/or
internal liquids through the deposited material in a solid waste disposal facility.
Subd. 31. “Liquid Waste” means wastewater that is collected from residential units,
commercial/industrial buildings and institutions within the community.
Subd. 32. “Liquid Waste Hauler” means a user that transports waste for the purpose of
discharge to the SCWWTS.
Subd. 33. “Load” means quantities of wastewater characteristics such as cBOD5, TSS, or
other constituents as expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/L) or pounds per twenty-four
(24) hours (lbs/24 hrs.)
Subd. 34. “Local Limits” means discharge limitations established by the City to protect
the wastewater treatment process, infrastructure and the beneficial reuse of biosolids.
Subd. 35. “MPCA” means the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
Subd. 36. “Mercury Reduction Plan (MRP)” is a strategy to ensure the maximum allowable
mercury loading to the WWTF is not exceeded.
Subd. 37. “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit” means
any permit or requirements issued by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA)
pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq);
for the purpose of regulating the discharge of wastewater, industrial wastes, or other
wastes under the authority of Section 402 of the Act.
Subd 38. “Non-dispersible wipes” are any cleaning or personal use product that does not
breakdown quickly in the sanitary sewer system and can cause interference or accumulate
in the system.
Subd. 39. “Non-Domestic Nutrient Contributor (NDNC)” means any non-domestic (as
defined by Subd. 11 Domestic Waste) wastewater source which is determined to
contribute nutrients (as defined by Subd. 39 Nutrients).
Subd. 40. “Nutrients” means elements and substances which are required to support living
plants and organisms, including carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen and phosphorus.
Subd. 41. “Operation and Maintenance” means the associated costs of treatment personnel,
maintenance, energy, materials and chemicals to produce wastewater that will meet effluent
requirements and to keep equipment functioning at satisfactory efficiencies.
Subd. 42. “Ordinance” means the set of rules contained herein governing the discharge of
wastewater to the SCWWTS.
Subd. 43. “Permit holder” means an Industrial User authorized to discharge industrial
waste into the SCWWTS pursuant to an Industrial Discharge Permit.
Subd. 44. “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen
ions in moles per liter of a solution. It is a measure of the acidity or basicity of a waste.
Subd 45. “Pharmaceutical” means any prescription or over the counter medication.
Subd. 46. “Phosphorus Management Plan” means the strategy used by the City including
pretreatment and operational procedures to reduce the amount of phosphorus discharged
to the environment.
Subd. 47. “Phosphorus Reduction Strategy (PRS)” means the process of reporting,
evaluating and reducing the amount of phosphorus discharged to the SCWWTS.
Subd. 48. “Pretreatment” means the process of reducing the amount of pollutants,
eliminating pollutants, or altering the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less
harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants
into the SCWWTS. The reduction, elimination, or alteration may be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes, process changes or other means, except as prohibited by
this ordinance.
Subd. 49. “Pretreatment Standards” means standards for industrial groups (categories)
promulgated by the EPA pursuant to the Act which regulates the quality of effluent
discharge to the SCWWTS and must be met by all users subject to such standards.
Subd. 50. “Public Utility” means the unit of municipal government and its people
responsible for the SCWWTS and this ordinance.
Subd. 51. “Replacement” means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment
works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and
constructed.
Subd. 52. “Residuals Solids” means solids and associated liquids in municipal wastewater
which are encountered and concentrated by a municipal wastewater treatment facility.
Subd. 53. “Sanitary Sewer” means a sewer which carries wastewater, and to which storm,
surface and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
Subd. 54. “St. Cloud Area Wastewater Advisory Committee (SCAWAC)” is an advisory
group whose objectives are to share information, improve understanding of regional
wastewater issues and to improve the level of cooperation in the resolution of regional
wastewater issues.
Subd. 55. “St. Cloud Wastewater Treatment System (SCWWTS)” means POTW
(Publicly Owned Treatment Works)" which is the treatment system as defined by Section
212 of the Act, which is owned by the municipality (as defined by Section 502(4) of the
Act). This includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, and
reclamation of municipal solids residuals or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also
includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to the
WWTF. The term also means the municipality as defined in Section 502(4) of the Act,
which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a
treatment system.
Subd. 56. “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater, industrial waste or
other waste liquids.
Subd. 57. “Sewer System” means pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, force mains,
and all other devices and appurtenances, used for collecting or conducting wastewater.
Subd. 58. “Significant Industrial User (SIU)” means all Industrial Users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N and any other Industrial User that discharges an average of 25,000 gallons
per day or more of process wastewater to the WWTF (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling and boiler blow down wastewater), contributes a process waste stream which
makes up 5 percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of
the WWTF, or is designated as such by the control authority as defined in 40 CFR 403.12
(a) on the basis that the Industrial User has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the WWTF operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.8 (f)(6). If, upon finding that an Industrial User meeting the
criteria of this subdivision has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
WWTF’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the control
authority, as defined in 40 CFR 403.12 (a), may, at any time, on its own initiative or in
response to a petition received from an Industrial User or WWTF and in accordance with
40 CFR 403.8 (f)(6) determine that such Industrial User is not a Significant Industrial
User. The City may determine that an Industrial User subject to categorical Pretreatment
Standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter 1, subchapter N is a Non-Significant
Categorical Industrial User rather than a Significant Industrial User on a finding that the
Industrial User never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical
wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling water and boiler blowdown
wastewater, unless specifically included in the Pretreatment Standard) and the conditions
are met stated in 40 CFR 403.3 (v)(2) (i,ii,iii).
Subd. 59. “Slug” means any waste discharge which, in concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds four (4) times the average twenty-four (24)
hour concentration or flow during normal operation which may by itself or in
combination with other wastes cause an interference within the WWTF.
Subd. 60. “Stormwater” means any flow occurring during, following or resulting from any
form of natural precipitation.
Subd. 61. “Storm Sewer” (sometimes termed “storm drain”) means a sewer which carries
storm and surface water and drainage, but excludes wastewater and industrial wastes,
other than unpolluted cooling or process water.
Subd 62. “ Strength Charge” means a surcharge for any discharge above the domestic
concentrations of TSS and cBOD5.
Subd. 63. “Sump Pump” means a pump which removes storm or groundwater from a
sump well.
Subd. 64. “Total Suspended Solids (TSS)” means the total suspended matter that floats on
the surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is
removable by a standard glass fiber filter.
Subd. 65. “Total Toxic Organics” means the summation of all values greater than 0.01
mg/L of toxic organics listed in Section 307 (A) of the Act.
Subd. 66. “Unpolluted Water” means clean water uncontaminated by industrial wastes,
other wastes, or any substance which renders such water unclean, or noxious, or impure
so as to be actually or potentially harmful or detrimental or injurious to public health,
safety, or welfare, to domestic, commercial, industrial, or recreational use, or to livestock,
wild animals, bird, fish, or other aquatic life.
Subd. 67. “User” means any person who discharges, causes, or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the SCWWTS.
Subd. 68. “User Charge System” means the system established by this ordinance to recover
from the users of the SCWWTS the cost of operation, maintenance and replacement of the
SCWWTS.
Subd. 69. “Wastewater” means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes
from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with
any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or
untreated, which is discharged into or permitted to enter the SCWWTS.
Subd. 70. “Wastewater Treatment Facility” means any facility, appurtenant structures, or
arrangement of devices used for the treatment of wastewater.
Section 360:06. Sewer Availability Charge. The SAC fees for all structures/properties will to
be collected on the Building or Plumbing Permit.
Section 360:07. SAC Exemptions. Buildings/property uses that meet any of the following
criteria will be exempt from the SAC fees:
Subd. 1. City Facilities: All buildings and building additions that are owned by the City of
St. Cloud are exempt from the Sewer Availability Charge.
Subd. 2. Sprinkling or Irrigation Meters: Water meters installed solely for the purpose of
irrigation are exempt from the Sewer Availability Charge.
Subd. 3. Fire Suppression Meters: Water meters installed solely for the purpose of
measuring water for fire suppression are exempt from the Sewer Availability Charge.
Section 360:08. Redevelopment Credit. In cases of redevelopment, the property owner may
request a credit from the Public Utilities Director for the existing sewer availability at the
property prior to the redevelopment activity and apply the credit to applicable Sewer Availability
Charge. The credit given shall not be greater than the effective Sewer Availability Charge.
Section 360:10. Individual Sewage Treatment System. Where a public sanitary sewer is not
available under the provision of Section 360:30, the building sewer shall be connected to an
individual sewage treatment system complying with the provisions of this Section 365:00,
Sewage Treatment Systems, and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Rules, Chapter 7080. The
provisions of this subsection shall be in addition to any requirements established by applicable
federal, state or local laws and regulations and shall not be construed to relieve any liability or
obligation imposed by such laws and regulations.
Section 360:15. Building Sewers and Connections.
Subd. 1. No person, unless authorized, shall uncover, make any connections with, or
disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof.
Subd. 2. All costs incurred in the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be
borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify and hold harmless the City from any loss or
damage to the public sewer that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation
of the building sewer.
Subd. 3. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building,
except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private
sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley,
court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, provided that the City shall
require a written agreement between the property owners as to the share of the costs of
construction and maintenance which each will contribute.
Subd. 4. Old building sewers may be used in connections with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and test by the City, to meet all requirements of this
ordinance.
Subd. 5. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the
method to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the
trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification
thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in Practice No. 9 and applicable American
Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM) standards shall apply.
Subd. 6. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low
to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, such building drain shall be provided with a
lifting device approved by the Plumbing Inspector and discharged to the building sewer.
Subd. 7. No persons shall make connection of roof downspouts, sump pump, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to the
public sanitary sewer.
Subd. 8. The construction of the building sewer and its connection into the public sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code, the sewer
specifications included herein, or other applicable rules and regulations and the procedures
set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM. All such construction shall be made
gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must
be approved by the Plumbing Inspector prior to installation.
Subd. 9. Employees of the City shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the connection shall notify the Plumbing
Inspector and City Engineer when the work is ready for final inspection and no underground
portions shall be covered prior to the final inspection. The connection shall be made under
the supervision of the Building Safety Department.
Subd. 10. Any new connections to the sanitary sewer system shall be prohibited unless
sufficient capacity is available in all downstream facilities including, but not limited to
capacity for flow, CBOD, nutrients, and suspended solids, as determined by the Director.
Section 360:20. Main and Lateral Sewers.
Subd. 1. No person, unless authorized, shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the Director.
Subd. 2. No sanitary or storm sewers shall be constructed in the City (except house or
building service sewers) except by the City or others, and subject to inspection during
construction by engineers and employees of the City. No such sewers shall be considered to
be a part of the public sewer system unless accepted by the City.
Subd. 3. The size, slope, alignment, material of construction, methods to be used in
excavation, placing of pipe, jointing, testing, backfilling and other work connected with the
construction of sewers shall conform to the requirements of the City.
Subd. 4. Joints and pipes shall be watertight and sound. The sewer lateral shall be free of
any structural defects including fractures, cracks, breaks, openings or missing portions.
Subd. 5. The sewer lateral shall be free of roots, grease deposits and other solids which
may impede or obstruct flow.
Subd. 6. Sanitary sewer cleanouts shall be securely sealed with a proper cap or approved
overflow device.
Section 360:25. Protection from Damage. No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment
which is a part of the SCWWTS.
Section 360:30. Use of Public Sewers.
Subd. 1. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City or in any area
under the jurisdiction of the City any wastewater or other polluted water, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this
ordinance.
Subd. 2. As set forth in Section 360:10, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any
privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
wastewater.
Subd. 3. The owner of any building or property which is located within the City, or in any
area under the jurisdiction of the City, and from which wastewater is discharged, shall be
required to connect to a public sewer at the owner’s expense within one year after service of
official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is available for connection.
Additionally, if the building or property is used for human occupancy, employment or
recreation, the owner shall be required to install at the same time toilet facilities in
accordance with the Minnesota Building Code and other ordinances of the City.
Subd. 4. In the event an owner fails to connect to a public sewer in compliance with a
notice given under Section 360:30, Subd. 3 of this ordinance, the City may undertake to
have the connection made and shall assess the cost against the benefited property, the
assessment shall be a lien against the property. Such assessment, when levied, shall bear
interest at the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum and shall be certified to the County
Auditor in which the land is situated and shall be collected and remitted to the City in the
same manner as assessments for local improvements. The rights of the City under this
subdivision shall be in addition to any other remedial or enforcement provisions of this
ordinance.
Subd. 5. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged directly or indirectly any
stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, sub-surface drainage, unpolluted
cooling or process water to any sanitary sewer unless there is no prudent and feasible
alternative and unless as approved by the Director.
Subd. 6. Stormwater and all other unpolluted water shall be discharged to a storm sewer,
except that unpolluted cooling or process water shall only be so discharged upon approval
by the Director, and the user may be required to obtain a NPDES Permit by the MPCA.
Subd.7. The sanitary sewer system shall not be the disposal method for unused
pharmaceuticals.
Section 360:31. Funds from User Charges. The funds received from the collection of the user
charges will be deposited as collected in the St. Cloud Wastewater Utility Fund and will be used for
the operation, maintenance, debt service, replacement and improvements of the SCWWTS, except
that the portion of any such funds which is limited to a particular use by applicable State or Federal
rules or regulations, will be used in compliance with such restrictions.
Section 360:32. Charges for General Municipal Users - Domestic, Commercial, Institutional and
Governmental Users.
Subd. 1. The charge for general municipal, commercial, institutional, industrial and
government users will be the product of the unit charge and the quantity of the water used as
measured by the city water meter. The formula for this calculation follows:
Unit Cost Per Volume of Water x Users Metered Water Flow
= Residential, Commercial, Institutional, Industrial Governmental Users Charge
Subd. 2. If a substantial portion of the water utilized by any user is not discharged into the
sewer system, the volume of such water will be deducted in computing the wastewater use
charge provided a separate meter is installed to measure such volume. The user desiring to
install such separate meter will make application and payment for the meter to the St. Cloud
Public Utilities Director and engage, at their own expense, a plumber to install the necessary
piping changes and to install the meter.
Section 360:35. Phosphorus Management
Subd. 1. Any non-domestic, i.e. commercial or industrial, source may be included as part of
the Phosphorus Management Plan (PMP) and required to evaluate their phosphorus
discharge to the SCWWTS.
Subd. 2. Any significant non-domestic nutrient contributor (NDNC) of phosphorus, as
determined by the Director, will be required to develop a Phosphorus Reduction Strategy
(PRS). The NDNC will evaluate and/or update the PRS to include methods and/or steps
taken to eliminate or reduce phosphorus loading to the SCWWTS.
Section 360:36. Mercury Management.
Subd. 1. Mercury concentrations is non-domestic wastewater discharged to the WWTF
shall not exceed 0.2 micrograms per liter (ug/L), as set forth in the Local Limitations:
Section 360.50 Subd.6. Mercury sampling procedures, preservation, handling and
analytical protocol for compliance monitoring shall be in accordance with EPA Method
245.7 or another method approved or required by the Director. The level of detection
developed in accordance with the procedure specified in 40 CFR 136, shall not exceed
0.2 micrograms per liter for mercury, unless higher levels are appropriate due to matrix
interference.
Subd. 2. To ensure that the maximum allowable mercury loading to the WWTF is not
exceeded, the City may require a non-domestic users to develop, submit for approval and
implement a Mercury Reduction Plan (MRP). Details of the requirements of the MRP
are included in the City of St. Cloud Mercury Minimization Plan. The MMP is required
by the MPCA and is updated once every five (5) years in accordance with the NPDES
permit. A copy of this plan is available upon request.
Subd. 3. Failure to submit an approvable MRP within 30 days of the required due date
shall constitute significant non-compliance in accordance with this Section, and will
result in publication as a significant violator;
Subd. 4. A non-domestic user may request a variance from MRP requirements if all
samples of the discharge for a period of one year are below the specified level of
detection, the non-domestic user has complied with the minimum monitoring frequency
of quarterly sampling events, and the Director deems that the MRP commitments have
been fulfilled sufficiently to ensure continued compliance with the mercury limitation.
Notice of approval or disapproval of the variance from MRP requirements will be made
in writing from the Director. If a MRP variance is issued, the non-domestic user remains
subject to the local limitation for mercury.
Section 360:40. Industrial Discharge Permit.
Subd. 1. Permit Requirement: Industrial Users discharging wastewater to the SCWWTS
shall apply for an Industrial Discharge Permit in accordance with these rules unless the
Director determines the wastewater has an insignificant impact to the SCWWTS. No
Industrial User requiring a permit shall discharge to the SCWWTS until the Industrial
User has been issued a permit. Issuance of an Industrial Discharge Permit shall not
relieve the Industrial User from any obligation to obtain any hazardous waste license
required by other authorities or to comply with any other local, state, or federal
requirements regarding waste disposal.
The criteria utilized by the Director to determine if an Industrial Discharge Permit will be
required include:
(a) An average flow loading greater than 25,000 gallons per operating day; or
(b) A pollutant concentration of greater than 50% for one or more regulated pollutants
(see 360:50, Subd. 6) at the point of discharge; or
(c) Has prohibitive discharge properties (see 360:40.); or
(d) Has been pretreated or passed through an equalization tank before discharge; or
(e) A hydraulic or organic loading greater than 5% of the average dry weather capacity
of the WWTF; or
(f) An industrial process regulated by EPA categorical standards; or
(g) Others as designated by the City as defined in 40 CFR 403.12 (a).
Subd. 2. Permit Application.
(a) An existing Significant Industrial User or other person who is required to obtain an
Industrial Discharge Permit shall complete and file a permit application with the
WWTF within (ninety) 90 days of notification. The appropriate permit fee shall
accompany the permit application form. A user shall have one year from the date of
notification by the City to obtain an Industrial Discharge Permit.
(b) New Significant Industrial Users proposing to connect or to commence a new
discharge to the SCWWTS shall apply for an Industrial Discharge Permit prior to
connection to or discharging into the SCWWTS. No discharge into the SCWWTS
can commence until an Industrial Discharge Permit is received unless the Director
has ruled that:
(i) an Industrial Discharge Permit is not required or
(ii) a discharge waiver is granted to commence discharge pending final action by the
Director.
Subd. 3. Incomplete or Deficient Application: An Industrial Discharge Permit shall not be
issued until an application is complete.
Subd. 4. Issuance of Industrial Discharge Permit: Within sixty (60) days of receiving a
completed application form the Director shall, upon a determination that the applicant is
capable of compliance with the Industrial Discharge Permit conditions and these rules, issue
an Industrial Discharge Permit subject to the terms and conditions provided herein.
Types of Industrial Discharge Permits:
(a) A Standard Permit, with requirements for a specific facility, will be issued to
an Industrial User with a direct discharge connection to the SCWWTS. A
Standard Permit will be issued to each Significant Industrial User, and other
Industrial Users determined by the Director;
(b) A Liquid Waste Hauler Permit will be issued to an Industrial User who
transports and discharges industrial waste to the collection system and the
WWTF; and
(c) Special Discharge Permit will be issued to an Industrial User who discharges
leachate, groundwater or other waste to the collection system or the WWTF
for which other permit forms are not applicable.
Subd. 5. Permit Conditions: Industrial Discharge Permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of this ordinance and all other applicable regulations, user charges, and fees
established by the City Council. Permits shall contain the following:
(a) A summary of the penalties and charges applicable for violations of the terms of
permit as provided in Section 360:85 of this ordinance;
(b) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be
discharged to the WWTF;
(c) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics, either in terms of concentrations, mass limitations, or other
appropriate limits;
(d) Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for
flow regulations and equalization;
(e) Requirements for installation and maintenance on inspection and sampling
facilities;
(f) Requirements for access to the permit holder's premises and records;
(g) Requirements for installation, operation, and maintenance of pretreatment
facilities; (see Section 360:65 on Pretreatment);
(h) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations,
frequency and method of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and
self reporting schedule;
(i) Compliance schedules;
(j) Requirements for maintaining and retaining records relating to wastewater
discharge as specified by the Director;
(k) Requirements for notification to the Director of any new introduction of
wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of
the wastewater constituents being introduced into the SCWWTS;
(l) Requirements for notification of slug discharges as provided in Section 360:55
of this ordinance;
(m) Requirements for the specific location, time, and volume of discharge to the
WWTF for Liquid Waste Haulers;
(n) The requirement for Industrial Discharge Permit transfer as stated herein; and
(o) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to ensure compliance with
this ordinance.
Subd. 6. Permit Modification, Suspension, and Revocation: An Industrial Discharge
Permit may be modified, suspended or revoked, in whole or in part, by the Director or City
during its term for cause, including:
(a) Violation of these rules;
(b) Violation of any terms or conditions of the Industrial Discharge Permit;
(c) Obtaining an Industrial Discharge Permit by misrepresentation or failure to fully
disclose all relevant facts;
(d) Amendment of these rules;
(e) A change in the wastewater treatment process which results in the permit
holder's discharge having a significantly different and negative impact on the
process;
(f) A change in the permit holder's industrial waste volume or characteristics which
the permit holder knows or has reason to know will or is likely to have, either by
itself or by interaction with other wastes, a negative impact on the treatment
process;
(g) A change in the WWTF’s NPDES or SDS permit requirements, any other
changes made by local, state and/or federal rules; and/or
(h) A determination by the Director that the permit holder's discharge reasonably
appears to present an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons, present an endangerment to the environment, or threaten interference
with the operation of the SCWWTF.
Subd. 7. Time Schedule for Compliance: Any modifications in the Industrial Discharge
Permit shall specify a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
Subd. 8. Refund of Permit Fee on Surrender or Revocation: A permit holder may surrender
an Industrial Discharge Permit to the City prior to the permit's scheduled termination. In the
event that a permit is surrendered or revoked, the permit holder shall be refunded a pro rata
portion of the permit fee paid.
Subd. 9. Permit Duration: Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed
five (5) years. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to
the permit's expiration date by filing with the City a permit reissuance application. If an
industrial user fails to submit a permit re-issuance application, the City may
administratively extend the Industrial User Permit. The terms and conditions of the permit
may be subject to modification by the Director during the term of the permit as limitations
or requirements as identified in Section 360:45 are modified or other just cause exists. The
user shall be informed prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions
in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
Subd. 10. Permit Transfer: Industrial Discharge Permits are issued to a specific user at a
specific location, for a specific operation, except in the case of Liquid Waste Haulers. An
Industrial Discharge Permit shall not be reassigned, transferred or sold to a new owner, new
user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the Director.
Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the
existing permit. In the event of a change in the entity owning the industrial discharge
facilities for which there is an Industrial Discharge Permit, the prior owner, shall notify the
City and the succeeding owner of said change in ownership and of the provisions of the
Industrial Discharge Permit and these rules. The new owner shall submit a new permit
application or shall submit to the City an executed statement agreeing to be bound by the
terms and conditions of the existing Industrial Discharge Permit for the facility, in which
case, upon consent of the City, the permit shall continue in effect until its expiration date.
Section 360:41. Liquid Waste Hauler Requirements.
Subd. 1. Any person seeking to transport and subsequently discharge residential,
commercial, institutional or industrial waste into the SCWWTS shall comply with
applicable requirements specified in this section:
(a) Permit: Liquid Waste Haulers shall obtain a Liquid Waste Hauler Permit and
shall comply with applicable requirements of these rules.
(b) An annual permit fee is due at time of issuance or reissuance of industrial
discharge agreement.
(c) Load Charge: Liquid Waste Haulers shall pay load charges to the City of St.
Cloud within 30 calendar days after the billing date. Load charges are
specified in the Liquid Waste Hauler’s Permit.
(d) Approved Disposal Sites: Liquid Waste Haulers shall discharge only at
approved disposal sites as designated by the Director.
(e) Conditions of Discharge: Any person who has obtained written approval or a
permit shall discharge in accordance with the terms of that approval or
permit, any other applicable provisions of these rules, applicable pretreatment
standards under the Act, and any other requirements set forth by the Director.
Subd. 2. Leachate and Contaminated Groundwater Discharge Requirements: Any person
seeking to discharge leachate or contaminated groundwater into the SCWWTS shall
submit a written application for approval to the Director according to the following:
(a) An application for approval to discharge shall be submitted at least 15 days
prior to initiation of the proposed discharge;
(b) An application for approval to discharge for a duration greater than six (6)
months shall be submitted at least 60 days prior to initiation of the proposed
discharge.
(c) Approval or Denial: Upon receipt of a complete application for discharge
approval, the Director shall:
(i.) Within 30 days, issue a written approval for discharges that will not
exceed six (6) months in duration; or
(ii.) Within 90 days, issue an industrial discharge permit for discharges that
will exceed six (6) months of duration; or
(iii.) Deny the request for discharging into the WWTF and state the reasons for
denial.
(d) Conditions of Discharge: Any person who has obtained a written approval or
a permit shall discharge in accordance with the terms of the approval or
permit, any other applicable provisions of these rules, applicable pretreatment
standards under the Act, and any other requirements set forth by the Director.
Section 360:45. Prohibitive Discharge. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged,
directly or indirectly, into the SCWWTS any of the following:
Subd. 1 Any combustible, flammable or explosive solids, liquids, or gases which by their
nature or quantity will or are likely to cause either alone or by interaction with other
substances a fire or explosion or be injurious to the treatment facility operation. At no time
shall two (2) successive readings on an explosimeter, at the point of discharge into the
sewer system, be more than five percent (5%) nor shall there be any single reading over ten
percent (10%) of the Lower Explosive Limit (LEL). Prohibited materials include, but are
not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, fuel oil, lubricating oil, benzene, toluene,
xylene, ethers, alcohols, and ketones.
Subd. 2 Any solids or viscous substances which will or are likely to cause obstruction to
the flow in a sewer, interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment or pass
through to the receiving waters. These include garbage with particles greater than one-half
inch (1/2") in any dimension, grease, animal guts or tissues, bones, hair, hides or fleshings,
entrails, feathers, ashes, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, grass clippings,
rags, spent grains, waste paper, wood, plastic, asphalt residues, residues from refining or
processing of fuel or lubricating oil, glass grinding, polishing wastes, non-dispersible wipes,
pharmaceuticals.
Subd. 3 Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or greater than 12.0 or having any
corrosive property that will or is likely to cause damage or hazard to structures, equipment,
or employee of the Public Utility.
Subd. 4 Any alkaline wastewater which alone or with others will or is likely to cause an
elevated pH in the SCWWTS so as to result in an inhibiting effect on the biological process
or encrustation to the sewer.
Subd. 5 Any wastewater containing toxic or poisonous pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either by itself or by interaction with other pollutants, that will or is likely to cause
interference or constitute a hazard to humans. (A toxic pollutant shall include but not be
limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act.)
Subd. 6 Any noxious or malodorous solids, liquids, or gases, which either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, will or are likely to create a public nuisance or hazard to life
or prevent the entry of Utility employees into a sewer for monitoring, maintenance, and
repair.
Subd. 7 Any wastewater which will or is likely to cause excessive discoloration in
treatment facility effluent.
Subd. 8 Wastes, other than Domestic Wastes, that are infectious prior to discharging.
Subd. 9 Any solids residual from an industrial pretreatment facility except as provided in
Section 360:65.
Subd. 10 Heat in amounts which will or is likely to inhibit biological activity in the
treatment facility resulting in interference or causing damage to the treatment facility, but in
no case heat in such quantities that the Industrial User's waste temperature is greater than 65
C (150 F) at its point of discharge to the sewer system, or heat causing, individually or in
combination with other wastewater, the influent at the wastewater treatment plant to have a
temperature exceeding 40 C (104 F).
Subd. 11 Any wastewater containing fat, wax, grease or oil in excess of 100 mg/L that will
or is likely to solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 0 and 65 Centigrade and
which will or is likely to cause interference at the WWTF including petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable
cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin.
Subd. 12 Any slug discharged in such volume or strength which a person knows or has
reason to know will or is likely to cause interference to the SCWWTS.
Subd. 13 Any substance including nutrients which will cause the WWTF to violate the
NPDES and/or State Disposal System Permit or the receiving water quality standards or
goals.
Subd. 14 Any substance which may cause the WWTF's effluent or any other product of the
wastewater treatment process such as residues, biosolids, or scums, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a
substance discharged to the SCWWTS cause the system to be in noncompliance with
biosolids use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or State
standards applicable to the biosolids management method being used.
Subd. 15 Any wastewater containing inert suspended solids (including lime slurries and
lime residues) or dissolved solids (including sodium chloride) in such quantities that will or
is likely to cause interference or pass through at the WWTF.
Subd. 16 Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such a half-life or concentration that they are in
noncompliance with standards issued by the appropriate authority having control over their
use and which will or are likely to cause damage or hazards to the SCWWTF or utility
employees.
Subd. 17 Any hazardous waste, unless prior approval has been issued from the Director.
Subd. 18 Any waste generated outside the area served by the SCWWTS without prior
approval of the Director.
Subd. 19 Any unpolluted water, including cooling water, rain water, stormwater or
groundwater, unless there is no other prudent or feasible alternative.
Subd. 20 Any trucked or hauled wastes or pollutants, except those approved by the Director
at discharge points designated by the City.
Subd. 21 Phosphorus or other nutrients that exceed acceptable limits as set by the WWTF.
Section 360:50. Limitations on Wastewater Strength.
Subd. 1. Federal Pretreatment Standards: Federal Pretreatment Standards and General
Regulations promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to
the Act shall be met by all users which are subject to such standards in any instance where
they are more stringent than the limitations in this ordinance unless the Director has applied
for, and obtained from the MPCA, approval to modify the specific limits in the Federal
Pretreatment Standards. In all other respects, Industrial Users subject to Pretreatment
Standards shall comply with all provisions of these rules and any permit issued thereunder,
notwithstanding less stringent provisions of the General Pretreatment Regulations or any
applicable Pretreatment Standard.
Subd. 2. State Requirements: State requirements and limitations on discharges shall be met
by all users which are subject to such standards in any instance in which they are more
stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this ordinance.
Subd. 3. City's Right of Revision: The City reserves the right to establish by ordinance
more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the WWTF if deemed necessary
to comply with the objectives presented in Section 360:00.
Subd. 4. Dilution: No user shall increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to
dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve
compliance with the limitations contained in any local or State requirements or Federal
pretreatment standards.
Subd. 5. Removal Credits and Variances:
(a) If the WWTF achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by Federal
Pretreatment Standards, the City may apply to MPCA for modification of
specific limits of the EPA Pretreatment Standards. The City shall modify
pollutant discharge limits applicable to an Industrial User in the Pretreatment
Standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR 403.7 of the General
Pretreatment Regulations relating to credits for the removal of pollutants are
fulfilled and approval from MPCA is obtained. However, nothing herein
shall be construed to require the City to apply to MPCA for removal credits
nor shall it be construed to in any way limit the applicability of the
limitations provided in Section 360:50, Subd. 6 in the event that such a
removal credit is granted, except as provided in Section 360:50.
(b) The City shall recognize and enforce the conditions allowed for by variances
from Pretreatment Standards for fundamentally different factors as granted
by EPA to individual Industrial Users in accordance with 40 CFR 403.13 of
the General Pretreatment Regulations.
(c) The Director shall notify all affected Industrial Users of the applicable
Pretreatment Standards, their amendments, and reporting requirements in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.12 of the General Pretreatment Regulations. A
compliance schedule as part of the Industrial Discharge Permit shall be
developed between the Director and the Industrial User to ensure that the
Industrial User complies with local, State, and Federal limitations in a timely
manner as provided by the same section of the General Pretreatment
Regulations.
Subd. 6. Supplementary Limitations: No person, except as authorized pursuant to a
compliance schedule in a permit, shall discharge or cause or allow to be discharged, directly
or indirectly, into the SCWWTS any of the following waste pollutants containing
concentrations in excess of the following maximum limitations for any operating day:
Pollutant Maximum Allowable Concentration (mg/L)
Arsenic 0.16
Cadmium 0.20
Chromium, Total 3.94
Copper 2.76
Cyanide, Total 3.11
Lead 1.36
Mercury 0.0002
Molybdenum 0.11
Nickel 0.75
Selenium 0.27
Silver 0.56
Zinc 5.00
Ammonia Nitrogen Best Management Practices
CBOD5 Best Management Practices
Phosphorus Best Management Practices or 6.00
Total Suspended Solids Best Management Practices
Subd. 7. Special Agreements: No statement contained in this subsection, except as
promulgated by the EPA, shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or
arrangement between the City and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of
unusual strength or character may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment,
by the industrial concern, in accordance with applicable ordinances and any supplemental
agreement with the City.
Subd. 8. Pretreatment Standards Notification: The Director shall notify all affected
Industrial Users of the applicable Pretreatment Standards, their amendments, and reporting
requirements in accordance with Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Section 403.12 of
the General Pretreatment Regulations. A compliance schedule shall be developed between
the City and the Industrial User to ensure that the Industrial User complies with local, state,
and federal limitations in a timely manner as provided by the same section of the General
Pretreatment Regulations.
Subd. 9. Reports specified in Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Section 403.12 of the
General Pretreatment Regulations shall be submitted to the WWTF by affected users.
Subd. 10. BMP’s shall be considered local limits and Pretreatment Standards.
Section 360:51. Strength Charge System
Subd. 1. Any permit holder as designated by the Director, discharging into the SCWWTS
industrial waste at carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand and/or total suspended
solids concentrations in excess of base levels shall be subject to a strength charge.
Further, any person discharging waste into the SCWWTS may be subject to a strength
charge under the same provisions. Base levels, strength charge rates and the procedures
for determining strength charges shall be set forth by the Director. These rates and
methods may be adjusted annually. Additional parameters, other than carbonaceous
biochemical oxygen demand and total suspended solids may be subject to a strength
charge. For current base level concentrations see definition of “Industrial Waste” in
360:05.
Subd. 2. Industrial user charges may also include specific credits for industrial
pretreatment which would encourage reduction in overall SCWWTS plant loading.
Section 360:55. Accidental and Slug Discharges.
Subd. 1. Prevention of Accidental and Slug Discharges: All Industrial Users shall provide
adequate protective procedures to prevent the accidental discharge of any prohibited waste,
any waste in excess of the local limitations or any waste in violation of an applicable
pretreatment standard.
Subd. 2. Accidental Discharge: Accidental discharges of prohibited waste into the
SCWWTS, directly or through another disposal system, or to any place from which such
waste may enter the SCWWTS, shall be reported to the Director by the persons responsible
for the discharge, or by the owner or occupant of the premises where the discharge occurred,
immediately upon obtaining knowledge of the fact of such discharge. Such notification will
not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the wastewater disposal
system or treatment process, or for any fines imposed on the City on account thereof under
any State or Federal law. The responsible person shall take immediate action as is
reasonably possible to minimize or abate the prohibited discharge.
The responsible person shall send a letter describing the prohibited discharge to the Director
within seven (7) days of obtaining knowledge of the discharge. The letter shall include the
following information:
(a) the time and location of the spill;
(b) description of the accidentally discharged waste, including estimate of
pollutant concentrations;
(c) time period and volume of wastewater discharged;
(d) actions taken to correct or control the spill;
(e) a schedule of corrective measures to prevent further spill occurrences.
Subd. 3. Slug Discharge: In the event that an Industrial User discharges a slug in such
volume or strength that the Industrial User knows or has reason to know it will cause
interference in the SCWWTS, the Industrial User shall immediately report the same to the
Director. Within seven (7) days thereafter, the Industrial User shall send a letter to the
Director describing the slug as specified under Accidental Discharge.
Subd. 4. Spill Containment Program Requirement: Any Industrial User with a significant
potential to discharge materials listed in the prohibited discharge section of this ordinance
is required to install and maintain an adequate spill containment system. General spill
containment requirements are listed below:
(a) Process, storage, holding or treatment tanks containing materials listed in the
prohibitive discharge section of this ordinance as well as the associated
piping, pumps and other appurtenances must be contained if a spill or leak
could enter the sewer. This includes tanks used for short-duration mixing,
processing or storage.
(b) The City prohibits floor drains with direct connections to the public sewer in
facilities that store toxic or flammable materials.
(c) The spill containment system must be capable of containing 100 percent of
the volume of the largest tank of restricted material.
(d) Acceptable Containment Systems Include:
(i.) Diking may be used to spill contain single shell tanks. Diking usually
consists of concrete blocks, concrete berming or other materials that
form a permanent structural barrier. Portable spill containment
trays/pallets are also acceptable.
(ii.) Self-Containment. Tanks of double shell construction are considered to
be self-contained and do not require additional spill containment
features unless there is a significant likelihood of overflowing. These
tanks consist of two independent structural shells with the outer shell
capable of containing any leakage from the inner one. An air gap of at
least one-inch must be provided between the inner and outer shell.
(iii.) Pits constructed under or around tanks are acceptable as spill
containment. No openings, manual or electric gates or valves are
allowed.
Subd. 5. Slug Discharge Control Plan: Any Significant Industrial User (SIU) that may
batch discharge any wastewater (including from spill containment areas), treated or
otherwise, and that discharge may potentially cause adverse impacts to the collection
system or treatment plant must complete and implement a Slug Discharge Control Plan.
Slug Discharge Control Plan must contain the following elements:
(a) Description of discharge practices, including non routine batch discharges;
(b) Description of stored chemicals;
(c) Procedure for promptly notifying the WWTF of slug discharges as defined
under Section 403.5(b) of the Code of Federal Regulations Title 40 and
Section 360:40 of this ordinance, with procedures for follow-up written
notification within five (5) days;
(d) Procedures necessary to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills,
including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer
of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of site runoff, and
employee training. Include drawings that show spill containment dimensions
and the locations of all floor drains, wastewater piping and pretreatment
equipment;
(e) The Slug Discharge Control Plan must be maintained at the discharge location
and be available on request to staff from the City, MPCA or EPA.
Section 360:60 Monitoring Requirements.
Subd. 1. Monitoring Facilities: When required by the City's permit, the permit holder of
any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control structure, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation sampling, flow measurement, and measurement of
wastes. Such structure and equipment when required shall be constructed at the owner's
expense in accordance with plans approved by the City and shall be safely maintained by
the owner and accessible at all times.
Subd. 2. Monitoring Point: Each permit holder shall have an approved monitoring point
provided at the permit holder’s expense. Liquid Waste Haulers and special industrial
users may be exempted by permit from portions of this section. All permit holders shall
have an approved monitoring point. All new installations shall be in accordance with
provisions of the Minnesota Plumbing Code, Minnesota Rules, chapter 4715. Each
permit holder is responsible for all maintenance on the approved monitoring point,
including routine cleaning. The Director may allow multiple monitoring points provided
that each point meets criteria 1-5 of this section. An approved monitoring point shall
meet the following criteria:
(a) the wastewater flow is visible and accessible for inspection and monitoring
purposes;
(b) the wastewater flow has appropriate velocity and is well mixed to yield
representative samples;
(c) the wastewater flow at the monitoring point conveys all of the permit holder’s
industrial waste;
(d) the monitoring point is large enough or space is provided nearby to allow for
monitoring equipment and replacement; and
(e) the total wastewater flow of the permitted facility, if exceeding 25,000 gallons
per day, can be measured using an open channel or other acceptable measuring
device.
Subd. 3. Inspection Maintenance Hatch: The Director may require the installation of an
inspection maintenance hatch (manhole), in the event of construction, replacement or
modification of a permit holder’s sewer connection(s). Permit holders shall provide
notice to the Director prior to any such replacement or modification. The inspection
maintenance hatch shall be of standard size and shape and be located on the private sewer
line between the facility and the public sewer. If feasible, the inspection maintenance
hole shall convey the total facility wastewater discharge.
Subd. 4. Flow Measurement: A permit holder, when required by permit, shall install and
maintain a flow measurement device for instantaneous rate and/or cumulative flow volume
determinations. Metered water supply may be used in lieu of flow measurement devices if
it can be documented that the water usage and waste discharge are the same, or where a
measurable adjustment to the metered supply can be made to determine the waste volume.
Meters and flow records shall be maintained at the permit holder's expense in good
operating condition at all times. The permit holder shall notify the Director in writing
within five (5) days in the event that the permit holder becomes aware that the meter or flow
recorder has failed to accurately register the flow. The permit holder shall also notify the
Director of the permit holder's intention to alter the installation of a meter or flow recorder
so as to affect the accurate recording of industrial waste entering the SCWWTS.
The following requirements apply to the selection and installation of wastewater flow
measuring devices:
(a) Flow measuring devices including, but not limited to, weirs, flumes, areavelocity
sensors and closed-pipe flow meters, shall be installed such that
proper hydraulic conditions exist. Factors used to determine the type, size
and location of a flow measuring device include:
1. flow rate and velocity;
2. pipe configuration and slope;
3. turbulence;
4. presence of nearby tributary flows; and
5. solids concentration.
(b) All flow measuring devices shall be properly installed and, where
applicable, properly level and sealed.
(c) When a weir or a flume is utilized, the flow level-sensing device shall be
installed at a proper distance upstream of the primary flow device and in a
location where excessive turbulence is not created.
Subd. 5. Self-monitoring Analyses: All measurements, tests, and analyses of the
characteristics of water and wastes as outlined in the permit shall be determined in
accordance with guidelines established in 40 CFR Part 136 and 40 CFR 403.12 (g) of the
General Pretreatment Regulations.
Subd. 6. Representative Sampling: Representative samples of a permit holder's industrial
waste shall be collected on a normal operating day and in accordance with guidelines
listed in the Industrial Discharge Permit. Industrial Users subject to Pretreatment
Standards shall sample in accordance with the Pretreatment Standards. Self-monitoring
point(s) for Industrial Users who are not subject to Pretreatment Standards shall be at a
location and at a frequency as specified in the Permit. The samples shall accurately
characterize the discharge, taking into account batch discharges, daily production
variations, downtime, cleanup and other operating conditions.
Subd. 7. Monitoring Techniques: The following monitoring methods will be used by
Industrial Users and contracted monitoring services and/or commercial analytical
laboratories that collect and/or analyze wastewater samples to fulfill requirements of
these rules or any permit issued under these rules:
(a) A series of at least four grab samples is required when analyzing wastewater
for pH, grease and oil, total phenols and sulfides, unless otherwise approved
by the Director. Samples for cyanide and volatile organics may be collected
by the grab sampling technique described above or by an automatic sampler,
using acceptable techniques. For other parameters, grab samples may be
required when the wastewater flow is not continuous or when necessary to
determine the instantaneous wastewater characteristics. Grab samples can be
taken manually or automatically. Appropriate containers shall be used when
collected grab samples.
(b) Composite samples are formed by combining discrete samples collected either
manually or by an automatic sampler. Each discrete sample shall have a
minimum volume of at least 100 milliliters. Discrete samples can be
composited using any of the following methods.
1. equal time intervals and equal volume samples;
2. equal time intervals and unequal volume samples; or
3. unequal time intervals and equal volume samples.
(c) When an equal time interval is used, the maximum sampling interval shall be
30 minutes. The composite sample volume shall be well mixed before sub
sampling.
Subd. 8. Sample Handling Procedures: All samples shall be contained, preserved and
held in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136. The sample temperature shall be maintained at
four (4) degrees Celsius, if necessary, from the time of collection until sample analysis is
performed. When applicable, additional preservation shall be performed upon sample
collection.
Subd. 9. Industrial Discharge Monitoring Reports (IDMR’s): A condition of the
Industrial Discharge Permit shall include the completion and submittal of accurate
routine self-monitoring reports to the Director in a form subscribed to by the Director.
The nature and frequency of routine reporting shall be based upon the requirements
specified in the Industrial Discharge Permit.
The Director may modify the above reporting and/or sampling schedule for a particular
permit holder based on the permit holder's industrial waste characteristics. Permit holders
subject to Pretreatment Standards shall submit reports to the WWTF in accordance with the
applicable Pretreatment Standards.
Permit holders shall submit complete IDMR’s on or before the 21st calendar day of the
month following the end of each applicable reporting period, unless otherwise stated in
the Industrial Discharge Permit. Any permit holder not submitting a self-monitoring
report by this date shall pay a late reporting fee.
Subd. 10. Inspection and Sampling: The City may modify the sampling requirements,
parameters sampled and/or analyzed, and frequency of sampling to ensure compliance with
federal, state and permit requirements. This may involve additional sampling requirements
other than stated in the Significant Industrial Users permit.
The City may conduct tests as are necessary to enforce this ordinance. Employees of the
City may enter any property for the purpose of taking samples, obtaining information or
conducting surveys or investigations relating to enforcement. Entry shall be made during
operating hours unless circumstances require otherwise. In all cases where tests are
conducted by the City for the purpose of determining user compliance, the cost of such tests
shall be added to the user's sewer charge. In those cases where the City determines that the
nature or volume of a particular user's wastewater requires more frequent testing, the City
may charge such user for the tests, after giving the user ten (10) days written notice of its
intention to do so, and the cost thereof shall be added to the user's sewer charge.
Duly authorized employees of the City, MPCA, and EPA bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
ordinance. Those employees shall have no authority to inquire into any processes except as
is necessary to determine the kind and source of the discharge to the SCWWTS.
Duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds an easement for the
purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and
maintenance of any portion of the SCWWTS lying within said easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in all accordance with the terms of
the easement pertaining to the private property involved. While performing the necessary
work on private properties the authorized employees of the City shall observe all safety
rules applicable to the premises established by the company.
The Director and/or their designee shall conduct inspections at least once a year as
required by the federal General Pretreatment Regulations and to determine compliance
status with the Pretreatment Program. The City will conduct the annual inspection at no
cost to the SIU; any additional inspections due to noncompliance may be billed to the
affected property owner at 2.5 times the base hourly salary of the Inspector.
Subd. 11. Testing Procedures: Testing procedures for analysis of pollutants for permit
applications and routine self monitoring shall conform to the guidelines established in Code
of Regulations, Title 40, Part 136 and Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Section 403.12
(g) of the Federal Pretreatment Regulations.
Subd. 12. Report and Monitoring Discrepancies: A permit holder shall be notified in
writing by the Director of a significant discrepancy between the permit holder's routine,
self-monitoring records and the City's monitoring results within thirty (30) days of receiving
monitoring results. The permit holder shall then have ten (10) working days to reply in
writing to such notification. If mutual resolution of such discrepancy is not achieved,
additional sampling shall be performed by the City at the owner’s expense. Samples may
be split between the permit holder's laboratory or agent and the City's laboratory for
analysis.
Subd. 13. Wastewater Discharge Records: Wastewater discharge records of a permit
holder shall be kept by the permit holder for not less than three (3) years. The permit holder
shall provide the Director reasonable access to these records during normal business hours.
A permit holder, subject to an applicable Pretreatment Standard, shall maintain all records
required by Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Section 403.12 (n) of the General
Pretreatment Regulations.
Section 360:65. Pretreatment Compliance with Standards
Subd. 1. Where pretreatment, flow equalizing facilities or interceptors are provided for any
water or wastes, they shall be effectively operated and maintained in satisfactory and
effective condition by the owner, at the owner’s expense, and available for inspection by
City employees at all reasonable times.
Subd. 2. Industrial Users shall achieve compliance with all Federal Categorical
Pretreatment Standards within the time limitations as specified by the Federal Pretreatment
Regulations. Industrial Users as required by their Industrial Discharge Permit shall submit
to the Director for review, detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities at least sixty
(60) days prior to initiation of construction. The Director shall approve the Industrial User's
pretreatment plans if it appears that the proposed pretreatment facility is capable of meeting
all applicable limitations.
Subd. 3. The Director's review and approval shall in no way relieve the Industrial User
from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent
complying with the provisions of these rules. Any subsequent modifications in the
pretreatment facilities which will result in a substantial change in discharge shall be
reported for approval by the Director upon a determination that the modified facility is
capable of meeting all applicable limitations, prior to the modification of the existing
facility.
Subd. 4. Residual solids from a pretreatment facility shall not be disposed, directly or
indirectly, into the SCWWTS without prior written approval from the Director. The
disposal method shall be in accordance with local, State and Federal requirements. The
Director shall be notified in writing within ten (10) days of any substantial changes in such
residual solids disposal procedures and/or characteristics.
Subd. 5. Separator and Trap Installations: Grease, oil, and sand separators and traps shall
be provided at the owner’s expense for the proper collection of waste containing excessive
amounts of grease, oil or sand. All trap installations shall be regularly cleaned and
maintained for adequate performance. All records of separators and traps must be available
for review by City personnel. The distance between the inlet and outlet of the separator
or trap must be sufficient to allow gravity separation of solids. To prevent overloading,
flow control baffles and any necessary inlet flow, control fitting shall be provided.
Section 360:70. Confidential Information.
Subd. 1. User information obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications,
permits, monitoring programs, and from inspections shall be available to the public or other
governmental agencies without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to
demonstrate that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or
methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets.
Subd. 2. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which
might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by
the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for
uses related to this ordinance, the NPDES Permit, State Disposal System Permit, and/or the
Pretreatment Programs, provided that such portions of a report shall be available for use by
the State or any State agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the
person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be
recognized as confidential information.
Subd. 3. Information accepted by the Director as confidential shall not be transmitted to any
governmental agency or to the general public by the Director until and unless a ten (10) day
notification is given to the user.
Section 360:75. Severability and Conflicts.
Subd. 1. Severability: If the provisions of any section, paragraph, or sentence of these rules
shall for any reason be held to be unconstitutional or invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the provisions of the remaining sections, paragraphs, and sentences shall
nevertheless continue in full force and effect.
Subd. 2. Conflicts: If conflicts arise between these rules or regulations previously adopted
by the City, these rules, and the interpretations thereof, shall take precedence.
Section 360:80. Enforcement.
Subd. 1. Remedies Available: The Director may suspend the sewer system service and/or
an Industrial Discharge Permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the
Director, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, the environment,
or the SCWWTS, or would cause the City to violate any condition of its NPDES or State
Disposal System Permit. Any user notified of a suspension of the sewer system service
and/or the Industrial Discharge Permit shall immediately stop the discharge. In the event of
a failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Director shall take
such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to
prevent or minimize damage to the SCWWTS or endangerment to any individuals. The
Director shall reinstate the Industrial Discharge Permit and/or the sewer system service
upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge.
Subd. 2. Revocation of Permit: The Director may revoke the permit of any user which fails
to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; which
fails to report significant changes in wastewater constituents or characteristics; which
refuses reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring;
or for violation of conditions of its permit, this ordinance, or applicable State and Federal
regulations.
Subd. 3. Notification of Violation: Whenever the Director finds that any person has
violated or is violating this ordinance, Industrial Discharge Permit, Phosphorus
Management Plan or any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained herein, the
Director may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation.
Within ten (10) days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof
shall be submitted to the City by the user.
Subd. 4. Show Cause Hearing:
(a) Notice of Hearing. If the violation is not corrected by timely compliance, the
Director may order any user which causes or allows an unauthorized discharge
to show cause before the City Council why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time
and place of a hearing to be held by the City Council regarding the violation, the
reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and
directing the user to show cause before the City Council why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be
served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at
least fourteen (14) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent
or officer of a corporation.
(b) Hearing Officials: The City Council may itself conduct the hearing and take the
evidence, or may designate any of its members, administrative law judge, or any
officer or employee of the (assigned department) to:
(i.) Issue in the name of the City notices of hearing requesting the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence
relevant to any matter involved in such hearings;
(ii.) Take the evidence; and,
(iii.) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts
and other evidence, together with recommendations to the City
Council for action thereon.
(c) Transcripts: At any hearing held pursuant to this ordinance, testimony taken must
be under oath and recorded. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to
any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual
charges therefore.
(d) Issuance of Orders: After the City Council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue
an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a
specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed or existing
treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated.
Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.
Subd. 5. Legal Action: If any person discharges wastewater, industrial wastes, or other
wastes into the City's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this
ordinance, Federal or State pretreatment requirements or any order of the City, the City
Attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief.
Subd. 6. Enforcement Response Plan (ERP): The ERP describes violations and indicates a
range of appropriate enforcement options. An enforcement action can be issued in no
particular order for each violation to ensure compliance with city, state and federal
regulations and the Pretreatment Program.
Section 360:85. Penalties.
Subd. 1. Administrative Fines: Notwithstanding any other section of this ordinance, any
user who is found to have violated any provision of this ordinance, or permits and orders
issued hereunder, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000 per violation. Each day
on which noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct
violation. Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall constitute a lien against the individual
user's property. Industrial Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a request for the
City Finance Director to reconsider the fine within 10 days of being notified of the fine.
Where the City Finance Director believes a request has merit, the Finance Director shall
convene a hearing on the matter within 30 days of receiving the request from the Industrial
User.
Subd. 2. Criminal Penalties: Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be furnished by a fine of
not more than $800, or by imprisonment for not to exceed 90 days, or both.
Subd. 3. Costs: In addition to the penalties provided herein, the City may recover court
costs, court reporter's fees and other expenses of litigation by an appropriate action against
the person found to have violated this ordinance or the orders, rules, regulations, and
permits issued hereunder.
Subd. 4. Costs of Damage: Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance
shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage. The Director may add to
the user's charges and fees the costs assessed for any cleaning, repair, or replacement work
caused by the violation or discharge. Any refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a
violation of this ordinance.
Subd. 5. Falsifying Information: Any person who knowingly makes false statements,
representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this ordinance, or Industrial Discharge Permit,
or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or
method required under this ordinance, shall upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not
more than $1000 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
Section 360:90. Publication of Significant Violations. Public notification will occur at least
annually in a newspaper(s) of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the
jurisdiction(s) served by the WWTF of Industrial Users which, at any time during the previous
twelve (12) months, were in significant violation of applicable Pretreatment Standards or
Pretreatment Requirements. For the purpose of this provision, an Industrial User is in significant
violation if its violations meet one or more of the following:
Subd. 1. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which
sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all of the measurements taken during a six (6) month
period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric Pretreatment Standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits.
Subd. 2. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirtythree
percent (33%) or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter
during a six (6) month period equal or exceed the product of a numeric Pretreatment
Standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits times the applicable TRC (TRC =
1.4 for CBOD, SS, fats, oil and grease and TRC = 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
Subd. 3. Any other violation of a pretreatment (daily maximum or longer term average,
instantaneous limit or narrative standard) that the Director determines has caused, alone or
in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering
the health of City employees or the general public);
Subd. 4. Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human
health, welfare or to the environment and has resulted in the necessity for the City’s to
exercise its emergency authority under 40 CFR 403.8 (F)(1)(vii)(b) to halt or prevent such a
discharge;
Subd. 5. Violation, by ninety (90) days or more after the schedule date, of a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order, for
starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
Subd. 6. Failure to provide required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, selfmonitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules, within forty-five
(45) days of the due date;
Subd. 7. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
Subd. 8. Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of Best
Management Practices which the Director determines will adversely affect the operation
or implementation of the local Pretreatment Program.
History: Ord. 2333 1-8-07; Ord. 2385 1-7-08; Ord. 2403 8-18-08; Ord. 2482 12-06-10; Ord. 2576 1-6-14.
1
Section 365: Stormwater System Use Code
Section 365:00. Purpose and Policy. This ordinance establishes standards and requirements for
stormwater conveyance, treatment and discharge within the City of St. Cloud; erosion and
sediment control measures to be taken during the development of and alterations to lands within
the City of St. Cloud; and regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the City of St. Cloud
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The purpose of this ordinance is to protect public
health, safety and general welfare, property and the environment, and administer and implement
stormwater best management practices (BMPs) as required by federal (United States
Environmental Protection Agency) and state (Minnesota Pollution Control Agency) law.
The Objectives of this ordinance are:
(a) To maintain compliance with the City of St. Cloud’s Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Program (SWPPP).
(b) To regulate the contribution of pollutants and prohibit illicit connections and
discharges to the City of St. Cloud’s MS4.
(c) To regulate land disturbing activity; installation, operations, maintenance and
replacement of the stormwater system (MS4); and protect and prevent the discharge
of sediment into public and/or private lands, public infrastructure, wetlands and
waters of the State.
(d) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspections, monitoring and enforcement
procedures necessary to comply with this ordinance.
This ordinance shall apply to all water entering the stormwater system (MS4) generated on any
developed and undeveloped lands unless exempted by the City of St. Cloud.
Section 365:10. Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following
terms as used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings designated.
Subd. 1. “Applicant” is any person or group that applies for a permit to allow land disturbing
activities. Applicant also means that person's agents, employees, and others acting under this
person's or group’s direction. The term “applicant” also refers to the permit holder or holders and
the permit holder’s agents, employees, and others acting under this person's or group’s direction.
Subd. 2. “Best Management Practices (BMPs)” means erosion and sediment control and water
quality management practices that are the most effective and practicable means of controlling,
preventing and minimizing degradation of waters of the state, including avoidance of impacts,
prohibitions of practices, general housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational
practices, operating and maintenance procedures, and other applicable management practices.
Subd. 3. “Builder, Commercial” is any building contractor engaging in work other than work
performed under a license from the State of Minnesota as a residential building contractor,
remodeler or specialty contractor in the business of contracting or offering to contract to improve
2
residential real estate, as defined by Minnesota Statute.
Subd. 4. “Builder, Residential” is any building contractor engaging in work performed under a
license from the State of Minnesota as a residential building contractor, remodeler or specialty
contractor in the business of contracting or offering to contract to improve residential real estate,
as defined by Minnesota Statute.
Subd. 5. “Building Construction” is the construction of any principle building or accessory
structure or modification of a parcel of land or platted lot.
Subd. 6. “City” is the City of St. Cloud
Subd. 7. “Developer” is any person, firm, corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership, state
agency, or political subdivision engaged in a land disturbance activity.
Subd. 8. “Dewatering” means the removal of surface or ground water to dry and/or solidify a
construction site to enable construction activity.
Subd. 9. “Director” is the City of St. Cloud Public Utilities Director or authorized designee.
Subd. 10. “Erosion Prevention” means measures employed to prevent erosion. Examples include
but not limited to: soil stabilization practices, limited grading, mulch, temporary erosion protection
or permanent cover, and construction phasing.
Subd. 11. “Final Stabilization” means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed
and all soils must be stabilized by a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of seventy
(70) percent of the expected final growth density over the entire pervious surface area, or other
equivalent means necessary to prevent soil failure under erosive conditions and,
(a) All drainage ditches, constructed to drain water from the site after construction is
complete, must be stabilized to exclude erosion;
(b) All temporary synthetic and structural erosion prevention and sediment control
BMP’s (such as silt fence) must be removed. BMPs designed to decompose on site (such
as some compost logs) may be left in place;
(c) The area must be cleaned out of all sediment from conveyances and from temporary
sedimentation basins that are to be used as permanent water quality management basins.
Sediment must be stabilized to prevent it from being washed back into the basin and/or
into conveyances or drainage ways discharging off-site or to surface waters. The cleanout
of permanent basins must be sufficient to return the basin to design capacity; and
(d) The permanent stormwater management system is constructed to meet all of the
required design parameters, and is functioning as designed.
Subd. 12. “Hazardous waste” means any refuse, sludge, or other waste material or combinations
of refuse, sludge or other waste materials in solid, semisolid, liquid, or contained gaseous form
3
which because of its quantity, concentration, or chemical, physical, or infectious characteristics
may (a) cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious
irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness; or (b) pose a substantial present or potential hazard
to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of,
or otherwise managed. Categories of hazardous waste materials include, but are not limited to:
explosives, flammables, oxidizers, poisons, irritants, and corrosives. Hazardous waste does not
include source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of
1954, as amended.
Subd. 13. “Illicit Connections” mean any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface that allows an illicit discharge to enter the municipal separate storm sewer system
(MS4) including, but not limited to, any conveyances that allow non-stormwater discharge
including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter the MS4 and any connections to
the MS4 from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether they had been previously allowed,
permitted or approved by the County or City; or any drain or conveyance connected from a
commercial or industrial land use to the MS4 that has not been documented in plans, maps or
equivalent records and approved by the City.
Subd. 14. “Illicit Discharge” is any direct, indirect or accidental non-stormwater discharge to the
MS4, except as exempted in this ordinance.
Subd. 15. “Industrial Activity” is an activity subject to NPDES Industrial Stormwater Permits as
defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14).
Subd. 16. “Land Development (Develop)” is the process whereby improvement to a single lot
or to an entire site, occurs in one continuous process or in more than one distinct phase, including
but not limited to the following activities: site grading; installation of utilities; construction of
public streets; construction or grading of drainage ways; other grading or filling of any area within
the site; grading of building pad areas; utility hookups; construction of buildings; parking lots;
driveways; storage areas; private streets; and any other construction or land disturbing activity
within the subject property site.
Subd. 17. “Land Disturbing Activity” is any activity that results in a change or alteration in the
existing ground cover (both vegetative and non-vegetative) and/or the existing soil topography.
Land disturbing activities include, but are not limited to, development, redevelopment,
demolition, excavating, grading, clearing, filling, stockpiling, hauling, construction,
reconstruction and borrow pits. Routine vegetation management, and mill and
overlay/resurfacing activities that do not alter the soil material beneath the pavement base, are
not considered land disturbance.
Subd. 18. “Land Disturbance Permit (LDP)” is a permit issued by the City for the control of
pollutants, erosion and sediment during land disturbing activities.
Subd. 19. “Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4)” is the system of conveyances and
structural stormwater BMPs (including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains) owned or
4
operated by the City, designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and not used for
collecting or conveying wastewater that discharges to waters of the United States.
Subd. 20. “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge
Permit” is a permit issued by the USEPA (or by a State under authority delegated by the USEPA)
that authorizes discharge to waters of the United States.
Subd. 21. “Non-Stormwater Discharge” is any discharge to the MS4 that is not composed entirely
of stormwater.
Subd. 22. “Owner(s)” means a natural person, partnership, firm, association, public or quasipublic
corporation, private corporation, or a combination of, with a legal or equitable interest in
the parcel.
Subd. 23. “Parcel” is a tract, plot, lot, and/or portion of subdivision or other parcel of land,
intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership,
possession or for building development.
Subd. 24. “Permittee” is an LDP holder.
Subd. 25. “Pollutant” means anything which causes or contributes to pollution, including but not
limited to sediments, dirt, rocks and sand; paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and other automotive
fluids; non- hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or
other discarded or abandoned objects, that may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; wastewater, coliform
bacteria and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that
result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Subd. 26. “Preliminary Plat” is a drawing of the entire subdivision meeting all requirements of
the City’s Land Development Code.
Subd. 27. “Premises” means any building, lot, parcel or portion of land whether undeveloped or
developed, adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
Subd. 28. “Public Waters” are all waterbasins and watercourses that meet the criteria set forth in
Minnesota Statute Section 103G.005 subd.15.
Subd. 29. “Sediment” means soil or sand particles exposed to movement.
Subd. 30. “Sediment Control” means methods employed to prevent sediment from leaving the site.
Sediment control practices include silt fences, sediment traps, earth dikes, drainage swales, check
dams, subsurface drains, bio rolls, rock logs, compost logs, storm drain inlet protection, and
temporary or permanent sedimentation basins.
Subd. 31. “Stabilize, Stabilized, Stabilization” means the exposed ground surface has been covered
by appropriate materials such as mulch, staked sod, riprap, erosion control blanket, mats or other
5
material that prevents erosion from occurring. Grass, agricultural crop or other seeding alone is
not stabilization. Mulch materials must achieve approximately 90 percent ground coverage
(typically 2 ton/acre).
Subd. 32. “Stormwater” is rainwater runoff, snowmelt and subsurface runoff and drainage.
Subd. 33. “Stormwater Management Plan” is a document that describes the BMPs and activities
to be implemented to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or
receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
Subd. 34. “Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP)” is a plan developed to identify the
sources of pollution that affect the quality of stormwater discharges from a site and to describe
and ensure the implementation of practices to prevent or reduce pollutants in stormwater
discharge.
Subd. 35. “Stormwater Structures” mean any structure used to capture, convey and/or treat
stormwater runoff including but not limited to catch basins, manholes, sumps, stormdrains,
outfalls, inlets, outlets, ponds and infiltration/filtration treatment areas.
Subd. 36. “Structural Stormwater BMPs” mean stationary and permanent BMPs designed,
constructed and operated to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants in stormwater.
Subd. 37. “Temporary Erosion Protection” means methods employed to prevent erosion during
construction activities. Examples of temporary erosion protection include, but are not limited to:
straw, wood fiber blanket, wood chips, vegetation, mulch, and rolled erosion control products.
Subd. 38. "Wastewater" i s l i q u i d and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions which is discharged into or
permitted to enter the City's wastewater treatment system.
Section 365:20. Stormwater Utility Fee.
Subd. 1. Fee Calculation. The charges for a given parcel of land will be determined by adding the
Fixed Charge (FC) to the product of the Unit Rate (UR), Residential Equivalent Factor (REF)
and Unit Area (UA).
Stormwater Charges = Fixed Charge + (Unit Rate x ResidentialEquivalency Factor x Unit Area)
= FC+ (UR x REF x UA)
Subd. 2. Unit Area Determination. Unit Area will be determined by the following formula:
(a) Divide the area of a parcel (expressed in square feet) by 10,000.
(b) “Round-down” the quotient to one decimal place. The minimum Unit Area value
for any parcel will be 1.0.
6
The following table provides examples of the determination of Unit Area values:
Parcel Area Unit
Area (Square Feet) (UA)
5,000* 1.0*
10,000 1.0
20,000 2.0
43,560** 4.3**
65,000 6.5
* Minimum value rule applies
** Round-down rule applies
Subd. 3. Residential Equivalency Factor (REF). The ratio of the volume of runoff generated by a
Unit Area of a particular land use to the volume of runoff generated by a Unit Area of singlefamily
residential property based on typical surface conditions and average annual rainfall. The
REF for the various land uses within the City will be as follows:
Land Use * REF
Single-Family and Patio Home: 1.00
Townhouse, Duplex Residential, Detached Townhouse
and Twin-Home Residential: 1.00
Manufactured Home Park: 1.00
Multi-Family Residential containing three or more attached
dwelling units including Dormitories and Nursing Homes: 1.50
Schools, Day Care Facilities serving 16 or more persons,
and Religious Institutions: 1.50
Other Institutional: 1.50
Commercial, Industrial, Hospital, Medical District: 1.75
* The land and building uses listed in this table are defined in the St. Cloud Land
Development Code.
The REF for land uses not listed in the table will be determined by the Public Utilities
Director based on probable hydrologic response.
Subd. 4. Standardizing Charges. The following will apply for the purpose of standardizing
charges:
(a) Each single-family and patio home parcel, all undeveloped parcels, parcels situated
within the AG (Agricultural) and the RR (Rural Residential) zoning districts of the
City without sewer are considered to have a UA value of 1.0.
(b) Parcels containing townhomes, duplexes, twin homes, and detached townhouse
housing units, including manufactured home parks, are considered to have a UA
value of 1.0 per each housing unit on the parcel (for example, a parcel that contains
7
four (4) townhouse units will be considered to have a UA value of 4.0).
(c) Parcels containing tri-plex or larger multi-family residential structures are
considered to have a UA value of 0.5 per each housing unit on the parcel (for
example, a parcel that contains a 12-unit apartment building will have a UA value
of 6.0).
(d) Parcels subject to standardized charge provisions are not eligible for fee
adjustments.
Subd. 5. Fee Adjustment Procedure.
(a) An adjustment to Stormwater Fees can be made at the Public Utilities Director’s
discretion with a maximum of a fifty percent (50%) discount given to property
owners that demonstrate hydrologic response substantially different from the REF
used to calculate fees. Adjustments will not be effective retroactively.
(b) The total parcel area as shown in the City Assessor’s records will be used to calculate
the parcel Unit Area (UA). It is the responsibility of the owner or manager of any
premises to provide the City with necessary land surveys and other information to
determine if a parcel, or a portion of a parcel, qualifies for an exemption or a fee
adjustment. Requests will be reviewed after the receipt of all required information.
Fee adjustments must be approved by the Public Utilities Director, and will become
effective at the beginning of the next billing cycle following approval.
Subd 6. Stormwater Utility Fee Exemptions. Accounts that are billed annually are exempted from
the Fixed Charge (FC). The following land uses are exempt from the established Stormwater
Utility Fees:
(a) Public street right-of-way,
(b) Wetlands and public waters as defined by state law,
(c) Locations up to the 100-year flood elevation,
(d) Publicly-owned park lands, natural areas, and recreational fields,
(e) Railroad right-of-way,
(f) Cemeteries,
(g) City-owned land,
(h) Golf courses are an exempt use except for the club house/building/paved surface
portions.
8
Subd 7. Fee Information.
(a) Failure to provide information related to the use, development and area of a
premise, or falsification of such information, will constitute a violation of this
ordinance.
(b) If, precise information related to the use, development or area is not available;
stormwater fees will be estimated and billed based upon available information.
(c) Stormwater fees will be computed and collected by the City, in accordance with
the procedures set forth in Section 245 of this Code.
Section 365:25. Stormwater Impact Fund Fee.
Subd. 1. The fee is charged when the post construction stormwater standard cannot be met as
required in Article 19.12 of the Land Development Code.
Subd. 2. Any volume not met onsite will be subject to the stormwater impact fee. The fee is
determined by multiplying the remaining stormwater volume by the fixed cost multiplied by an
administrative multiplier.
Stormwater Impact Fund Fee = (Volume) x (Fixed Cost x Multiplier)
= (V) x (FC x M)
Subd. 3. Volume (V). The stormwater volume reduction not met on site as required by Article
19.12 of the City’s Land Development Code.
Subd. 4. Fixed Cost (FC). The fixed cost, as set in ordinance section 575, Public Utilities
Department Fees, is determined by the average expected cost per cubic foot of volume reduction
needed to construct off-site BMPs.
Subd. 5. Multiplier (M). The multiplier, as set in ordinance section 575, Public Utilities
Department Fees, is determined by the expected cost to administer, design and provide long-term
maintenance on installed BMP(s).
Section 365:30. Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination.
Subd. 1. Prohibited Discharges. No person shall throw, drain or otherwise discharge, cause, or
allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the City’s MS4, any
pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater.
Subd. 2. Stormwater Discharge Exemptions. If not causing a public safety or nuisance, or water
quality violation, the following shall not be considered prohibited discharges.
(a) Discharges from landscape irrigation, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater,
uncontaminated groundwater infiltration, uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
9
discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning
condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space sump pumps, footing
drains, lawn watering, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats
and wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, water main flushing and
street wash water. Discharges associated with dye testing; verbal approval prior to
testing is required.
(b) Discharges or flow from firefighting and other discharges specified by the City as
necessary to protect public health and safety.
(c) The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an
NPDES Permit, waiver or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and
administered under the authority of the USEPA, provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable
laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the MS4.
Subd. 3. Illicit Connections.
(a) The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections
to the MS4 is prohibited. This prohibition includes, without limitation, previous illicit
connections regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or
practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
(b) Improper connections in violation of this ordinance must be disconnected and
redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or
upon approval, to the City’s wastewater treatment system.
(c) Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in record drawings, maps or
equivalent, and which may be connected to the MS4, shall be located by the owner or
occupant of that property within twenty-one (21) days upon receipt of written notice
from the City requiring that the location be disclosed. Documentation shall be
provided to the City including location of drain or conveyance, drain or conveyance
identification as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and the outfall location or point
of entry into the City’s storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other point of discharge.
Subd. 4. Illicit Discharges. All users shall provide adequate protective procedures and BMP’s to
prevent discharges of any non-stormwater discharge to the City’s MS4.
(a) Discharges of prohibited waste shall be reported to the Public Utilities Director or
designee by the persons responsible for the discharge, or by the owner or occupant of
the premises where the discharge occurred, immediately upon obtaining knowledge of
the discharge. Such notification will not relieve users of liability for expense, loss or
damage to the MS4, or any fines imposed on the City under any State or Federal law.
The responsible person shall take immediate action as is reasonably possible to
minimize or abate the prohibited discharge. The responsible person shall send detailed
10
written notification describing the illicit discharge to the Public Utilities Director or
designee within seven (7) days of knowledge of the discharge. The letter shall include
the following information:
i. The time and location of the discharge;
ii. Description of the discharge, including estimate of pollutant concentrations;
iii. Time period and volume of discharge;
iv. Actions taken to correct or control the discharge;and
v.A schedule of corrective measures to prevent further discharges.
Subd. 5. Stormwater Inspections. The City may conduct tests as necessary to enforce this ordinance,
and authorized City employees may enter any property for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, obtaining information or conducting surveys or investigations to enforce
this ordinance. Entry shall be made during operating hours unless circumstances require otherwise.
Subd. 6. Discharge Sampling. The City may require installation of monitoring equipment. All
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained and in proper operating condition by the
discharger, at their expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure accuracy.
Subd. 7. Requirement of Best Management Practices (BMPs). Compliance with all terms and
conditions of a valid NPDES Permit or LDP shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of
this section. The City will adopt requirements identifying BMPs for any activity, operation, or
facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the MS4 or
waters of the United States. The owner or operator of such activity, operation or facility shall
provide, at the owner’s expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharges of prohibited
materials or other wastes into the MS4 or watercourses through the use of the BMPs. Any person
responsible for a property or premise that is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be
required to implement, at their expense, additional BMPs to prevent the further discharge of
pollutants to the City’sMS4.
Subd. 8. Industrial or Land Disturbing Activity Discharges. Any person subject to an industrial
or construction activity NPDES Stormwater Permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Written proof of compliance may be required prior to discharge to the City’sMS4.
Section 365:40. General Land Disturbance Requirements.
Subd. 1. Land Disturbing Activities Exemptions. All land disturbing activities are subject to this
ordinance except the following activities:
(a) Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life,
property or natural resources.
11
(b) Nursery, home gardening and agricultural operations that are confined to private
property.
Subd. 2. Land Disturbance Permit (LDP) Requirements. The following are required to obtain a
(LDP) for each lot.
(a) All new construction of single family homes, excluding garages and additions or repairs
to the existing home; or
(b) Land disturbing activities that disturb land of equal to or greater than five thousand
(5,000) square feet.
Subd. 3. The following activities do not require a LDP but are subject to the conditions of this
ordinance:
(a) Maintenance work by City employees.
(b) Federal, State, County, and other MS4 projects where the City does
not have regulatory authority.
(c) Commercial, industrial, subdivision development, roadway, utility and
grading land disturbing activities disturbing land less than 5,000 square feet.
Subd. 4. The LDP does not replace, eliminate, or satisfy the need for any other permits required by any
other public or private entity.
Subd. 5. Land Disturbance Permit (LDP). Prior to any land disturbing activities, the owner or
applicant shall be required to obtain a LDP, unless exempt in Subd. 3.
(a) The LDP application shall be submitted to the City.
(b) All single family residential LDPs shall be processed within seven (7) calendar days
from receipt of a completed application. All other LDPs shall be processed within
thirty (30) calendar days from receipt of a completed application.
(c) The City shall in writing:
(i.) Approve the permit application;
(ii.) Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions asmay
be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this Ordinance, and
issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
(iii.) Disapprove the permit applications, indicating the reason(s) and procedure
for submitting a revised application and/or submission.
12
(iv.) Failure of the City to act on an original or revised LDP application within
seven (7) calendar days for single family residential permits and thirty (30)
calendar days for all other permits upon receipt shall authorize the applicant to
proceed in accordance with the plans as filed unless such time is extended by
agreement between the applicant and the City, or the City notifies the applicant
of errors and/or omissions in the application requiring corrective action on the
part of the applicant. Once the LDP is approved, permit coverage will be
issued to the Permittee.
Subd. 6. Land Disturbance Permit (LDP) Submittals. The application for a LDP shall include
the following:
(a) One full set of site plans and a copy of the SWPPP, or portion of the SWPPP that
applies to the site, prepared for the MPCA if not included in the full set of site plans.
The City reserves the right to approve the SWPPP subject to conditions deemed
necessary to meet the purpose of this ordinance and the MPCA requirements. City
approval of a SWPPP does not mean approval by the MPCA, and MPCA approval
of a SWPPP does not mean City approval. At a minimum, all conditions of the MPCA
NPDES Construction Permit MN R100001 must be met; in some cases, the City may
apply stricter standards or require temporary and permanent erosion and sediment
control measures in addition to those required by other public or private entities.
(b) For all projects that include structural stormwater BMP’s the Permittee shall include
the name of the responsible party for post construction maintenance along with a
detailed maintenance plan. A permanent public easement and recorded Maintenance
Agreement is required for all structural BMP’s as part of the building permit process
per Land Development Code Section 19:12.
(c) If a SWPPP is not required by the MPCA, the following must accompany the LDP
application regarding site information:
(i.) Delineation of the subject property and the location of existing and
proposed buildings, structures and impervious surfaces;
(ii.) Description of the construction or land disturbing activity to be performed
on the property and proposed project schedule;
(iii.) Identification of all public waters located on and within 30 feet of the subject
property’s boundaries, and identify if a water body is intended to be used
for water quality treatment. Identification by use of best available maps
from the City, DNR or County will be sufficient;
(iv.) Identification of all wetland buffer zones;
(v.) Topographical data, including existing (dashed) and proposed (solid)
13
contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet, except that contour
lines shall be no more than 100 feet apart;
(vi.) Temporary benchmarks shall be established within the boundaries of the
project area. Descriptions, reference ties and elevations of the benchmarks
shall be furnished; and
(vii.) The location and size of all existing sanitary sewer, water or storm sewer,
and services on or adjacent to the property.
(d) Erosion and Sedimentation Control.
(i.) Delineation of all areas to be graded or excavated, and the limits of land
disturbing activities;
(ii.) Identification of measures to be utilized to control erosion and sedimentation
within and from the subject property during the project activity as required
herein;
(iii.) Identification of all permanent erosion control measures and a completion
schedule.
(iv.) Identification of the location of dirt or soil storage or stockpile areas to be
utilized;
(v.) Identification of all measures to be utilized to protect neighboring property,
water bodies, and wetland buffer zones; and
(vi.) Identification, use and maintenance plan of BMPs for temporary erosion and
sedimentation control as recommended by the MPCA including but not
limited to:
(a) Perimeter sediment control devices, including but not limited to silt
fence, sediment logs, mulch, etc.;
(b) Stockpile protection;
(c) Phased grading;
(d) Temporary seeding, mulching, and disc anchoring (with seed and
mulch type);
(e) Storm drain inlet protection devices;
(f) Appropriately protected construction entrance;
14
(g) Removal of all debris, dirt and soil from impervious ground
surfaces, including abutting public or private roadways and
sidewalks, in connection with the subject property (street
sweeping);
(h) Sediment basins and flow diversions; and
(i) Any other erosion and sedimentation control device as deemed
necessary by the City.
(e) Dewatering BMPs.
(i) Identify BMPs so that turbid or sediment-laden waters are treated
with appropriate BMPs such that the discharge water does not cause
a nuisance condition to receiving waters or adversely affect
downstream properties; and
(ii) Discharge points identified and adequately protected from erosion
and scour.
(f) Final Stabilization BMPs.
(i.) Identification of BMPs used to meet final stabilization requirements
including landscaping, seeding and stabilization BMPs.
(g) Management of Solid and HazardousWastes.
(i.) Identification of BMPs for the storage, handling, and disposal of
construction products, materials, and wastes per MPCA requirements;
(ii.) Identification of BMPs for the fueling and maintenance of equipment
and vehicles;
(iii.) Identification of BMPs for spill prevention and response; and
(iv.) Identification of BMPs for the management and containment of
concrete and other washout wastes.
(h) Drainage and Grading.
(i.) Identification of proposed contour grading at vertical intervals of not more
than two feet;
(ii.) The estimated time required to complete the work, the amount of material
to be moved and/or removed from the site;
15
(iii.) A map showing the stages or limits of grading together with the existing or
proposed finished elevations based on sea level readings;
(iv.) Identification of proposed building bench elevations and direction of flow
of surface water within each lot;
(v.) Methods of controlling dust;
(vi.) Submission of preliminary plans or program for water supply, sewage
disposal, drainage and flood control;
(vii.) Soil borings, if required by the City Engineer; and drainage and grading
design requirements such that no land shall be developed and no use shall be
permitted that result in water runoff causing flooding or erosion on adjacent
property (in excess of the natural drainage anticipated by the city stormwater
management plan). Runoff shall be properly drained via overland drainage ways or
channeled into the MS4, watercourse, ponding area or other suitable facility
approved by the City.
Subd. 7. Exempt Land Disturbance Activities. Exempt land disturbing activities shall comply with
the following requirements:
(a) Dewatering BMPs.
(i.) Installation of BMPs so that turbid or sediment-laden waters are treated
with appropriate BMPs such that the discharge water does not cause a nuisance
condition to receiving waters or adversely affect downstream properties; and
(ii.) Discharge points shall be adequately protected from erosion and scour.
(b) Final Stabilization BMPs.
(i.) Installation of BMPs used to meet final stabilization requirements including
landscaping, seeding and stabilization BMPs.
(c) Management of Solid and Hazardous Waste BMPs. Installation of BMPs for
(i.) the storage, handling, and disposal of construction products, materials, and
wastes per MPCA requirements; the fueling and maintenance of equipment and
vehicles; spill prevention and response; and the management and containment
of concrete and other washout wastes.
(d) Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control BMPs.
(i) Installation of BMPs to prevent erosion by employing measures such as but
not limited to soil BMPs stabilization practices, limited grading, mulch,
16
temporary erosion protection or permanent cover, and construction phasing.
(ii) Installation of BMPs to control sediment by employing measures such as
but not limited to silt fences, sediment traps, earth dikes, drainage swales, check
dams, subsurface drains, bio rolls, rock logs, compost logs, storm drain inlet
protection, street sweeping, protected construction entrance and temporary or
permanent sedimentation basins.
(e) Drainage and Grading.
(i.) No land shall be developed or used which results in water runoff causing
flooding or erosion on adjacent property (in excess of the natural drainage
anticipated by city stormwater management plan). Runoff shall be properly
drained via overland drainage ways or challenged into the MS4 watercourse,
ponding area or other suitable facility approved by the City.
Subd. 8. Land Disturbance Activity Standards. All permitted land disturbing activities must
comply with the approved SWPPP and/or appropriate BMPs as referenced in Section 365:40
Subd. 6 of this Ordinance until the LDP is terminated or the project reaches final stabilization.
Each non-compliant BMP (e.g. perimeter controls, inlet protections, concrete washout),
whether permitted or non-permitted, shall be considered a distinct violation of this Ordinance.
Subd. 9. Duration of Coverage by Land Disturbance Permit. A LDP shall remain effective
until one of the following occurs:
(a) Final Stabilization. Final Stabilization is achieved, a Notice of Termination (NOT)
has been filed with the City, all termination of coverage requirements is met and the
City has issued the NOT; or
(b) Time Requirement Reached. The LDP becomes void if work does not begin within
180 days of permit approval or is suspended at any time for over 180 days. Extensions
may be granted upon requests received at least 15 days prior to permit becoming
void. If a permit becomes void, the permit application process will begin anew; or
(c) Transfer of LDP. To transfer the LDP prior to issuing Notice of Termination (NOT)
to the LDP Permittee, (e.g. a homebuilder sells a house and lot to the final homebuyer
or the entire site changes ownership), the transferor must:
(i.) Submit a completed LDP Notice of Termination/Permit Transfer Form
to the Public Utilities Department. The original SWPPP, or equivalent
plan, shall remain in effect unless no longer relevant or a new plan is to
be used. A new plan must be submitted with the LDP Notice of
Termination/Permit Transfer Form.
(ii.) The transfer form must be submitted to the City within seven (7) calendar
days of assuming operational control of the site, commencing work on
17
their portion of the site, or of the legal transfer, sale, or closing on the
property. No new fees will be required.
(iii.) The transfer becomes effective five (5) calendar days from receipt of the
completed form unless the Permittee is contacted by the City during the
five (5) day period and notified of an incomplete form. The permit
modification portion of the NOT/permit modification form acts as the
permit application for the new applicant and a NOT for the current
applicant only for the portion of the site which was sold.
(iv.) Late submittals of LDP transfers will not be rejected, however, the City
reserves the right to take enforcement for any unpermitted discharges or
permit noncompliance for the new registered party that has assumed
control of the site.
(v.) For stormwater discharges where the LDP is transferred, the new
Permittee can implement the original SWPPP created for the project or
develop and implement their own SWPPP.
(vi.) The new Permittee shall ensure their SWPPP meets all terms and
conditions of this ordinance and that their activities do not render
ineffective another party’s erosion prevention and sediment control
BMP’s.
Subd. 10. Termination of LDP Coverage. A Permittee wishing to terminate the LDP must
complete Final Stabilization of the Parcel and submit a Notice of Termination (NOT) request.
Requests for NOT is done by completing the NOT/permit modification form supplied with the
permit; or using other proper NOT communication (phone call, e-mail) and submitting it to the
Public Utilities Director or designee as provided with the notice of coverage.
Compliance with the LDP is required until a NOT is submitted and approved by the City. The
NOT becomes effective fifteen (15) calendar days after the postmarked date of the completed
NOT form or other proper notification, unless the Permittee is contacted by the City during the
fifteen (15) day period and notified of an incomplete NOT. As-built drawings for all stormwater
structures must be provided to the City before overall subdivision permits are terminated. All
other LDPs must show that all stormwater structures are in compliance with the grading plan. A
notice of permit termination will be issued once the termination is approved.
Subd. 11. Land Disturbance Inspections. The City shall have the right to enter and inspect a
property to determine compliance with this ordinance.
(a) Self-Inspections. The Permittee or their designee must make regular inspections of
all the BMPs and the entire site at least once every seven (7) days during active
construction and within twenty-four (24) hours after a rainfall event greater than 0.5
inches in 24 hours. Records of these inspections shall be made available to the City
upon request.
18
(b) City Inspections. The Public Utilities Director and/or their designee shall make
inspections and either approve that portion of completed work or notify the Permittee
where work is non-compliant. The LDP fee shall cover the cost of routine
inspections. Additional inspections due to noncompliance will be billed to the
affected property owner at 2.5 times the base hourly salary of the Inspector.
Subd. 12. Post Construction Maintenance. Property owner shall maintain all stormwater facilities
in proper condition consistent with the performance standards for which they were originally
designed.
Section 365:50. Violations and Enforcement.
Subd. 1. Violation Enforcement. It shall be unlawful to violate any provision or fail to comply with
any of the requirements of this ordinance. A violation of the provisions of this ordinance, may be
subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this ordinance or may be restrained by injunction or
otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. It is the duty of the Public Utilities Director or
designee to enforce the provisions of this ordinance, including the power to inspect private premises
and issue orders for abatement.
Subd. 2. Right of Entry. In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health
or public safety, the City is authorized to enter the property, without prior notice, to take any and all
measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property, at the owner’s expense. The
City will pursue measures to recover all costs associated with the restoration.
Subd. 3. MS4 Service Suspension. The Public Utilities Director or designee may suspend MS4 service
when necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent
or substantial endangerment to public health or safety, the environment, or the MS4, or would cause
the City to violate any condition of its NPDES Stormwater Permit. Any user notified of a suspension
of the MS4 service shall immediately stop the discharge. In the event the user fails to comply
voluntarily with the suspension order, the Public Utilities Director or designee shall take steps as
deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the stormwater connection, to prevent or
minimize damage to the system, public health or public safety. The Public Utilities Director or
designee shall reinstate the MS4 service upon proof of elimination of the non-complying discharge.
Subd. 4. Stop Work Order. The City may issue a Stop Work Order in the event of immediate danger
to public health and safety, or the environment; noncompliance of this Ordinance or a LDP; failure
to obtain a LDP; or a LDP was issued based on incorrect information. Upon issuance of a Stop
Work Order:
(a)Only work to remedy the Stop Work Order will be allowed. The Stop Work Order will state
what remedial work is necessary and state the time limits for completing the remedialwork.
(b)If necessary remedial work is not begun or completed by the violator as specified in the Stop
Work Order, the abatement of the violation will be under the direction of the Public Utilities
Director, or designee. The expenses for the abatement will include a $75.00 administrative fee
in addition to the actual costs of the abatement. Abatement actions that require the presence of
City staff for more than one hour during the abatement or other extraordinary coordination efforts
will be billed to the property owner at the rate of $60.00 per hour. If abatement expenses are not
19
paid, they will be levied against the property as a special assessment and collected as in the case
of other special assessments. A $50.00 charge will be added to all accounts certified to the
County Auditor's office for collection. This fee is to be considered separate and distinct from any
penalty or interest that may be charged by the County as a result of the certification.
(c)Upon successful remediation, the Stop Work Order will be lifted.
Subd. 5. Land Disturbance Permit (LDP) Revocation. If the violator refuses or fails to cease work
after the Stop Work Order, the City shall revoke the LDP.
Subd. 6. Whenever the Public Utilities Director or designee finds a violation of this ordinance has
occurred, where an immediate public health threat does not exist, the Director or designee shall issue
a notice of violation and order to correct by personal service, regular mail or electronic mail. The
notice of violation and order to correct will be served upon the property owners, responsible parties,
violators, Permittees, and/or other responsible persons. The notice of violation will identify the
violation(s) and corrective measures required for compliance. The notice will require corrective
measures to be taken within a specified time period.
If compliance is not achieved, an administrative citation shall be issued. The administrative citation
shall be presented in person or by mail. The citation shall state the date, time and nature of the
offense, the name of the official issuing the citation, the amount of the scheduled civil fine, and the
manner for paying the fine or appealing the citation by requesting a hearing pursuant to Ord. § 1100.
Subd. 7. Abatement of Violation. If, after service of notice, the person served fails to abate the
violation or make the necessary repairs, alterations or changes in accordance as required by the order
of the Public Utilities Department, the same may be abated under the direction of the Public Utilities
Director or designee. The expenses for the abatement will include a $75.00 administrative fee in
addition to the actual costs of the abatement. Abatement actions that require the presence of City staff
for more than one hour during the abatement or other extraordinary coordination efforts will be billed
to the property owner at the rate of $60.00 per hour. If abatement expenses are not paid, they will be
levied against the property as a special assessment and collected as in the case of other special
assessments. A $50.00 charge will be added to all accounts certified to the County Auditor's office
for collection. This fee is to be considered separate and distinct from any penalty or interest that may
be charged by the County as a result of the certification.
Section 365:125. Penalties.
Subd. 1. Administrative Fines. Notwithstanding any other section of this ordinance, any person who
is found to have violated any provision of this ordinance, or permits and orders issued hereunder,
shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000 per violation. Each calendar day on which
noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation.
Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall constitute a lien against the individual user's property.
Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a request pursuant to the administrative hearing
procedure established in St. Cloud City Ordinance § 1100, Sec. 12 which is incorporated herein by
reference.
Subd. 2. Criminal Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be
20
guilty of a misdemeanor
Subd. 3. Costs of Damage. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall become
liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage. The Director may add to the violator’s charges and
fees, the costs assessed for any cleaning, repair or replacement work caused by the violation or
discharge. Additional inspections caused by noncompliance will be billed to the affected property
owner at 2.5 times the base hourly salary of the inspector.
Subd. 4. Falsifying Information. Any person who knowingly makes false statements, representations
or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be
maintained pursuant to this ordinance, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this ordinance, shall upon conviction,
be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or
both.
Subd. 5. Permit Fee Doubled. No construction, installation, alteration or repair, for which a LDP is
required, will commence without first obtaining the LDP A violation of this permit requirement
will result in the permit fee being doubled.
History: Ord. 2262, 1-9-07; Ord. 2403 8-18-08; Ord. 2414 11-24-08; Ord. 2415 11-24-08; Ord. 2483 12-6-
10; Ord. 2592 6-9-14; Ord. 2612 2-9-15; Ord. 2654 5-2-16; Ord. 2736 12-4-17
Section 370: City Water Use Code
Section 370:00. Purpose and Policy. This ordinance sets forth uniform requirements for use of St.
Cloud City Water.
The objectives of this ordinance are:
a) To prevent cross-connections to the drinking water system; and
b) To comply with the federal, state and local rules and regulations.
Section 370:05. Water Use. The fees, rates, and charges for the municipal water service shall be
for the terms, upon the conditions, and in the amounts set forth in Section 575 and shall be
collected in accordance to procedures set forth in Section 245 of this code. It will be illegal to use
water from an unmetered source connected to the public water system without prior written
permission of the Public Utilities Director.
Section 370:10. Unmetered Water and Metered Hydrant Water. Reasonable charges for use of
facilities, unmetered water consumption, special services and metered hydrant water may be
established from time to time by the St. Cloud Public Utilities Director. Parties that want to use
water from hydrants must apply for a permit at the Public Utility.
Section 370:15. Water Restrictions. Water use restrictions will be implemented at the Public
Utilities Director discretion. The City uses a Water Use Class system for determining water
restrictions. Nonessential water use may be restricted as needed.
Section 370:20. Penalty Imposed for Noncompliance. Water service to any utility account will be
turned off for noncompliance of the watering ban. Service will be reinstated only upon payment of
the turn-on fee.
Section 370:25. Notice of Disconnected Electric and/or Gas Service. When the City is notified that
a property’s electric and/or gas service is or will be disconnected, water service may be turned off to
prevent or minimize damage.
Section 370:30. Testing of Private Water Wells Required. It is the responsibility of all property
owners not connected to City water service and using private water wells to test the water well
annually for coliform bacteria and nitrates. The City may require written verification of testing
results. Testing required by this ordinance will be done by a laboratory certified by the Minnesota
Department of Health.
Section 370:35. Water Availability Charge. The WAC fees for all structures/properties will to
be collected on the Building or Plumbing Permit.
Section 370:40 WAC Exemptions. Buildings/property uses that meet any of the following
criteria will be exempt from the WAC fees:
Subd. 1. City Facilities. All buildings and building additions that are owned by the City
of St. Cloud are exempt from the Water Availability Charge.
Subd. 2. Sprinkling or Irrigation Meters. Water meters installed solely for the purpose of
irrigation are exempt from the Sewer Availability Charge; Water Availability Charges
will apply.
Subd. 3. Fire Suppression Meters. Water meters installed solely for the purpose of
measuring water for fire suppression are exempt from the Water Availability Charge.
Section 370:45. Redevelopment Credit. In cases of redevelopment, the property owner may
request a credit from the Public Utilities Director for the existing water availability at the
property prior to the redevelopment activity and apply the credit to the Water Availability
Charge. The credit given shall not be greater than the effective Water Availability Charge.
Section 370:50. City Water System Connections.
Subd. 1. No person, unless authorized, shall uncover, make any connections with, or disturb
the water system or appurtenances.
Subd. 2. All costs incurred in the installation and connection of the building water line shall
be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify and hold harmless the City from any
loss or damage to the public water system that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building water line.
Subd. 3. A separate and independent water connection shall be provided for every building,
except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no water is
available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard,
or driveway.
Subd. 4. The size, alignment, materials of construction of a water service line, and the
method to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the
trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification
thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in Practice No. 9 and applicable American
Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM) standards shall apply.
Subd. 5. City Employees shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction
and, in any event, the applicant for the connection shall notify the Plumbing Inspector and
City Engineer when the work is ready for final inspection and no underground portions shall
be covered before the final inspection is completed. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the Building Inspector Program Coordinator or his/her representative.
Section 370:55. Water Main and Laterals.
Subd. 1. No person, unless authorized, shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining permission from the Director.
Subd. 2. No water main shall be constructed in the City (except house or building service)
except by the City or others and subject to inspection during construction by engineers and
employees of the City. No such water mains shall be considered a part of the city water
system unless accepted by the City.
Subd. 3. The size, slope, alignment, material of construction, methods to be used in
excavation, placing of pipe, jointing, testing, backfilling and other work connected with the
construction of water services shall conform to the requirements of the City.
Section 370:60. Protection from Damage. No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment
which is a part of the city water system.
Section 370:65. Violations. Violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance will constitute a
misdemeanor.
History: Ord. 2387, 1-7-08; Ord. 2403 8-18-08; Heritage Preservation Ord. repealed 11-10-08; Ord. 2442 10-26-09
Section 380 – Life Cycle Housing
Section 380.00 – Declaration of Public Purpose. In October of 2002, the cities of Saint Cloud,
Saint Joseph, Sartell, Sauk Rapids, and Waite Park entered into a Joint Powers Agreement
pledging to ensure that 15 % of the combined total number of owner-occupied and rental housing
units built in each city will be Life Cycle Housing Units. The provisions of this Section are
intended to implement the Central Minnesota Life Cycle Housing Joint Powers Agreement by
establishing standards and procedures to encourage the development of Life Cycle Housing
within the City of St. Cloud.
Section 380.10 – Definitions.
Subd. 1. “Life Cycle Housing Development”: A residential subdivision in which 15% of
the total housing units to be constructed meet the definition of an Owner Occupied Life
Cycle Housing Unit and/or Rental Life Cycle Housing Unit.
Subd. 2. “Owner Occupied Life Cycle Housing Unit”: Newly constructed units that:
(a) Are sold only to households with annual incomes at or below 80% of the area
median income and are sold at or below the Life Cycle Housing price point; or
(b) Are sold to anyone, regardless of income, if and only if the builder/developer
has not received a written offer to purchase for a price equal to or less than the
Price Point from an income-qualified buyer before the end of a 30y day period
following completion of framing.
Subd. 3. “Price Point”: The maximum price for which the builder or developer can sell
an owner occupied Life Cycle Housing Unit. The price point is determined by the City in
cooperation with Central Minnesota Life Cycle Housing Board and will be incorporated
into a subdivision agreement prior to final plat approval.
Subd. 4 “Rental Life Cycle Housing Unit”: Newly constructed rental units whose
maximum monthly rent is no greater than 30% of the monthly income of households
earning 65% of the area median income, adjusted for the size of the unit, as specified and
periodically updated by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Section 380.20 – Incentives and Assistance. Any residential subdivision qualifying as a Life
Cycle Housing Development may be eligible for incentives and assistance as set forth in this
Section to facilitate the construction of Life Cycle Housing Units. The developer of a residential
subdivision qualifying as a Life Cycle Housing Development may request any combination of
the incentives listed to off-set the cost of providing the life cycle housing units. At its sole
discretion, the City may consider for each residential subdivision the extent that these or other
incentives are made available based upon the criteria established by Section 380.30, which will
be agreed between the parties through the subdivision agreement.
Subd. 1. Density Bonus. The City may provide a 15 % increase in the maximum
allowable residential density established by the Comprehensive Plan for any residential
development qualifying as a Life Cycle Housing Development. The density bonus will
not require an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan, zoning change, or other
discretionary approval by the City; other than those approvals required by City if the
development were not proposed as a Life Cycle Housing Development. The housing
units allowed by the density bonus will not be included when determining the total
number of housing units to qualify as a Life Cycle Housing Development. The density
bonus will apply to housing developments consisting of five or more dwellings.
Subd. 2. RLH, Residential Life-Cycle Housing Zoning. The City has enacted the
Residential Life-Cycle Housing, zoning district for the purposes of reducing the cost of
housing and limiting urban sprawl through increased density of single-family residential
neighborhoods. As such, the RLH zoning district establishes common standards for the
development of life-cycle housing and other small-lot single-family development without
the necessity of a planned unit development.
Subd. 3. Fee Waivers. At the request of the developer, the City may issue a
reimbursement for fees and/or charges related to the development and construction of
Life Cycle Housing Units, including but not limited to the following. Reimbursements
will be issued subsequent to a determination by the City that the developer has satisfied
the definitions of an owner-occupied or rental Life Cycle Housing Unit.
(a) Planning and Zoning Fees. The City may issue a reimbursement to the
developer for up to 20% of the zoning and subdivision fees for any Life Cycle
Housing Development.
(b) Building Permit Fees. The City may issue a reimbursement to the builder for
up to 20% of the building permit fee for any structure meeting the definition
of a Life Cycle Housing Unit. For multiple-family housing developments, the
building permit reimbursement may be available for any individual structure
meeting the definition of a Life Cycle Housing Unit.
(c) Sewer and Water Availability Charges. The City may issue a reimbursement
to the builder in the amount of 20% of the sewer availability charge (SAC)
and water availability charge (WAC) for any structure meeting the definition
of a Life Cycle Housing Unit.
(d) Parkland Dedication Fees. The City may issue a reimbursement to the
developer in the amount of 20% of a cash payment in lieu of park and open
space dedication, if any, for each Life Cycle Housing Unit constructed within
a Life Cycle Housing Development. A reimbursement will not be provided
for land dedication.
Subd. 4. Promotion of Life Cycle Housing Units. The City will work with developers of
any Life Cycle Housing Development to promote the availability of lots intended for
construction of rental or owner occupied Life Cycle Housing Units.
Subd. 5. Modification of Development Standards. At the request of the developer, the
City may modify for Life Cycle Housing Developments, to the extent feasible in light of
the uses, design, and infrastructure needs of the residential subdivision, the development
standards of the City Code, including but not limited to the following:
(a) Right-of-Way. The City, at its sole discretion, may reduce the minimum
right-of-way width for local streets serving a Life Cycle Housing
Development from 66 feet to 54 feet, where appropriate to maintain a safe and
efficient transportation network, as well as serve private and public
infrastructure needs.
(b) Street Widths. The City, at its sole discretion, may reduce the minimum street
width for local streets serving a Life Cycle Housing Development from 36
feet to 30 feet, where appropriate to maintain a safe and efficient
transportation network.
(c) Curbs and Gutters. The City, at its sole discretion, may allow deviations from
the requirement for barrier curbs upon local streets serving Life Cycle
Housing Developments. Mountable curb and gutter will be permitted where
deemed appropriate by the City.
(d) The City, at its sole discretion, will consider the reduction to one-side or
removal of sidewalks from local residential streets within Life-Cycle Housing
Developments where deemed appropriate to maintain a safe pedestrian
network. Sidewalks will be required along collector and arterial roadways.
Trails or bike paths will be encouraged to provide alternative pedestrian routes
within a development.
Subd. 6. Streamlining and Priority Processing. The City will develop procedures and
policies for streamlining and priority processing of any residential development
qualifying as a Life Cycle Housing Development to the extent feasible consistent with the
public health, safety, and welfare.
Subd. 7. Other Requests. The City will consider other forms of incentives requested by
the developer provided the request is consistent with the intent of increasing life-cycle
housing while maintaining high quality living environments.
Section 380.30 Criteria for Approval of Development Incentives. The City Council will approve
of a requested development incentive for a Life Cycle Housing Development provided the
evidence presented is such as to establish that:
Subd. 1. The development incentive is necessary to meet the developer’s life-cycle
housing commitment.
Subd. 2. The development incentive will not, under the circumstances of the particular
case, be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons within the Life
Cycle Housing Development.
Subd. 3. The development incentive will not unreasonably increase congestion in the
public street and/or compromise the ability to maintain the public street.
Subd. 4. The development incentive will not unreasonably diminish or impair established
property values within the neighborhood, or in any way be contrary to the intent of the
Zoning District in which it is located or the goals and policies of the Comprehensive
Plan.
Section 390 - Signs
Section 390:00. Definitions.
Subd.1. "Sign" means any written announcement, demonstration, display, illustration or
insignia used to advertise or promote the interest of any person when the same is displayed
or placed out of doors in view of the general public and will include every detached sign or
billboard and every sign attached to or forming a component part of any building marquee,
canopy, awning, street clock, pole, parked vehicle or other objects whether stationary or
movable.
Subd. 2. "Illuminated Signs" means any sign which has characters, letter figures, designs or
outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as part of the sign proper or by
indirect lighting.
Subd. 3. "Facing" or "Surface" means the surface of the sign upon, against or through which
the message is displayed or illustrated on the sign.
Subd. 4. "Incombustible Material" means any material which will not ignite at or below a
temperature of 1200 Degrees F. and will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature.
Subd. 5. "Structural Trim" means the molding, battens, capping, mailing strips, latticing, and
platforms which are attached to the sign structure.
Subd. 6. "Erect" means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix.
Subd. 7. "Ground Sign" means any sign supported by uprights or braces placed upon the
ground and not attached to any building.
Subd. 8. "Wall Sign" means any sign painted on the exterior surface of a building or
structure and any flat signs of solid face construction which is placed against a building or
other structure and attached to the exterior front, rear or side wall of any building or
structure.
Subd. 9. "Roof Sign" means any sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon or
over the roof of any building with the principal supports on the roof structure.
Subd. 10. "Projecting Sign" means any sign which is attached to a building or other
structure and extends beyond the line of said building or structure or beyond the surface of
that portion of the building or structure to which it is attached.
Subd. 11. "Marquee" means any hood or awning of permanent construction projecting from
the wall of a building above an entrance and extending over the thoroughfare.
Subd. 12. "Major Repair" means the repair or reconstruction of a sign to the extent of
making changes in the sign structure or facing.
Section 390:05. License and Bond Insurance Requirements. No person will engage in the business
of erecting signs, nor be entitled to a permit to erect a sign under this ordinance unless licensed to do
so by the City Council. A license may be granted by the City Council on written application filed
with the City Clerk in such form as prescribed and accompanied by the required annual license fee.
No license will take effect until the licensee files with the City Clerk a copy of the licensee's liability
insurance policy in a form approved by the City Attorney. The application will be accompanied by a
surety bond, executed by the licensee as principal, and by a corporate surety, authorized to execute a
bond under the laws of the State of Minnesota, in the penal sum of $10,000, approved by the City
Attorney and conditioned that the licensee will pay all permit fees required under this ordinance, pay
any fines imposed upon him for violation of the ordinance, will conform to all of the provisions of
this ordinance, and will indemnify and hold the City, its officers and agents, harmless from any
damage or claim resulting from or related to the erection or maintenance of any sign in the City by
the licensee. The application will also be accompanied by a copy of the licensee's general policy of
liability and property damage insurance, which will provide a penal sum of not less than $100,000
for injuries to or death of one person, not less than $300,000 on account of one accident, and not less
than $100,000 for property damage. The bond required herein will be effective for the period from
January 1 through December 31 of the license year. The bond and insurance policy will provide that
the bond or insurance policy will not be cancelled for any cause by the principal, the insured, or the
surety or insurance company without first giving ten (10) days notice to the City, in writing, of the
intention to cancel. The notice will be addressed to the City Clerk by registered mail or will be
delivered to the City Clerk personally. Annual licenses will expire the 31st of December of each
year. License fees will not be pro-rated or refundable.
Section 390.10. Permits.
Subd. 1. Permits Required for Each Sign. It will be unlawful for any person to erect,
relocate or make major repairs to any sign in the City without first obtaining a permit to do
so from the Building Inspector and making payment of the fee as herein required.
Subd. 2. Application for Permit. Application for permits will be made upon blanks provided
by the Building Inspector and will give the information set forth in the subdivisions which
follow.
(a) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
(b) Location of building, structure or lot to which, or upon which, the sign is to be
attached or erected.
(c) Drawing of the sign showing dimensions and describing the face of the sign.
(d) Upon Request: Give a copy of stress sheets and calculations showing the
structure is designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the
amount required by this and all other laws and ordinances.
(e) Name of person, firm, corporation or association erecting sign.
(f) Written consent of the owner of any vacant land on which the sign is to be
located.
(g) Such Other information as the Building Inspector requires to show full
compliance with this and all other laws and ordinances of the City. The Building
Inspector may waive subdivisions 5 and 7.
Subd. 3. Permit Issued if Application in Order. The Building Inspector upon receipt of an
application for a permit will examine the plans and specifications and other \ data, and the
premises upon which it is proposed to be erected. If it will appears that the proposed
structure is in compliance with all the requirements of the sign ordinance and all other laws
and ordinances of the City, the building inspector will issue a permit. If the work authorized
under a permit has not been completed within six months after the date of issuance, the
permit will become null and void.
Subd. 4. Permit Fees. A permit will not be granted until the applicant pays to the City
Treasurer the required permit fee for each sign regulated by this ordinance. Permit fees are
based upon the size of the sign as measured in square feet. The square area of all signs will
be determined by multiplying their greatest width by their greatest length.
Subd. 5. License or Permit Revokable at Any Time. All rights and privileges acquired under
the provisions of this ordinance are mere licenses revokable at any time by the City Council,
and all such licenses and permits will contain a provision to this effect.
Section 390:30. Annual Inspection Fees.
Subd. 1. Advertising Signs. The Building Inspector will inspect annually, and at such other
times as deemed necessary, each sign regulated by this ordinance. The Building Inspector
will determine if the sign is secure or insecure, whether it is in need of removal or repair, and
whether the sign is in compliance with all the requirements of the sign ordinance and all the
laws and ordinances of the City.
Subd. 2. Fees. To meet the expense of any annual or periodic inspections, the permit holder
of each sign will pay an inspection fee to the City Treasurer. Annual inspection fees will be
payable on or before December 31st of each year.
Section 390:40. Unsafe and Unlawful Signs. If the Building Inspector finds that any sign is unsafe,
insecure, is a menace to the public, or has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in
violation of the provisions of a City ordinance, written notice will be given to the permit holder or to
some responsible person at the property or by registered mail to the property owner. If the permit
holder or owner fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the provisions of the
ordinance, within ten (10) days after such notice, the sign may be removed or altered to comply by
the Building Inspector at the expense of the permit holder or owner of the property upon which it is
located. The Building Inspector may cause any sign which poses an immediate safety threat to be
removed summarily and without notice.
Section 390:45. Painting and Maintenance. All parts and supports of signs will be properly painted
unless they are galvanized or otherwise treated to prevent rust. All signs will be properly maintained
and owners of signs will comply with an order of the Building Inspection requiring sign painting and
maintenance.
Section 390:50. Wind Pressure and Dead Load Requirements. All signs will be designed and
constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square foot of area and will
be constructed to receive dead load as required in the Building Code or other ordinances of the City.
Section 390:55. Removal of Certain Signs. Any sign which no longer advertises a bona fide
business conducted or a product sold will be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or
person having the beneficial use of the building or premises upon which the is located within ten
days after written notification by the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector is authorized to
remove the sign upon the owner/agent failure to remove the sign within the 10 day period. Any
expenses incident to be removed will be paid by the owner of the building or premises to which
the sign is attached.
Section 390:60. Exceptions. The provisions and regulations of this ordinance do not apply to the
signs described in the subdivisions which follow. However, all said signs are subject to the unsafe
and unlawful signs provisions of Section 390:40.
Subd. 1. Real estate signs not exceeding 32 square feet which advertise the sale, rental or
lease of the premises upon which the signs are located only.
Subd. 2. Professional name plates not exceeding four square feet in area.
Subd. 3. Signs painted on the exterior surface of a vehicle, unless the vehicle is parked for
the primary purpose of displaying the sign.
Subd. 4. Bulletin boards not over 16 square feet in area for public, charitable or religious
institutions when the same are located on the premises of said institution.
Subd. 5. Temporary political yard signs not exceeding 32 square feet.
Subd. 6. Signs denoting the architect, engineer or contractor when placed upon work under
construction and not exceeding 32 square feet in area.
Subd. 7. Occupational signs denoting only the name and profession of an occupant in a
commercial building, public institutional building or dwelling house and not exceeding two
(2) square feet in area.
Subd. 8. Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into
masonry or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material.
Subd. 9. Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger, and
other temporary, emergency or nonadvertising signs as approved by the City Council.
Section 390:65. Signs Not to Constitute Traffic Hazard. No sign will be erected at the intersection
of any street or alley in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision of persons using the
intersecting streets, nor at any location where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it may
interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with "Look", "Drive-In", "Danger" or any other
word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
Section 390:70. Construction Standards.
Subd. 1. All ground signs in Fire Zones 1 or 2, as defined in the City's Building Code, will
have a surface or facing of incombustible material. However, paper copy on outdoor signs,
commonly known as billboards, will be permitted.
Subd. 2. All letters, figures, characters or representations in cut-out or irregular form
maintained in conjunction with, attached to, or super-imposed upon any sign will be safely
and securely built or attached to the sign structure.
Subd. 3. All ground signs will be securely built, constructed and erected upon posts and
standards sunk at least 3½ feet below grade and unless the Building Inspector will determine
that the size of supporting posts is sufficient to support the sign without bracing, each sign
will be supported and braced by timbers or metal rods in the rear, of the sign, extending from
the top to a point in the ground at least a distance equal to one-half the height of the sign,
measured along the ground, from the posts or standards upon which the sign is erected.
Subd. 4. All posts, anchors and bracing of wood that rest upon or enter into the ground will
be treated to protect them from moisture by creosoting or other approved methods.
Subd. 5. All ground signs and the premises surrounding the will be maintained by the owner
in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition, free and clear of all obnoxious substances,
rubbish, and weeds.
Subd. 6. No wall sign will cover wholly or partially any wall opening except on approval of
the Fire Chief.
Subd. 7. No wall sign will be permitted to extend beyond the building line except as
authorized by the Zoning Ordinance.
Subd. 8. All wall signs, except signs painted on the exterior surface of a building or
structure, will be safely and securely attached to the building wall by means of metal
anchors, bolts or expansion screws of not less than 3/8 inch in diameter, embedded in the
wall at least 5 inches; However, signs may rest in, or be bolted to, strong, heavy metal
brackets or saddles set no more than six feet apart, each of which will be securely fixed to
the wall as required above. In no case will any wall sign be secured with wire, strips of wood
or nails.
Subd. 9. No roof sign will be placed on the roof of any building or structure in such a
manner as to prevent free passage from one part of roof to any other part of the roof or
interfere with openings in the roof.
Subd. 10. Projecting signs exceeding ten square feet in area or 50 pounds in weight will not
be attached to nor supported by frame buildings nor the wood framework of a building. Such
signs will be attached to masonry walls with galvanized expansion bolts at least 3/8 inch in
diameter, will be fixed to the wall by means of bolts in the same manner as for wall signs.
However, when approved by the Building Inspector, a set of plates may be installed in the
interior of the building to securely attach the sign to the building.
Section 390:75. Revocation of Permits. The Building Inspector is authorized and empowered to
revoke any permit upon the failure of the permit holder to comply with any provision of this
ordinance.
Section 390:80. Penalties. Any person violating a provisions of this ordinance is guilty of a
misdemeanor. Each day that violation is committed or permitted to continue will constitute a
separate offense and may be punishable as such.
CHAPTER IV
Section 400 - General Provision for
Issuance of Licenses and Permits
Section 400:00. Application of Regulations.
Subd. 1. Compliance Required. It will be unlawful for any person either directly or
indirectly to engage in any business, or to use in connection with any business, any vehicle,
premises, machine or device, in whole or in part, for which a license or permit is required
by any provision of this chapter or any other law or ordinance of this City, without a license
or permit being first procured and kept in effect at all times as required by any provision of
this chapter or any other law or ordinance of this City.
Subd. 2. One Act Constitutes Doing Business. For the purpose of this chapter any person
will be deemed to be engaged in any business for which a license or permit is required, and
thus subject to the requirements of this chapter when he does one act of:
(a) selling any goods or service for which a license is required,
(b) soliciting such business or offering such goods or services for sale or hire,
(c) acquiring or using any vehicle or any premises in the City for such business
purposes.
Subd. 3. Agents Responsible for Obtaining License. The agents or other representatives of
non-residents of this City who are doing business in this City will be personally responsible
for the compliance with the provisions of this chapter by their principals and of the
businesses they represent.
Subd. 4. Separate License for Branch Establishments. A license will be obtained in the
manner prescribed herein for each branch establishment or location of the business engaged
in, as if each such branch establishment or location were a separate business; provided that
warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business
licensed under any provision of this chapter will not be deemed to be a separate place of
business or branch establishment.
Subd. 5. No License Required for Mere Delivery. No license will be required of any
person for the mere delivery in the City of any property purchased or acquired in good faith
from such person at his regular place of business outside the corporate limits of the City
where no intent by such person is shown to exist to evade the provisions of this chapter.
Section 400:03. Application for Licenses.
Subd. 1. Every person required to procure any permit, license or transfer under the
provisions of this chapter or any other law or ordinance of this City will submit an
application for the license to the City Clerk. The application will conform to the following
subdivisions.
Subd. 2. The application will be a written statement upon forms provided by the City Clerk,
such form to include an affidavit to be sworn to by the applicant before a person authorized
to administer an oath.
Subd. 3. The application will contain all information necessary to comply with the
subdivisions of this chapter under which the license is required and any other information
required by the City.
Subd. 4. The application will contain:
(a) Name and address of applicant.
(b) Purpose for which license or permit is asked.
(c) As to license any occupation or permit the doing of any act, the place within the
City where such occupation or act is to be carried on or done.
(d) The length of time such licenses or permits is to cover.
Subd. 5. All questions on the application blank must be answered and all information
required must be furnished. Any application for a license made by an individual owner will
be signed and sworn to by the owner; if made by a partnership, it will be signed and sworn
to by one of the partners; and if by a corporation, by one of the duly elected officials of the
corporation.
Section 400:06. Fees, Bonds and Insurance. An applicant for a permit, license or transfer of a
license to be issued or granted by the City will pay to the City the full amount of the permit fee,
license fee, or transfer fee required by this code and other ordinances of the City, and will file with
the City the bond, insurance policy, or certificate and certified copy of a state license, if required for
City license.
Section 400:09. Fees. Except as otherwise specifically stated in the regulations for specific
licenses or permits, the fees for the various licenses, permits and transfers will be as fixed or
estimated in Chapter V of this code or as otherwise provided in the fees ordinances adopted
hereafter.
Section 400:12. No Split Fee. The fee for each license issued will be the full amount provided in
this code or other ordinance of the City and no reduction in the amount of the fee will be made
because part of the license year has elapsed prior to the date the license is issued, unless specifically
stated.
Section 400:15. Permit Fee Doubled. Should any person, firm or corporation begin any
construction, installation, alteration or repair for which a permit from the City is required, without
having secured the necessary permit either previous to or during the day of the commencement of
the work, or on the next succeeding day when the work is commenced on a Saturday afternoon or
on a Sunday or a holiday, will, be required to pay double the permit fee and will be subject to all the
penal provisions of this code or other ordinances of the City.
Section 400:16. Hearing.
Subd. 1. Should any persons, firm or corporation be directed to pay double fees pursuant to
this ordinance, he may appeal said directive to the City Council by giving written notice to
the City Administrator within 10 days of the date upon which application was made for the
permit in question.
Subd. 2. In the event a hearing is requested by the permit applicant, the City Administrator
will set the matter for hearing before the City Council not less than 10 days and not more
than 30 days after request. The City Council will review the directive assessing double fees
and make its final order sustaining or modifying said directive. The City Council may order
any excess fees collected prior to entry of its decision returned.
Section 400:18. License Bonds. If the provisions under which any license is to be issued require
the licensee to furnish a bond, such bond will be executed by the licensee and a corporate surety,
and will be furnished to the City Clerk at the time the application is filed or as soon thereafter as the
City Clerk will request. The bond will be in an amount and with penalty provisions as will be
required by the license provision and will be approved as to form and execution by the City
Attorney and as to surety and amount by the Director of Finance. The bonds may terminate with the
annual license period or may provide for automatic renewal in the event the license is renewed.)
Section 400:21. Procedure for Issuance of Licenses. On receipt of an application for any license,
the City Clerk will transmit the same together with license bond and copy of receipt for license fee
to the Chief of Police or other department responsible therefor, who will cause investigation to be
made of the qualifications of the applicant and the City Clerk will determine whether the applicant
has complied with all requirements of the ordinance under which the license is to be issued and
which requirements are prerequisites to the issuance of the license. Unless the subdivision of the
ordinance pursuant to which the license is to be issued requires issuance of the license by the City
Council, the City Clerk will issue such license upon determination that such prerequisites have been
complied with, but if he will have determined that such prerequisites have not been complied with,
he will deny the application for issuance of the license. If any ordinance will require issuance of a
license by the City Council, the City Administrator will refer the application, together with a report
of the investigation and determination with respect to the applicant and his compliance with the
said requirements of the ordinance, to the City Council. The City Council will review the report
and findings and may grant or deny the license. The applicant for any license which has been
denied by the City Clerk may appeal the decision of the City Clerk to the City Council by filing
with the Clerk within ten days after receipt of notice of such denial, a request for review by the
Council of such determination by the Clerk. The City Clerk will refer the request to the City
Council at its next regular meeting, at which time the Council will hear the applicant and review the
determination of the City Clerk and may grant or deny such license.
Upon determination of the City Council that a license will be issued, such determination will be
transmitted to the City Clerk who will issue the license certificate in duplicate under the seal of the
City and deliver one copy to the applicant and retain the other in the license book as a part of the
records of the City.
Section 400:30. Contents of License. Each license issued under this chapter will state upon its face
the following:
(1) Name of the licensee and any other name under which such business will be conducted.
(2) The name and address of each business so licensed.
(3) The amount of license fee.
(4) The dates of issuance and expiration thereof.
(5) Such other information as the City Administrator will determine.
Section 400:33. License Period. All permits, licenses or transfers issued under any provision of
this chapter will terminate on December 31st of the calendar year in which issued unless a different
termination date with respect to specific licenses will be specifically provided with respect to such
permit, license or transfer.
Section 400:36. Renewal License Procedure. Applications for renewal of any license will be made
to the City Clerk on forms provided by him, and will contain any information required for renewal
of the license by the subdivision of this chapter under which the license is to be issued, and such
additional information as the City Administrator will require.
Section 400:39. Duplicate and Replacement License Procedure. A duplicate license certificate or
tag will be issued by the City Clerk to replace any license certificate or tag previously issued which
has been lost, stolen, defaced or destroyed, without any willful conduct on the part of the licensee,
upon the filing by the licensee of an affidavit attesting to such fact and paying to the Clerk the
required fee.
Section 400:42. Rebate of Fee. No rebate or refund of any license fee or part thereof will be made
by reason of non-use of such license, or by reason of a change in location or business rendering the
use of such license ineffective, provided that the Clerk will have authority to refund a license fee
collected through an error, or in cases where the application is denied by the City Clerk or the City
Council.
Section 400:45. Duties of Licensee.
Subd. 1. Every licensee and permit holder under any provision of this chapter or other
ordinances of the City will have the duties set forth in the following subdivisions.
Subd. 2. Permit Inspection. Permit all reasonable inspections of the business and
examinations of books and records by such authorities so authorized by law.
Subd. 3. Comply with Governing Law. Ascertain and at all times comply with all laws,
ordinances, and regulations applicable to such business.
Subd. 4. Cease Business. Refrain from operating the licensed business after expiration of
his the license and during the period the license is revoked or suspended.
Subd. 5. License Displayed. All licenses, tags, plates, or other method of identification
required by this chapter or other ordinances of the City will be kept on display at a
conspicuous place on the licensed premises, vehicle, or device, or where neither premises,
vehicle or device are licensed, on the person of the licensee, or in the case of licenses for
billboards or signboards, at the place of business of the licensee.
Subd. 6. Unlawful Possession. Not loan, sell, give, or assign, to any other person, or to
allow any other person to use or display or to have in their possession any license or insignia
which has been issued to such licensee.
Subd. 7. Pay Taxes. Pay all special assessment and real and personal property taxes levied
against real and personal property owned by the licensee and used in the licensed business
(prior to the date penalty attaches for non-payment).
Subd. 8. Inspections. All licensees and permit holders are subject to proper periodic
inspections, so far as to give the police officers and other duly authorized inspectors of the
City the right and power at all times to enter upon their premises for the purpose of
ascertaining the manner in which the business is being conducted.
Section 400:48. Change of Location of Licensed Premises. A licensee or permit holder will not
have the right to change the location of the licensed premises except upon the approval of the City
Clerk if the license will be issued by him, or upon the approval of the City Council if the license
will be issued by the City Council. Application for such renewal will be made in writing in such
form as will be prescribed by the City Clerk and will be accompanied by the required removal fee.
Section 400:5l. Transfer of License. No licensee will have the right to transfer a license to any other
person unless specifically authorized by this chapter or pursuant to a provision of the license.
Section 400:54. Enforcement.
Subd. 1. Inspections. It will be the duty of the Health Officer to inspect all licensed
premises hereunder for the purpose of determining any violation of law relating to health. It
will be the duty of the police department to inspect and examine all premises, businesses
and enterprises subject to license, or which have been licensed by the City. The City
Administrator will have the right to direct the Health Officer, any police officer, or any
other appropriate officer of the City to make such inspections at all reasonable times.
Subd. 2. Sealing of Unlicensed, Defective or Unsafe Machines or Devices and Affixing
License Insignia. Any food vending machine, cigarette vending machine, pinball machine,
children's amusement device, mechanical amusement device, or other amusement device
which is defective or unsafe, or which is licensed and has no license tag or other license
insignia affixed as required by law, or is required to be licensed by the City and such
machine or device is not currently licensed by the City, may be sealed by a tape or wire to
prevent its continued use. The tape or tag attached to the seal will state that the machine or
device is not to be used.
Subd. 3. Removing Seal, Using Machine Prohibited. No person will remove or deface a
seal affixed under these provisions except under the direction of an authorized agent of the
City. No person will use any machine or device on which a seal has been affixed under the
provisions hereof.
Section 400:57. Termination of License. At any time that the City Administrator will determine
that any person licensed under this chapter or other ordinance of the City will have failed to comply
with any requirement of law or with any provision of this chapter, he the Administrator will notify
the licensee in writing of the violation. The notice to will be delivered by the U.S. mail or
personally as the City Administrator may determine and deposit of the notice in the U.S. mail,
addressed to the address stated on the license application, will constitute service of the notice. If
such person cannot be otherwise found, the notice may be posted on the premises licensed. The
notice will require compliance with the provision of law, code or ordinance specified within a
reasonable time to be specified by the Administrator. Upon expiration of said time, unless the
licensee will have requested a hearing in writing, the Administrator, in the event that the license
involved will have been issued by the City Clerk, may terminate the license, or in the event that the
license has been issued by the City Council, the Administrator will report the matter to the City
Council and the Council may terminate such license, subject to compliance with any procedure
prescribed by the provisions of the ordinance pursuant to which the license or permit was issued.
Section 400:60. Hearing. In the event that a hearing is requested by the licensee, the City
Administrator will set a time for such hearing, not less than ten days and not more than 20 days
after request, at which time the City Administrator will hear all testimony offered by the licensee,
and will inform the licensee of all information upon which alleged violation of law has been
determined. If the license has been issued by the City Council, the hearing will be conducted by the
City Council. On completion of the hearing, the City Administrator or City Council, as the case
may be, may make a final order suspending or terminating the license in question. Upon the entry
of any such order by the City Administrator, the licensee may appeal the determination of the City
Administrator to the City Council by filing request for such appeal with the City Clerk within 10
days after receipt of notification of the order of the City Administrator, and the City Council will
thereupon promptly hear the licensee and review the determination of the City Administrator and
make its final order sustaining or modifying the determination of the Administrator.
Section 400:63. Payment of Taxes, Fines, Fees and Charges on Licensed Premises. It will be a
condition of the issuance of any license by the City pursuant to this code or any of the ordinances
of the City hereinafter referred to and amended, that all real estate taxes and special assessments
levied against the premises licensed and/or other fines, fees, charges or other financial claims
owed to the City will be paid prior to the last date when payable without penalty. Upon receipt of
evidence that such taxes, special assessments levied against any such premises and/or other fines,
fees, charges or other financial claims owed to the City have become delinquent, the City
Administrator will notify the licensee of the delinquency and that all licenses issued for the
premises under the circumstances hereinafter described will be terminated and cancelled thirty
days after date of the notice, and unless such taxes, special assessments, fines, fees, charges or
other financial claim owed to the City are paid and the county treasurer's receipt for the same
delivered to the City Administrator within said 30 day period, the license described in said notice
will upon termination of said 30 day period be deemed cancelled and terminated; provided,
however, that no such license will be cancelled or terminated during the time in which any
judicial or administrative proceeding is pending challenging the validity of the amount of the tax,
special assessment, fine, fee, charge or other financial claim of the City in question.
History: Ord. 2543 12-17-12
Section 405 – Dance Establishments
Section 405:00. Definitions.
Subd 1. “Public dance” means any dance the public may participate in by payment,
either directly or indirectly, of an admission fee, cover charge, fee for dancing, or fee for
membership in a club, and including any manner of holding a dance which may be
participated in by the public through the payment of money, directly or indirectly.
Subd. 2. “Dance establishment” means and includes any room, place or space in which
dancing occurs and is open to general public patronage whether or not a charge for
admission, either directly or indirectly, is required to be paid.
Section 405:05. License Required. No person, partnership or corporation will operate a dance
establishment in the City of St. Cloud without having first obtained a license. Notwithstanding
the forgoing, no license will be required to be obtained under this section if (i) the person,
partnership or corporation has already obtained an on-sale intoxicating liquor license, a 3.2
percent malt liquor license, or a hotel or motel license for the premises at which the public dance
would take place; or (ii) if the public dance would take place on the campus or in the facilities of
an elementary or secondary school, vocational or trade school, college or university, or similar
educational institution.
Section 405:10. License Application. A person, partnership or corporation seeking a Dance
Establishment License will complete an application containing the following information:
Subd. 1. The name, date of birth and address of the person seeking the license. In the
case of a partnership, the names, dates of birth and addresses of all partners will be listed.
In the case of a corporation, the names, dates of birth and addresses of all officers of the
corporation.
Subd. 2. The address of the property to be licensed, together with a floor plan depicting
the premises to be licensed and setting forth the square footage that will be open to the
public, and the number of off-street parking stalls that will be available to the customers
and employees of the premises.
Subd. 3. A statement whether all real estate taxes and special assessments that are due
and payable for the property to be licensed have been paid to the date of the application,
and if not paid, the years and amounts that are unpaid.
Subd. 4. A copy of any lease governing the premises to be licensed, in the event that the
premises are not owned by the applicant.
Subd. 5. The name, date of birth and address of any individuals employed by the
applicant as managers of the premises to be licensed.
Subd. 6. Such other information as the City Council or the Issuing Authority will require.
Section 405:15. License Application Execution. If the application is that of a person, the
application will be signed and sworn to by that person; if of a partnership, by one of the general
partners; if of a corporation, by an officer thereof.
Section 405:20. License Fee. The annual fee for a Dance Establishment license will be included
in Section 510 of the Code of Ordinances.
Section 405:25. Persons and Locations Ineligible for License.
Subd. 1. Persons ineligible. A license will not be approved for the applicant, the
applicant’s managers, partners (in the case of partnerships), and/or officers (in the case of
corporations) under the following conditions:
(a) Is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien, or is
legally prohibited from working in the United States.
(b) Is not at least eighteen (18) years of age on the date the
application is submitted to the Issuing Authority.
(c) Has a conviction of any crime that is directly related to the
occupation licensed, as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes, Section 364.03,
subd. 2, and the applicant has not shown competent evidence of sufficient
rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties as prescribed by
Minnesota Statutes, Section 364.03, subd. 3.
(d) The applicant is not the real party in interest in the business being
licensed.
(e) The applicant knowingly misrepresented or falsified information on the
license
application.
(f) The applicant owes taxes or assessments to the State, County, School
District, or City that are due and delinquent.
Subd. 2. Locations ineligible.
(a) No license will be approved for any premises on which taxes, assessments or
other financial claims of the State, County, School District, or City are
delinquent, or unpaid. In the event a suit has been commenced under
Minnesota Statutes, Sections 278.01-278.13, contesting the amount or validity
of such taxes, the City Council may, on application, waive strict compliance
with this provision, provided, however, that no waiver may be granted for
taxeswhich remain unpaid for a period exceeding one year after becoming
due.
(b) No license will be approved unless the premises proposed to be licensed
complies with all applicable zoning requirements.
Section 405:30. License Application Verification and Consideration.
Subd. 1. Verification. Applications for licenses under this section will be submitted to
the City Clerk by filing the same, together with the license fee, to the City Clerk. The
City Clerk is empowered to conduct any and all investigations to verify the information
on the application, including conducting criminal history and/or driver’s license checks
on the applicant, its partners, officers and managers. Verification will also include an
inspection of the premises to be licensed for confirmation that the premises comply with
all required building, mechanical, fire, health, zoning and off-street parking requirements.
Subd. 2. Consideration. Within a reasonable period after the completion of the license
verification process by the City Clerk, the City Clerk will approve or deny the license
application. If the application is approved, the City Clerk will issue the license by regular
mail to the applicant at the address provided by the applicant in the application. If the
application is denied, the City Clerk will notify the applicant in writing by regular mail at
the address provided by the applicant in its application.
Section 405:35. License Restrictions.
Subd. 1. Posting of License. A license issued under the this section must be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.
Subd. 2. Not to Admit Intoxicated Persons. A licensed dance establishment will not
admit or permit to remain on the premises any individual who is intoxicated or appears to
be under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs.
Subd. 3. Maintenance of Order. A licensee will be responsible for the conduct
of the public on the premises, including any contiguous parking areas and will maintain
conditions of sobriety and order at all times.
Subd. 4. Illegal Activities. A licensee will not allow any person to sell or use alcohol or
illegal drugs anywhere on the licensed premises, including any parking areas contiguous
thereto.
Subd. 5. Hours of Operation. No public dance will be conducted at the licensed
premises between the hours of one o’clock (1:00) a.m. and eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. on
any day.
(a) Licensee must establish and maintain a system that requires all juveniles
to depart the licensed premises one-half hour prior to their applicable
curfew hour.
(b) Licensee must establish and maintain a noise control policy to assure that
the noise generated inside of the licensed premises is not clearly audible
outside the licensed premises.
(c) Licensee to Comply with all other Ordinances. A licensee is required to
comply with any and all City ordinances, including but not limited to the
zoning ordinance, noise ordinance, amusement device ordinance, and food
and beverage licensing requirements.
Section 405:40. License Term. Each license issued under this section will be valid from January
1 until December 31 of the year in which it is issued.
Section 405:45. Sanctions for License Violations. The City Council may suspend or revoke a
license issued pursuant to this section for a violation of:
Subd. 1. Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in a license
application.
Subd. 2. Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the licensed business.
Subd. 3. Any violation of State law or City ordinances.
Subd. 4. A criminal conviction of a licensee, a partner in the case of the licensee being a
partnership, or an officer in the case of the licensee being a corporation, that is directly
related to the business licensed as defined by Minnesota Statutes, section 364.03, subd. 2,
provided that the person so convicted cannot show competent evidence of sufficient
rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of the licensed business as defined
by Minnesota Statutes, Section 364.03, subd. 3.
Subd. 5. Conducting the licensed business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as
to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or
general welfare of the community.
Subd. 6. A license suspension or revocation by the City Council will be preceded by
written notice to the licensee and the opportunity for a hearing. The notice will give at
least eight (8) days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing and will state the nature of
the allegations against the licensee. The notice will be mailed by regular mail to the
address of licensed premises.
Section 406 - Amusement Devices
Section 406:00. Definition. Amusement device means any electronic or mechanical machine or
device which upon the insertion of a coin, operates or may be operated as a game, contest or
amusement other than music, and which contains no automatic payoff device for the return of
money, tokens or merchandise.
Section 406:05. License Required. No person, firm or corporation will keep, maintain, exhibit or
permit to be operated in its place of business, any device without first having obtained a license and
having paid the required fee.
Section 406:10. Application. Any person, firm or corporation desiring a license will make
application to the City Clerk in writing stating; (a) the name and address of the applicant; (b) the
location of the premises on which such device is to be used and the general nature of the business (c)
that the device is not a gambling device and will not be used for any betting or wagering purpose.
Section 406:15. Issuance. Upon the granting of a license, the City Clerk will issue a license
certificate which will be numbered and contain the name and address of the person to whom issued,
the location of the premises where the device is to be operated, and the date of expiration of the
license. The license certificate will be accompanied by a sticker to be affixed by the licensee to any
device operated upon said premises and will be plainly visible to the person operating such device.
Section 406:20. Transfer Prohibited. No license certificate will be transferred to or used by any
person other than the one to whom issued nor at any location other than that stated in the certificate
but may be affixed to any device that may be used by the licensee at that location during the license
period.
Section 406:25. Illegal Uses. No person, firm or corporation will permit any device to be used for
betting or gambling purposes in any form. No prize, award, merchandise, gifts or anything of value
other than free games will be given to any person operating any such device.
Section 407:40. This ordinance will not apply to devices held or kept in storage and which are not in
use or displayed for use.
Section 407 - Amusement Centers
Section 407:00. Definitions.
Subd. 1. "Amusement Center". Any room, place or space available for public patronage,
operated as a business, together with any contiguous private parking areas of the
business, which utilizes in its operation five or more pieces of equipment or games,
including, but not limited to pool tables, billiard tables, table tennis tables, foosball
tables, pinball machines, or any mechanical or electronic amusement device. An
amusement center as defined in this section will not include intoxicating or
non-intoxicating, on- or off-sale liquor establishments licensed pursuant to Section 800 or
Section 810 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of St. Cloud.
Subd. 2. "Amusement Device" means any electronic or mechanical machine or device
which upon the insertion of a coin, operates or may be operated as a game, contest or
amusement other than music and which contains no automatic payoff device for the
return of money, tokens, or merchandise.
Subd. 3. "Operator" means any person, firm or corporation who owns, leases or rents to,
or places with others for use of play, any amusement device.
Section 407:05. License Required. No person, firm or corporation whether operated for profit
or not for profit will conduct, manage, supervise or maintain any amusement center without first
obtaining an amusement center license and a conditional use permit, pursuant to the Zoning
Code if required. The licensing period will be January 1 through December 31 per calendar
year.
Section 407:10. License Application. Applications for an amusement center license will be
made in writing to the City Clerk and will be verified by the applicant and accompanied by the
required license fee. The application will contain such information as may be required,
including, but not limited to, the following:
Subd. 1. The names and addresses of the property owner, the business owner, the lessor,
the manager and the operator and the names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the
amusement device. If any of the above are acting on behalf of a corporation, the names
and addresses of the shareholders, officers and board of directors will be filed with the
application.
Subd. 2. The address and location of the place where the amusement center and
amusement device will be operated.
Subd. 3. The number and types of devices to be used.
Subd. 4. Total square footage of the room, place or space where the amusement center
will be operated. A diagram will be submitted with the application showing the gross
area of room, place or space where the amusement center will be operated. The diagram
will be drawn to scale (scale must be indicated on the diagram) on size 8 1/2" x 11" graph
paper. Each floor must be shown on a separate diagram.
Subd. 5. The hours of operation.
Subd. 6. In addition to the above, the applicant will submit at the time of the application
a site plan of the premises showing location of amusement devices, sanitary facilities and
parking provisions for vehicles and bicycles.
Subd.7. The applicant for an amusement center license will provide the City with a
certificate of insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the amount of $100,000
per person and $300,000 per occurrence.
Subd. 8. Such other information as the Council may require.
Section 407:15. License Fee. The license fee for each amusement center will be set forth in
Section 510:00 of the Code of Ordinances.
Section 407:20. License Conditions.
Subd. 1. No amusement center may be operated between the hours of:
(a) 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day.
(b) Amusement centers which are also licensed to serve intoxicating or
non-intoxicating liquor are not subject to these hour restrictions.
Subd. 2. The licensee and his employees and agents will adhere to the provisions of the
City code relating to minors. No licensee, nor his employees or agents, will knowingly
permit a minor to be present on the premises in violation of curfew laws, nor knowingly
permit a person under the age of 17 years to be present on the premises between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on any day which Independent School District No. 742 (St.
Cloud) has classes regularly scheduled unless on a valid excused absence.
Subd. 3. The licensee of an amusement center will not permit intoxicated persons to
remain on the premises.
Subd. 4. The amusement center and the premises in which amusement devices are
located will conform to all building and fire prevention codes of the City. The Building
Inspector or Fire Inspector may enter the premises at any time during normal
business hours, for the purpose of inspecting the premises for fire hazards. All law
enforcement personnel of the City will have the right to enter said premises at any time
during normal business hours, for the purpose of enforcement of the terms of this section.
Subd. 5. It will be the responsibility of the licensee to maintain order on the licensed
premises at all times, including contiguous parking areas.
Subd. 6. Amusement centers which derive their principal source of income from the
utilization of equipment or games including but not limited to pool tables, billiard tables,
table tennis tables, pinball machines, or any mechanical or electronic amusement device
will have, in addition to a manager, a designated security person on the premises on
Fridays and Saturdays for all hours between 5:00 p.m. and closing of the day of
operation.
Subd. 7. The licensee will provide for daily outdoor cleanup of the area surrounding any
licensed premises.
Subd. 8. No amusement center will be operated so as to constitute a public nuisance.
Subd. 9. The licensee will, at all times, control sound on the licensed premises so as not
to cause disturbance or nuisance to others in the vicinity of the licensed premises.
Subd. 10. The licensee will be required to maintain liability insurance coverage in the
amount of $100,000 per person and $300,000 per occurrence.
Section 407:22. License Revocation. The Council may, after notice and hearing, revoke or
suspend any license issued under this section if the licensee is found to have violated any of the
provisions of this ordinance or any ordinance, state law, or federal law relating to the use, sale or
possession of non-intoxicating liquor or intoxicating liquor, or the use or possession of gambling
devices, or state law relating to the sale and use of tobacco products. The conviction of a person,
while an occupant of the licensed premises, of a violation of any of the above described
ordinances, state laws or federal laws will also be grounds for revocation of the license.
Section 408 - Charitable Gambling
Section 408:00. Charitable Gambling Fees. Prior to conducting charitable gambling within the City
of St. Cloud, an application and investigation or permit fee as set forth in Section 510:00 of the Code
shall be submitted to the Office of the City Clerk.
Fees will not be prorated or refunded.
Section 409-Circuses, Carnivals and Amusements
Section 409:00. License Required, Transported Shows. Any person or firm or corporation, who will
give or exhibit in the City of St. Cloud, any circus, or carnival will obtain a license and pay a license
fee to the City of St. Cloud in the required amount.
Section 409:05. Sideshows Included. An extra license will not be required for sideshows or concerts
under the same management and ownership as the greater show licensed under Section 409:00.
Section 409:10. Rubbish Removal. No show circus or carnival will permit any accumulation of
rubbish or litter upon any streets or ground used by it, and will, at its own expense, remove all
rubbish or litter necessary or occasioned by such show so that all streets and grounds used by it will
be kept free and clear of rubbish and litter.
Section 409:15. Theaters, License Required. Any person who will operate or maintain a movie
theater will obtain a license and pay the required license fee.
Section 409:30. License Required, Amusements. It will be unlawful for any person or persons to
maintain, operate or conduct any of the following forms of amusements, except when licensed and
the license fee paid:
Subd. 1. Pool and billiard tables.
Subd. 2. Bowling alleys, cone racks and similar games.
Subd. 3. Conducting or operating a place for skating. The license is to be procured by the
owner of the premises or the proprietor or operator of said place for public skating. Provided
further that when the applicant for a permit and license will hold an "on-sale" or "off-sale"
3.2 percent malt liquor license upon the premises or such 3.2 percent malt liquor license will
be subsequently procured or there will be direct or indirect communication with any room in
which 3.2 percent malt liquor is sold, given away or otherwise used, then and in that case the
license fee will be set forth in Section 510:00 of this code; the fee will not be prorated for
any part of the year.
Section 409:35. Clubs Exempt. Bona fide clubs incorporated under the laws of the State will not be
subject to any of the license fees required under Section 409:30.
Section 409:40. Term; Non-transferable. All licenses provided for in Section 409:30, Subd. 2, 2,
and 3, will terminate on the 1st day of January. Licenses are non-transferable.
Section 409:45. Marathons and Endurance Contests Prohibited. No contest or exhibition will be
conducted or participated in for which an admission is charged, either directly or indirectly or for
which a prize is given, either directly or indirectly, for the longest period of time or which constitutes
an endurance contest.
Section 409:55. Charitable Corporations Exempted. Notwithstanding the provision of any other
ordinance of the City of St. Cloud, whenever a license is required for the conduct of exhibits, shows
or other forms of public amusement, the fee required for such event may be waived if the applicant
for such license is a non-profit organization or corporation which meets the standards established in
Minnesota Statutes 290:05, Subdivision (9).
Section 410 - Gambling Halls
Section 410:00. License Required. No person will use or allow to be used, any building or part
of a building for the purpose of conducting lawful gambling in the form of pull-tabs, tipboard,
raffles, and/or paddle wheels without first obtaining a license as provided in this chapter.
Section 410:05. Exceptions. No License is required if the lawful gambling is to be conducted in
the building 12 or fewer days in any calendar year, in a bingo hall licensed pursuant to the
provisions of Minnesota Statutes Section 349.164, in an on-sale or off-sale liquor establishment
licensed pursuant to section 810 of the Code of Ordinances, or in a private club licensed pursuant
to section 810 of the Code of Ordinances.
Section 410:10. Annual Fee. The annual license fee for a gambling hall will be established by
ordinance as specified in section 510 of the Code of Ordinances.
Section 410:15. Requirements.
Subd. 1. Application. The application for license will contain, in addition to other
information required by the inspector, the name and address of the owner of the property,
the names and addresses of all shareholders and officers, if the owner is a corporation or
other association, the names of all tenants of the building, and which tenants will be
conducting the lawful gambling on the premises.
Subd. 2. Inspection, etc. Prior to the issuance of the license, the building will be
inspected by the appropriate officials. No building will be licensed unless it complies
with the requirements of the zoning, fire, building, health and sanitation codes of the City
and the State.
Subd. 3. Restrictions. The license applicant or licensee will have no financial interest
whatsoever in the operation of the lawful gambling, except for any rent to be received
from the tenant organization. The amount of rent to be charged will not exceed the rental
limits established by the State Charitable Gambling Control Board.
Subd. 4. Inspections. The licensed premises will be open to inspection by officials of the
City during normal business hours. The licensee will maintain written records of all lease
transactions, including rental receipts and tax records, and will make them available to
City inspectors upon reasonable notice. Failure to permit City officials access to such
records or access to premises will be cause for revocation of the license.
Subd. 5. Only lawful gambling permitted; obligation of gambling hall licensee. Only
lawful gambling permitted under the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 349 will
be allowed on the licensed premises. It will be the obligation of the gambling hall
licensee to investigate and assure that the organization conducting the gambling event has
obtained the required state license or city permit.
Section 410:20. Location.
Subd. 1. Minimum distance between gambling halls. A minimum distance of 1,200
lineal feet will be required between buildings licensed for gambling halls under the
provisions of section 410. The distance will be measured from the property lines.
Subd. 2. Zoning. Gambling halls will be located only in the C-5 commercial-zoning
district.
Subd. 3. Maximum size. The maximum size of any gambling hall facility will not
exceed 1,500 square feet of gross floor area.
Section 410:25. Signage. Signage visible from the exterior of the facility will be limited to one
wall mounted sign (internally lit only) of not more than 10 square feet in area.
Section 410:30. Hours of Operation. A gambling hall will not be open for business:
• Between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of any day.
• Between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sunday
• Between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Sunday and 8 a.m. on Monday
• After 8:00 p.m. on December 24.
Section 410:35. Alarm Systems. A gambling hall will be protected by an alarm system that is
centrally monitored and has a battery backup.
Section 419 - Unclaimed Property; Disposal
Section 419:00. Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the custody and disposal
of property lawfully coming into the City's possession in the course of municipal operations and
remaining unclaimed by the owner. The source of this authority is found in part in Minnesota
Statutes Section 471.195.
Section 419:10. Custody. Property lawfully coming into the City's possession in the course of
municipal operations will be retained by the City or its agent for a period of 60 days. Reasonable
effort will be made to identify the owner and notify the owner that the property is in the custody of
the City.
Section 419:20. Disposal. Property that remains unclaimed for a period of more than 60 days may
be sold to the highest bidder at public auction or sale following reasonable published notice. In the
alternative unclaimed property may be donated to a non-profit charitable corporation.
Section 419:30. Proceeds. The proceeds received from any sale, after deducting the costs of the
sale, will be placed in the general fund.
Section 419:40. Owners Right to Redemption. In the event that the owner of property sold
pursuant to this ordinance makes application to the City Clerk within six months of the sale and
provides satisfactory proof of ownership, the owner will be reimbursed the net proceeds from the
sale, if any. If no application is made within six months, the net proceeds will become the absolute
property of the City.
Section 419:50. Other Statutes or Authority. This ordinance does not supersede the provisions of
other statutes that govern the disposal of specific items of property (i.e. abandoned motor vehicles).
Section 424 - Tobacco
Section 424:00. Definitions.
Subd. 1. "Retail Tobacco Dealer" means any person, selling, offering for sale or having in
possession for sale, at retail, tobacco as defined;
Subd. 2. "Location" means the building, room or rooms, space or area where tobacco is sold at
retail, identified by a postal address and under the control of one person.
Subd. 3. "Operator" means the person in legal possession and control of a location by reason of
ownership, lease, contract or agreement, for the sale of tobacco at retail.
Subd. 4. "Tobacco Vending Machine" means any kind of device or mechanical machine which
upon the insertion of a currency, tokens or other objects will release in packages or otherwise,
tobacco for the purpose of selling the same at retail.
Subd. 5. "Minor" means any individual, without regard to sex, who has not attained the age of
eighteen years.
Subd. 6. "Tobacco" means cigarettes; cigars; cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut,
crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff; snuff flour, cavendish; plug and twist
tobacco; fine cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and
sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco, prepared in such manner as to be
suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or cigarette papers.
Subd. 7. "Self-service Vending" means the display for sale of tobacco products which are
accessible to the public without the need of assistance of an employee.
Subd. 8. The words "Tobacco Shop" mean a self-contained, independent retail facility, as
opposed to a department within a larger retail establishment, that is not more than 1000 square
feet in area, in which tobacco is offered for sale, with or without other non-tobacco products,
which includes open air display of individual products for inspection and selection by patrons,
and which is continuously staffed by an employee from which persons under 18 years of age are
prohibited from entering, and which otherwise complies with the requirements of Minnesota
Statute Section 461.18, Subd. 1(d).
Subd. 9. "Carton" means a package containing ten or more individual packages of cigarettes.
Subd. 10. "Smoking" means inhaling or exhaling smoke from any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe,
or any other lighted tobacco or plant product. Smoking also includes carrying a lighted cigar,
cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation.
Section 424:05. License Required. It will be unlawful for any person to sell at retail any
tobacco within the City unless the person then holds a retail tobacco dealer's license, in full
force and effect.
Section 424:10. Procurement of License.
Subd. 1. Any person desiring a retail tobacco dealer's license will make and file with
the City Clerk an application, in writing, executed in duplicate. Such application will
give the name and residence address of the applicant, if an individual, identify the
location at which it is proposed to sell tobacco at retail, and such other information as
the Council may from time to time require. The application will be accompanied by the
required fee.
Subd. 2. The City Clerk will immediately transmit a copy of the application to the
Chief of Police (application), who will investigate of all facts and information which
s/he can reasonably find, bearing upon the question of the applicant's fitness to receive
the license and to perform the duties imposed by this ordinance. Upon completing the
investigation, the Chief of Police will report, in writing, her/his findings to the Mayor,
together with her/his recommendation as to the issuance of a license to the applicant.
The Mayor will submit to the City Council the report of the Chief of Police, together
with the recommendation as to the issuance of the license to the applicant.
Subd. 3. The City Council will consider the facts and recommendation of the Chief of
Police and of the Mayor, together with any material facts which it may have or obtain,
and then, by motion, will approve or deny the application to the City Clerk together
with a copy of the motion. If the Council has approved the application, it is the duty of
the City Clerk to execute and deliver a license to the applicant on a form approved by
the City Attorney. Such license will be for the calendar year for which it is issued, or if
it be a first issue for the location by the licensee then for the balance of the current year.
Section 424: 15. Smoking Prohibited. Smoking shall not be permitted in and no person shall
smoke indoors at a location with a retail tobacco license.
Section 424:16. Sales of Less than a Carton. No retail tobacco licensee will offer any tobacco
products, packaged less than a carton, but more than a single package, unless a.) by a vending
display that is either on or accessible only from behind a checkout or service counter that is
staffed by at least one on duty clerk or employee, and the display is within clear view of that on
duty clerk or employee, or b.) such displays are contained in a locked display cabinet, to which
access is controlled by a store employee. This section will not apply to a tobacco shop.
Section 424:17. Sales of Single Packages. No retail tobacco licensee will offer for sale single
packages of tobacco products in open displays that are accessible by the public without the
intervention of a store employee.
Section 424:18. Self-service Vending of Cartons, Limitations. Self-service vending of cartons
of cigarettes is permitted provided that cartons will be sold only from display racks located
within 20 feet and in clear view of an on duty clerk or employee, and the display racks must be
equipped with clear shields that allow the removal only of a single carton of cigarettes that are
being displayed. All such displays will be accompanied by a sign stating "Shoplifters will be
prosecuted" in plain view of customers. This section will not apply to a tobacco shop.
Section 424.19. Prohibition Against Retail Sales of Tobacco by Vending Machine. No person
will sell or dispense any tobacco through the use of a vending machine.
Section 424:20. Suspension or Revocation of Licenses: Civil Penalty.
Subd. 1. The Council will follow the provisions of this section of the ordinance on the
suspension, revocation or imposition of a civil penalty against any license granted
under this ordinance.
Subd. 2. Notice Of Violation. The Chief of Police will report, in writing, any
violation of the provisions of this section or Minnesota Statutes Chapter 461
committed in the operation of the licensee's business to the City Attorney's Office,
giving all facts and circumstances known. If the City Attorney's Office determines
from the facts and circumstances reported, together with any other facts and
circumstances known to it, that the violation may warrant a suspension or revocation
of the licenses held by the licensee, it will fix a time and place for a hearing
sufficiently in advance to enable ten days written notice of the time, place and purpose
of such hearing. The City Attorney's Office will then report to the Council at its next
regularly scheduled meeting that a hearing has been scheduled on an alleged violation
at the licensed premises.
Subd. 3. Hearing On Alleged Violations. The hearing will be held before an
independent hearing officer, in accordance with Section 1100 of the 2007 Code of
Ordinances. At the time of the hearing, the licensee may appear and present any
evidence which is material to the investigation. The hearing officer will make a
finding of facts as to whether a violation of the provisions of this section or Minnesota
Statutes Chapter 461 has been committed in the operation of the licensee's business
and whether the violation was willful in nature. The hearing officer will also make a
recommendation of what penalty, if any, will be applied. The City Council will adopt
the hearing officer's findings of fact that the licensee is guilty of a violation of any of
the provisions of this ordinance or State law, and may impose a civil fine, or suspend
or revoke the retail dealer’s license in accordance with the schedule in Section 424.25.
Subd. 4. Mandatory Revocation. The Council will revoke the license or licenses of
any licensee under this ordinance if the licensee willfully violates any provisions of the
Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 461.
Section 424:25. Penalties for Violations. Upon a violation by a licensee holding a retail
tobacco dealer's license of any provision of this ordinance or any provision of a state law
regulating the sale or furnishing of tobacco to minors, the City Council may impose a civil fine,
or suspend or revoke the retail tobacco dealer's license in accordance with the following
schedule:
First violation………………………………………………………………….fine up to $100.00
Second violation within 24 months…………fine up to $200.00 and a 30 day license suspension
Third violation within 24 months………………….. fine up to $250.00 and a license revocation
Violation during period of suspension…………………………………………license
revocation
No suspension or penalty may take effect until the licensee has received notice, served
personally or by mail, or the alleged violation and an opportunity for a hearing before a person
authorized by the licensing authority to conduct the hearing. A decision that a violation has
occurred must be in writing, pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Section 461.
Any civil fine assessed against a licensee pursuant to this section must be paid in full within 30
days from receipt of written notification of the City Council imposition of the civil fine.
Failure to pay the fine within that time period will result in a ten day license suspension.
Licensees whose licenses have been revoked may not be issued a new license within six
months from the effective date of such revocation.
History: Ord. 2457, 4-5-10; Ord. 2520 12-19-12;
Section 433 - Explosives
Section 433:00. Scope of Section 433.
Subd. 1. Sections 433:00 et seq. will apply to the manufacture, possession, storage, sale,
transportation, and use of explosives and blasting agents.
Subd. 2. Sections 433:00 et seq. will not apply to the following:
(a) Transportation of explosives or blasting agents when under the jurisdiction of
and in compliance with the regulations of the Federal Department of
Transportation.
(b) Shipment, transportation and handling of military explosives by the Armed
Forces of the United States and the State military forces.
(c) Transportation and use of explosives or blasting agents in the normal and
emergency operation of federal agencies or state or municipal fire and police
departments, providing they are acting in their official capacities and in the
proper performance of their duties.
(d) Sale, use or public display of pyrotechnics commonly known as fireworks.
Subd. 3. Sections 433:00 et seq. will not apply to the following commodities and items:
(a) Stocks of small arms ammunition; propellant-actuated power cartridges; small
arms ammunition primers in quantities of less than 1,000,000 smokeless
propellant in quantities of less than 750 pounds.
(b) Explosive actuated power devices when in quantities of less than 50 pounds net
weight of explosives.
(c) Fuse lighters and fuse igniters.
(d) Safety fuse (safety fuse does not include cordeau detonant fuse), and 3/32 inch
cannon fuses or matchlock fuses (slow match).
(e) The sale or transfer of black powder or other commonly used non-smokeless
propellant in individual transactions involving quantities of five (5) pounds or
less when used for muzzle loaded firearms or used in the handloading of firearms
Section 433:05. Definitions.
Subd. 1. “Blasting Agent” means any material or mixture consisting of a fuel and oxidizer,
intended for blasting not otherwise classified as an explosive and in which none of the
ingredients are classified as an explosive, provided that the finished product, as mixed and
packaged for use or shipment, cannot be detonated by means of a No. 8 test blasting cap
when unconfined.
Subd. 2. A No. 8 test blasting cap is a blasting cap containing two grams of a mixture of
80% mercury fulminate and 20% potassium chlorate, or a cap of equivalent strength.
Subd. 3. Nitro-Carbo-Nitrate. This term applies to any blasting agent which has been
classified as nitro-carbo-nitrate under the Department of Transportation Regulations, and
which is packaged and shipped in compliance with the regulations of the Department of
Transportation.
Subd. 4. Explosive-actuated power devices means any tool or special mechanized device
which is actuated by explosives, but not to include propellant-actuated power devices.
Examples of explosive-actuated power devices are jet tappers and jet perforators.
Subd. 5. DOT means Department of Transportation of the United States.
Subd. 6. ICC means Interstate Commerce Commission of the United States.
Subd. 7. Explosive or explosives means any chemical compound, mixture or device, the
primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion -- i.e., with substantially
instantaneous release of gas and heat, unless such compound, mixture or device is otherwise
specifically classified by the DOT (formerly ICC). The term "Explosives" will include all
material which is classified as Class A, Class B and Class C explosives by the DOT
(formerly ICC), and includes, but is not limited to, dynamite, black powder, pellet powders,
initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting caps, safety fuse, fuse lighters, fuse
igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant fuse, instantaneous fuse, igniter cord, igniters, small arms
ammunition, small arms ammunition primers, smokeless propellant, cartridges for propellant
actuated power devices and cartridges for industrial guns, and some special fireworks.
(Commercial explosives are those explosives which are intended to be used in commercial or
industrial operations.)
Subd. 8. Classification of explosives as described by the Department of Transportation,
DOT (formerly Interstate Commerce Commission, ICC) means:
(a) Class A Explosives. Possessing, detonating or otherwise maximum hazard; such as
dynamite, nitro-glycerin, picric acid, lead azide, fulminate of mercury, black powder,
blasting caps, and detonating primers.
(b) Class B Explosives. Possessing flammable hazard, such as propellant explosives
(including some smokeless propellants), photographic flash powders, and some
special fireworks.
(c) Class C Explosives. Includes certain types of manufactured articles which contain
Class A or Class B explosives, or both, as components but in restricted quantities.
(d) Forbidden or Not Acceptable Explosives. Means explosives which are forbidden or
not acceptable for transportation by common carriers, by rail freight, rail express,
highway or water in accordance with the regulations of the DOT (formerly ICC).
(e) Certain chemicals and certain fuel materials may have explosive characteristics
which are not specifically classified by the DOT (formerly ICC) and are not readily
classified for coverage in the code. Authoritative information should be obtained for
such unclassified materials and action commensurate with their hazards, location,
isolation and safeguards, should be taken.
Subd. 9. Highway means any public street, public alley or public road.
Subd. 10. Inhabited buildings means a building or structure regularly used in whole or in art
as a place of human habitation. The term "inhabited building" will also mean any church,
school, store, railway passenger station, airport terminal for passengers, and any other
building or structure where people are accustomed to congregate or assemble, but excluding
any building or structure occupied in connection with the manufacture, transportation,
storage and use of explosives.
Subd. 11. Magazine means any building or structure, other than an explosives =
manufacturing building, approved for the storage of explosives.
Subd. 12. Motor vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle, truck, tractor, semi-trailer,
or truck-full trailers used for the transportation of freight over public highways.
Subd. 13. Propellant-actuated power devices means any tool or special mechanized
device or gas generator system which is actuated by a smokeless propellant or which releases
and directs work through a smokeless propellant charge.
Subd. 14. Public conveyance means any railroad car, street car, ferry, cab, bus, airplane
or other vehicle which is carrying passengers for hire.
Subd. 15. Railway means any steam, electric, diesel, electric or other railroad or
railway which carries passengers for hire on the particular line or branch in the vicinity
where explosives are stored or where explosives manufacturing buildings are situated.
Subd. 17. Small arms ammunition means any shotgun, rifle, pistol or revolver cartridge
and cartridge for propellant-actuated power devices and industrial guns. Military-type
ammunition containing explosives bursting charges, spotting or pyrotechnic projectiles is
excluded from this definition.
Subd. 18. Small arms ammunition primers means small percussion-sensitive explosive
charges, encased in a cup, used to ignite propellant powder.
Subd. 19. Smokeless propellants. Smokeless propellants, commonly called smokeless
powders in the trade, used in small arms ammunition, cannon, rockets, propellant-actuated
power devices, etc.
Subd. 20. Special industrial explosive devices means explosive-actuated power devices
and propellant-actuated power devices.
Subd. 21. Special industrial explosives materials means shaped materials and sheet
forms and various other extrusions, pellets and packages of high explosives, which include
dynamite, TNT, PETN, RDX, and other similar compounds used for high-energy-rate
forming, expanding and shaping in metal fabrication, and for dismemberment and quick
reduction of scrap metal.
Section 433:10. Permits Required for Acquisition and Use. It will be unlawful for any person to
acquire, possess, use, sell or handle any explosive except as otherwise provided by this Section
within the City of St. Cloud, without possessing a permit.
Section 433:15. Application.
Subd. 1. Any person desiring a permit will make application in writing to the City Clerk on
such forms as the City Clerk may prescribe.
Subd. 2. The application for a permit will be sworn to by the applicant and will contain the
following information:
(a) Name and address of the applicant;
(b) The applicant's date of birth;
(c) Where applicant intends to permanently store the explosives and the storage security
measures provided at the storage and use sites;
(d) The applicant's intended use for explosives.
(e) All information relative to applicant with respect to facts required under Section
433:20, Subd. 2;
(f) All such additional information as may be prescribed by the City Council in
determining whether the applicant is qualified to possess such permit under the
requirements of Section 433:00 et seq.
Subd. 3. Upon receipt of an application the Clerk will notify the Chief of the Fire
Department. The Chief will inspect the premises upon which the applicant desires the Fire
Chief to store, handle and use the explosives as set forth in the application and if he is
satisfied (1) that no serious fire hazard will be created, and (2) that the applicant plans to
store and use the explosives in the manner prescribed by this ordinance, he will endorse his
approval upon the application and return it to the Clerk who will present the application to
the Council.
Section 433:20. Issuance.
Subd. 1. A permit will be issued by the City Clerk, only upon approval of the City
Council.
Subd. 2. The Council will deny the issuance of a permit to anyone who:
(a) Has been convicted within the past ten years of a felony or gross
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or anyone who is presently under
indictment for any such crime; or
(b) Has been within the past ten years convicted of a crime in which the use,
possession or sale of narcotics or illicit drugs was an element; or
(c) Has been treated within the past ten years for addiction to narcotic or illicit
drugs, or has been within such time period admitted to any hospital or
institution for treatment of narcotics or illicit drug addiction, or has been
within such time period, certified by a licensed medical doctor as being
addicted to narcotic or illicit drugs; or
(d) Has been within the past ten years, acquitted of any criminal charge by
reason of mental illness; or
(e) Is not twenty-one years of age at the time when application for such permit
is made.
Section 433:25. Fee. If the Council approves the permit, the Clerk will, upon receipt of the required
fee, prepare and deliver to the applicant a permit as is requested in the application. No permit will
be granted for a period exceeding one year.
Section 433:30. Permit Revocation or Suspension. A permit may be revoked or suspended at any
time by order of the City Council for any violation of the provisions of this ordinance or upon the
creation or existence of any condition which would, in the opinion of the Chief of the Fire
Department, create or tend to create a fire hazard.
Section 433:35. May Not Transfer to Unauthorized Person. No person will sell, transfer or give
away any explosive or blasting agent to anyone who does not possess a valid permit issued pursuant
to this ordinance.
Section 433:40. Seller's Record and Report.
Subd. 1. Every person selling or giving away explosives covered by this ordinance will
maintain an accurate record in a bound book, of all explosives handled, indicating a detailed
account of:
(a) Date of each transference of explosives;
(b) Amount of each such transference;
(c) Name and address of each purchaser or transferee;
(d) Manufacturer of the explosives being transferred;
(e) The type of and any identification numbers of explosives being transferred;
(f) Explosives owner's or user's permit number;
(g) Intended place of storage of the explosive by the purchaser or transferee;
(h) Intended use site; and
(i) Security measures provided at the storage site and at the use site.
Subd. 2. Such record book will at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of the
Chief of the Fire Department and all duly constituted law enforcement
officials of the City of St. Cloud. In addition, on the first day of every month
the seller or transferor will make a report to the Chief of the Fire Department
of the transactions which took place that month.
Section 433:45. Storage and Security Requirements. Any person storing, handling, using or in any
way disposing of explosives covered by this ordinance will maintain minimum safety and security
features of all permanent and temporary storage facilities in a manner prescribed by the Rules and
Regulations of the Minnesota State Fire Marshal governing the storage, handling, use and
transportation of blasting agents and explosives.
Section 433:50. Report of Thefts. Any person who has explosives in his possession and who incurs
a loss or theft of explosives immediately, (and in no event longer than 24 hours from the time of
discovery), inform the office of the local Chief of Police of the loss or theft, the amount missing and
the approximate time of the occurrence.
Section 433:55. Bomb Threats.
Subd. 1. It will be unlawful and a penal offense for anyone to do the acts described in
the following subdivisions.
Subd. 2. As a hoax, to communicate or cause to be communicated the fact that a bomb
or any other explosive device has been placed in any building or in any
location other than a building.
Subd. 3. As a hoax, to threaten to bomb any person, place or building.
Subd. 4. To knowingly permit any telephone or other means of communication to be
used for any purposes prohibited by this section.
Subd. 5. As a hoax, to place or cause to be placed in any location any article,
constructed or placed with intent to give the impression that the article
possesses explosive capability.
Section 436-Fireworks
Section 436:00. Definitions.
Subd. 1. Fireworks: For the purposes of this section, “fireworks” will have the same
definition as contained in Minnesota Statute § 624.20 subd. 1 or any superceding statute.
Section 436:05. Sale and Use of Fireworks Prohibited. It will be unlawful for any person to offer
for sale, or use or explode any fireworks, except as otherwise provided.
Section 436:10. Permit Required. No person will sell or possess for sale fireworks without first
having obtained an annual permit from the City.
Subd. 1. Application for Aerial Fireworks Display. An application for an aerial
fireworks display permit will be made in writing to the City Clerk at least 15 days in
advance of the date of the aerial fireworks display. The application will be promptly
referred to the Fire Chief.
(a) Investigation. The Fire Chief will make an investigation to determine whether
the operator of the aerial fireworks display is competent and whether the
display is of such a character and is to be so located, discharged, or fired that
it will not be hazardous to property or endanger any person. The Fire Chief
will report the results of this investigation to the City Clerk and if the Fire
Chief reports that the operator is competent and that the display as planned
will conform to safety requirements, including the rules and regulations of the
State Fire Marshal, the City Clerk will issue a permit for the display when the
applicant pays a permit fee set forth in Section 520 of this Code. After such
permit will have been granted, sales, possession, use and distribution of
fireworks for such aerial fireworks display will be lawful for that purpose
only. No permit so granted will be transferable.
Subd. 2. Application for Permitted Sales, Use, and/or Possession. An application for a
permitted sale, use, and/or possession permit will be made in writing to the City Clerk at
least 15 days in advance of the date of the sales or retail display. The application will be
promptly referred to the Fire Chief.
(a) Investigation. The Fire Chief will make an investigation to determine whether
the applicant is competent. The Fire Chief will report the results of this
investigation to the Clerk and if he reports that in his opinion the applicant is
competent and that the permitted sale, use, and/or possession will conform to
safety requirements, including the rules and regulations of the State Fire
Marshal, the Clerk will issue a permit when the applicant pays a permit fee set
forth in Section 520 of this Code. After the permit has been granted, sales,
possession, use and/or distribution of fireworks will be lawful. No permit will
be transferable.
Subd. 3. The designated Fire Official will give final approval or denial of an application
for the manufacture, storage for commercial purposes or sale of fireworks within 30 days
of such application being made to the City.
Subd. 4. Permits for permitted use, sale, and/or possession will be issued for the calendar
year applied for and will expire on December 31st of that year. Aerial fireworks display
permits and sales and retail display permits will be issued for the duration of the event
only and expire thereafter.
Subd. 5. Prior to processing the application, a criminal records check may be conducted.
Neither the applicant nor the responsible party for the permit will have been convicted of
a felony or a fire or fireworks-related misdemeanor within the last three years.
Subd. 6. Prior to processing the application, the designated Fire Official will determine
that the proposed location is code compliant.
Subd. 7. The application will include a letter from the person legally responsible for the
property on which the fireworks related activity would occur. Such letter will grant
permission to the applicant for the use of said property.
Subd. 8. No aerial fireworks display will be conducted unless a permit has first been
secured. However, a permit will not be required when the aerial fireworks display is
given by a municipality or fair association within its own limits.
Section 436:15. Exceptions and Permitted Sales and Uses.
Subd. 1. Section 436:05 will not be construed to prohibit the sale or uses set forth in any of
the following subdivisions.
Subd. 2. Sales at wholesale to those persons holding valid permits for a fireworks display
from a governmental subdivision of the State.
Subd. 3. Sales outside the State.
Subd. 4. Any resident wholesaler, dealer, or jobber, from selling at wholesale such fireworks
as are not prohibited.
Subd. 5. The sale of any kind of fireworks for shipment directly out of the State.
Subd. 6. The use of fireworks by airplanes and railroads, or other transportation agencies for
signal purposes or illumination.
Subd. 7. The sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater, or for signal or ceremonial
purposes in athletics or sports, or for use by military organizations.
Subd. 8. Supervised public displays of fireworks by cities, villages, and fair associations,
amusement parks, and other organizations, when granted a permit and conducted as provided
by this section.
Section 436:20. Regulations.
Subd. 1. No person will sell or store consumer fireworks within 50 feet of any fuel
dispensing apparatus unless the total aggregate quantities of consumer fireworks are below
the exempt amounts listed wihtin Chapter 7 of NFPA 1124 Code for the Manufacture,
Transportation, Storage and Retail Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles ®, 2003
Edition within an approved structure or building. Consumer fireworks sales and retail
display will be limited to mercantile occupancies as defined in NFPA 10, Life Safety Code®.
No person will construct a retail display nor offer for sale explosives, explosive materials, or
fireworks upon highways, sidewalks, public property, or in assembly or educational
occupancies The designated Fire Official will determine compliance.
Subd. 2. It will be unlawful for any seller of any fireworks to permit smoking at any site
containing fireworks. “No Smoking” signs must be conspicuously posted and approved fire
extinguishers must be available for use.
Subd. 3. Exempt amounts: The requirement of Chapter 7 of NFPA 1124® will not apply to
consumer fireworks retail sales facilitieis or stores where the total quantity of consumer
fireworks on hand does not exceed 56.8 kg [125lb (net)] of pyrotechnic composition or, in a
building protected throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed
accordance with NFPA 12 Standard for the installation of sprinkler systems® 113.6 kg
[250lb (net)] of pyrotechnic composition. Where the actual weight of the pyrotechnic
composition of consumer fireworks is not known, 25 percent of the gross weight of the
consumer fireworks, including packaging, will be used to determine the weight of the
pyrotechnic composition. Amounts in excess of the exempt amounts will be required to
comply with NFPA 1124®.
Subd. 4. The requirements of this ordinance are in addition to any requirements imposed by
any building and zoning regulations, fire codes or state law.
Subd. 5. Only persons 18 years of age or older may purchase fireworks and the age of the
purchaser must be verified by photographic identification.
Subd. 6. Exterior storage, retail display, sales or transient sales of fireworks may be
permitted subject to a site plan review. Site plans will be submitted for review and approval a
minimum of 30 days before display. Approved minimum separation distances in compliance
with table 7.7.2 of NFPA 1124® will be provided from the exterior display to adjacent
buildings, combustibles or flammable liquids. No manufacturing, sales or storage for
commercial purposes will occur on residentially zoned property or within 100’ thereof.
Subd. 7. A list of all consumer fireworks displayed for sale and stored on the property will
be available at all times. The list will document the name, weight and quantity of the
fireworks and be accompanied by the material safety data sheets.
Subd. 8. Manufacturing, warehouse buildings, or sales displays in excess of the quantities
listed in Subd. 3 for retail consumer fireworks will be classified as defined in the Building
Code and where applicable, subject to the requirement of NFPA 24® and the current edition
of the Minnesota State Fire Code.
Subd. 9. A handout describing fireworks use, safety and warnings will be provided to each
consumer purchasing fireworks by the retailer.
Section 436:25. Use and Possession.
Subd. 1. It is unlawful to use, fire or discharge any fireworks along the route of and during
any parade, in any place of public assembly, on any public property or in any
commercial/industrial zoning district.
Subd. 2. It is unlawful at any time to throw, toss or aim any fireworks at any person, animal,
vehicle or other thing or object or used in any manner that may threaten or cause possible
harm to life or property.
Subd. 3. The discharge of fireworks will be prohibited inside a building and within fifteen
(15) feet of any building.
Subd. 4. The Fire Official may ban fireworks if dry or windy conditions exist.
Subd. 5. Juveniles may not possess fireworks unless under the direct supervision of a
responsible adult.
Subd. 6. Fireworks will not be discharged in such a manner that may create a nuisance nor
between the hours of 12:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. Fireworks use will also be subject to any
additional ordinances such as noise and/or assembly.
Section 436:30. Officers May Seize Illegal Fireworks. The State Fire Marshal, or any sheriff,
police officer, or local fire official, will seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed, at the
expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks or combustibles offered or exposed for sale, stored,
or held in violation of Sections 436:00 et seq.
Section 436:35. Penalties.
Subd. 1. Materials that violate and/or pose a threat to public safety will be confiscated
and destroyed. Costs associated with disposal will be assessed back to the property
owner or permit holder.
Subd. 2. Violations of this regulation, city ordinance or state statute may result in
revocation of the permit.
Subd. 3. Any violation of Section 436 is a misdemeanor.
1
Section 440 - Food Establishments
Section 440:00. Regulation of Food and Beverage Establishments, Catering, Retail Food
Establishment, and Vending Machines.
Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to establish rules, regulations and
standards to:
(a) Protect and promote the health, safety and the general welfare of the people of St.
Cloud.
(b) Prevent food-borne illness.
(c) Correct and prevent conditions that may adversely affect persons utilizing food,
beverage and retail food service establishments.
(d) Provide minimum standards for the design, construction, operation, and maintenance
of food, beverage and retail food establishments as defined in Minnesota Statute 157
& Minnesota Rules Chapter 4626.
(e) Meet consumer expectations for the quality and safety of food, beverage and retail
food service establishments.
Subd. 2. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to powers granted under Minnesota Statutes
Chapters 17.04, 28A, 31, 34A, 145A, 157 with the exception of section 157.16, and under
Minnesota Rules Chapters 1520, 1545, 1550, 1556 and 4626.
Subd. 3. Jurisdiction. These ordinances will be applicable to all food and beverage
establishments within the legal boundaries of the City of St. Cloud. Food, beverage and retail
food establishments as defined in Minnesota Statutes Chapters 17.04, 28A, 31, 34A, 145A,
157.15 and 4626.0020, will include but not be limited to restaurants, temporary food stands
and push carts, commissaries, drive-ins, bars, taverns, drive-in cafes, sidewalk cafes, clubs,
lodges, caterers, schools, public buildings, places of worship, retail food stores, grocery
stores and convenience stores and all other businesses and establishments where meals,
lunches or drinks are served. Private school food services located in any building constructed
and primarily used for religious worship will be included in this regulation.
Section 440:05. Food Code. The City adopts and incorporates by reference the food code
adopted by the state departments of health and agriculture, and set forth in Minnesota Statutes
Chapters 28A, 31, 34A, 145A, 157 and 327 and Minnesota Rules Chapters 1520, 1545, 1550,
1556, and 4626 (Minnesota Food Code) excluding 4626.0033 subparts G through O, 4626.1720
paragraph B, and 4626.1760, as amended. One copy of which is on file in the Office of the City
Clerk, is adopted as the Uniform Food Code of the City of St. Cloud and is incorporated in this
ordinance as completely as if set forth in full.
Section 440:10. Additional Definitions.
Subd. 1. A “Caterer” prepares food in a licensed commissary, transports and serves food to a
location other than the commissary for immediate consumption.
Subd. 2. A “Catering Food Vehicle” is any vehicle used only to transport any food, other than
pizza, from its point of preparation to a point where the food is served to the consumer.
Subd. 3. A “Commissary” is a food establishment where food, containers, or supplies are kept,
handled, prepared, packaged and stored.
2
Subd. 4. “Deli” means a medium or high-risk food service establishment located in a grocery or
meat market.
Subd. 5. “Delivery” means the transport of food which is prepared in a licensed restaurant/
kitchen and delivered to customer, at which time the customer assumes responsibility for the
food (ex: pizza, box lunches, etc.).
Subd. 6. “Grocery” means a food establishment with the majority of food sales comprising
both time/temperature control for safety and non-time/temperature control for safety food
products sold in the original packaging.
Subd. 7. “Mobile food vehicle” means a food establishment preparing and/or serving foods from
a self-contained vehicle, either motorized or within a trailer, on public sidewalks, curbside on
the public streets, or on private property that is readily movable, without disassembling, for
transport to another location.
Subd. 8. “Mobile food vehicle, limited” means a food establishment serving only prepackaged,
nonperishable or packaged confections from a self-contained motorized vehicle
Subd. 9. “Type A food establishment” means a food establishment with non-time/temperature
for safety food or food products sold in the original packaging.
Subd. 10. “Type B food establishment” means a grocery, meat market, deli located within
grocery or meat market, food manufacturer, bakery or food distributor.
Section 440:20. Plan review.
Subd. 1. A person shall not begin to construct, remodel, or alter a food establishment until an
application, plans, specifications and fee are submitted and approved by the Health &
Inspections Department.
Subd. 2. Plans and specifications shall be drawn to scale and be legible and complete in all
details. The plans and specifications shall indicate the following:
a. Proposed equipment layout
b. Room finish materials
c. Plumbing specifications
d. Kitchen exhaust ventilation and make-up air specifications
e. Construction materials of work areas
f. Manufacturers name and model number of proposed equipment and facilities
g. Proposed menu
Subd. 3. Plans, specifications, application form and fee, must be submitted at least 30 days
before beginning construction, remodeling, or conversion of a food establishment. If work
has commenced prior to approval of plans when required, the Health & Inspections
Department may issue orders to halt the construction, extensive remodeling, expansion, or
alteration until approved plans and specifications are obtained.
Subd. 4. The plans will be approved only if they meet the requirements of all applicable
federal, state and local regulations.
Subd. 5. The Health & Inspections Department may inspect the establishment as frequently
as necessary during the construction to ensure that the construction occurs in conformance
3
with City Ordinance and the plan review submitted.
Subd. 6. The licensee must obtain an inspection and subsequent approval from the Health &
Inspections Department prior to the start of the operation. The food establishment shall be
constructed and finished in conformance with the approved plans.
Section 440:30. Mobile Food Vehicle-additional regulations.
Subd. 1. Exemption. This ordinance section will not apply to those motor vehicles used
exclusively for the regular delivery of food products to homes and businesses.
Subd. 2. Sound Devices. No person operating a mobile food vehicle will shout, make any
cryout, blow a horn, or use any sound device, including any loud speaking radio or sound
amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places in the City or
upon any private premises in the City for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares
or merchandise which the permittee proposes to sell. Notwithstanding any other provision to the
contrary, food/beverage vehicles may sound a manually operated bell between noon and 9:00
p.m. daily which produces a noise level measured at a distance of 50 feet from the source no
greater than 65 decibels.
Subd. 3. Sales While in Motion. At no time will any sales be made from a mobile food vehicle
while it is in motion.
Subd. 4. Mandatory Safety.
(a) Flashing Warning Lights. The vehicle's flashing warning lights will be activated
whenever the vehicle is parked adjacent to the curb line on any City street. The
flashing warning lights will be used for the purpose of warning operators of other
vehicles to approach, overtake or pass with care. Warning lights will be visible from a
distance of not less than 500 feet under normal atmospheric conditions at night. Use
of the vehicle's factory equipped emergency or warning lights will satisfy the
requirements of this subdivision.
(b) No mobile food vehicle will be located at a place that would impair the movement of
pedestrians or vehicles or pose a hazard to public safety.
Section 440:40. Food carts-additional regulations.
Subd. 1. Location. Each food cart which operates in a public right-of-way will be separately
licensed and may operate only at the location specified in the license. No cart will be located
at a place that would impair the movement of pedestrians or vehicles or pose a hazard to
public safety.
Subd. 2. Application Procedure.
(a) Each applicant will include in the application a proposed operating location. The
proposed location will be referred to the Director of Public Works for their approval
or disapproval. If the applicant's proposed location is disapproved, they will be
notified and they may select an alternate location which will also be referred to the
Director of Public Works for approval or disapproval. Public locations for each
licensed cart will be determined by lot and all applicants will be informed.
(b) No location which has been chosen in a previous application will be available for
selection.
4
Subd. 3. Construction.
(a) Food carts will not have dimensions exceeding four feet in width, eight feet in length,
and eight feet in height.
(b) The cart may be equipped with a self-supporting awning on each of two sides of the
cart, which awning will not project more than 24 inches from either side. In the
alternative, the cart may be equipped with an umbrella not to exceed six feet in
diameter.
(c) Each food cart will be self-propelled and must be capable of being moved and kept
under control by one person traveling on foot. The City Council may grant a special
license to a handicapped person to operate a sidewalk cart propelled by electric
motor, provided that the applicant will meet all other conditions for a license.
(d) Signing will be limited to four square feet of copy area on each of two sides of the
cart. The signing may be lettered directly on the body of the cart or securely attached
to the surface of the cart. Signs may not project from the cart. Lettering may be
integrated into the awning of any cart so equipped. Signing will be limited to
advertising the cart and the products offered for sale.
(e) The design and construction of the cart will be in keeping with the design,
development, and use of the Central Business District, all in accordance with
Minnesota Statutes Section 430.011 as well as other applicable laws and ordinances.
The design and construction will be subject to the approval of the Health and Inspection
Department.
Subd. 4. A food cart license will not be transferable from person to person nor place to place.
Subd. 5. Every licensee will maintain a permanent location for the storage and preparation of
food and beverages carried by the licensee's food carts and for the cleaning and servicing of
those carts. The permanent location will comply in all respects with the requirements of the
St. Cloud Food Establishment Ordinances. Each cart will return to the permanent location at
least once daily for cleaning and servicing.
Subd. 6. Toilet facilities will be required at the permanent location but not on each cart.
Subd. 7. All waste liquids, garbage, litter, and refuse will be kept in leak-proof, nonabsorbent
containers which will be kept covered with tight fitting lids and properly disposed of at the
permanent location. No waste liquids, garbage, litter or refuse will be dumped or drained into
sidewalks, streets, gutters, drains, trash receptacles or any other place except at the permanent
location. When leaving the sales area, the licensee or the licensee’s employees will pick up
litter resulting from business and will deposit such litter in an approved container located on
the cart.
Subd 8. Approved Food. No items of any kind, other than approved food and beverage items,
will be sold and dispensed from sidewalk carts.
Subd. 9. Fixed permanently and prominently to each sidewalk cart will be a sign no smaller
than twelve inches by twelve inches displaying the name, address and telephone number of
the cart owner.
Subd. 10. Each licensee which operates in a public right-of-way will provide proof of
liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $100,000 for individuals, $300,000 for any
single incident, and $50,000 for property damage. A Certificate of Insurance will be
delivered to the City Clerk prior to issuance of a license. The City will be named an
additional insured.
5
Subd. 11. Noise Makers. No food cart which operates in a public right-of-way will use lights
or noise makers, such as bells, horns or whistles to attract customers.
Subd. 12. No food cart which operates in a public right-of-way will operate before 8:00 a.m.
or after 2:30 a.m. on any day. Hours may be extended for special events on approval of the
City Council.
Subd. 13. No food cart which operates in a public right-of-way will operate, park, stand or
stop at any street or alley except to cross at designated street crossings.
Section 440:50. Vending machines – additional requirements.
Subd. 1. Vending Machines. The applicant for a license to sell food by vending machines
will furnish the address where the applicant proposes to install and operate vending
machines, the type and number of machines, and a general description of the food to be
vended. After a license has been issued upon written application to the Health and
Inspections Department and payment to the City the established license fee as set forth in
Section 512 for each additional machine, the licensee may receive from the Health and
Inspections Department written permits for additional machines over and above the number
stated in the original application. The application for an additional permit will state the
desired number of machines, the date and the number of the original license, and the street
address of the property or place where the applicant proposes to install the additional
machines.
Subd. 2. Vending Machine Owner's Label. No licensee will install, use or operate a greater
number of vending machines than the owner is licensed and has paid the fees. The Health
and Inspections Department will have the right to inspect the licensee's books and records to
determine compliance with this section. Each licensee will clearly identify each vending
machine or bank of interconnected vending machines operated by the owner. The label will
clearly identify the owners name and telephone number displayed in such a manner that the
information can be easily read without moving the machine or machines. The absence of
such an owner's label will constitute a violation of this ordinance.
Subd 3. Vending Machine Location. Each vending machine will be located in a room, area or
space that can be maintained in a clean condition and that is protected from overhead leakage
or from condensation from water, waste or sewer piping. The immediate area in which the
machine is located will be well lighted. Each vending machine will be located so that the
space around the machine can be easily cleaned and maintained, and so that insect and rodent
waste is not created. The floor area where vending machines are located will be reasonably
smooth, of cleanable construction, and be capable of withstanding repeated washing and
scrubbing. The space and the immediate surroundings of each vending machine will be
maintained in a clean condition.
Section 440:60. Compliance Procedures.
Subd. 1. Licenses Needed. It will be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment
within the City of St. Cloud who does not possess a valid license issued by the Health and
Inspections Department as required by this ordinance. Only a person who complies with the
requirements of this ordinance will be entitled to receive and retain such a license. Licenses
will not be transferable from one establishment or person to another establishment or person.
A valid license will be posted in every food service establishment that is conspicuous to
consumers. The license year will be valid from January 1 to December 31 of the year of its
issuance or other such time frame as specified.
6
Subd. 2. Application for License.
(a) Any person desiring to operate a food service establishment will make written
application for a license in such form and manner as the Health Director prescribes.
Each application for a license, together with the appropriate license fee as described
in Section 512 will be submitted to the Health and Inspections Department not later
than one-month prior to the expiration of the previous license; or in the case of a new
or seasonal business, one month prior to the opening date of such a business. A
penalty will be added to the amount of the license fee and paid by the applicant if the
application has not reached the Health and Inspections Department by the dates
designated. Any person who operates a food service operation without submitting an
application and appropriate fee will be deemed to have violated this ordinance and
will be subject to prosecution as provided in this ordinance.
(b) Any food and/or beverage establishment will pay an annual license fee as specified in
Section 512.
(c) "Fee Exemptions". Food services owned and operated by government subdivisions,
member groups of the St. Cloud Neighborhood Coalition and places of worship, will
not be required to pay a license fee, but will be subject to all other requirements of this
ordinance.
(d) Home Occupation. It will be unlawful to open, operate or conduct a food
establishment in any private living quarters in the City of St. Cloud with the
exception of licensed Bed and Breakfast Facilities as defined in the City of St. Cloud
Zoning Ordinance
(e) Enforcement. This ordinance will be enforced by the Health Director of the City of
St. Cloud or their designee.
(f) Penalty for Late Payment of License Renewal Fee for Food Establishments. The
penalty for late payment of license renewal fee will be set forth in Section 500 of this
code.
(g) Sidewalk cafes. Service is permitted upon the public sidewalk lying immediately
adjacent to a licensed food and beverage establishment within the Central Business
District pursuant to the Section 635:50.
Section 440:70. Inspections.
Subd. 1. The person operating a food establishment will, upon request of the Health and
Inspections Department, permit access to all parts of the establishment at any reasonable time
for the purpose of inspection and will exhibit and allow copying of any records necessary to
ascertain sources of foods or other compliance with this ordinance.
Subd. 2. Whenever an inspection of a food service establishment is made, the findings will be
recorded on the inspection report form. One copy of the inspection report form will be
furnished to the person in charge of the establishment. The completed inspection report is a
public document that will be made available for public disclosure to any person who requests
it.
Subd. 3. The inspection report form will specify a specific and reasonable period of time for
the correction of the violations found and correction of the violations will be accomplished
within the period specified.
7
Section 440:80. Suspension of License.
Subd. 1. Licenses may be suspended temporarily by the Health Director or their designee at
any time for failure by the holder to comply with the requirements of this ordinance.
Whenever a license holder or operator has failed to comply with any notice requiring
corrective action issued under the provisions of this ordinance, the license holder or operator
will be notified in writing that the license, upon service of the notice, is immediately
suspended, and the licensed establishment must discontinue operation immediately. An
opportunity for a hearing before the City Council will be provided if a written request for
appeal is filed with the Health and Inspections Department by the license holder upon form
provided by the Health Department within ten days of the date of the notice of suspension.
Subd. 2. Whenever the Health Director finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation
of a food establishment which in the Director’s judgment constitutes a substantial hazard to
the public health, the Director may without warning, notice or hearing issue a written notice
to the license holder or operator citing such condition, specifying the corrective action to be
taken, and specifying the time period with which such action will be taken; The Director
may, if deemed necessary, order that the license is immediately suspended, and all food
operations to be immediately discontinued. The licensee will comply immediately with the
order.
Subd. 3. Any person whose license has been suspended may at any time make application to
the Health and Inspections Department for a reinspection for the purpose of reinstatement of
the license. Within five days following receipt of a written request, including a statement
signed by the applicant that in their opinion the conditions causing the suspension of the
license have been corrected, the Health and Inspections Department will make a reinspection.
If the applicant is complying with the requirements of this ordinance, the license will be
reinstated.
Section 440:90. Revocation of License. For serious or repeated violations of any of the
requirements of this ordinance, the license may be revoked after an opportunity for a hearing
before the City Council has been provided. Prior to such action, the Health Director will notify
the license holder in writing and advised that the license will be permanently revoked at the end
of a ten-day period. A license may be suspended pending a hearing on the license revocation.
Section 440:100. Appeal.
Subd. 1. Request for Hearing. Any person affected by the notice of suspension or revocation
will be granted a hearing on the matter before the City Council upon filing in the office of the
Health Department a written petition upon a form provided by the Health and Inspections
Department, requesting such a hearing and setting forth a brief statement on the grounds for
appeal. Said petition will be filed within ten days after the notice was served.
Subd. 2. Date of Hearing. The hearing requested will be held at the next available Council
meeting date, providing public notice requirements are met.
Subd. 3. Notice of Hearing. The Health and Inspections Department will give to the
petitioner or petitioners five days written notice of the hearing to by personal service or by
mailing to the petition or petitioners' last known address.
Subd. 4. Proceedings. At the hearing the petitioner, petitioner’s agent or attorney will be
given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause why the notice of suspension or
revocation should be modified or withdrawn. The Health and Inspections Department will
present a detailed written statement of its findings and decision to the City Council at the
time of the hearing.
Subd. 5. Decisions of the City Council, after such hearing, will sustain, modify or withdraw
8
the notice of suspension or revocation depending upon its findings as to whether the
provisions of the ordinance have been complied with. A copy of the decisions of the City
Council will be served by mail on the petitioner or petitioners. Any person aggrieved by the
decision of the City Council may seek relief in any court of competent jurisdiction as
provided by the laws of the State.
Subd. 6. Record of Proceedings. The proceedings of each hearing held before the City
Council pursuant to petition, including the findings and the decision will be recorded and
reduced to writing and entered as a public document.
Subd. 7. Notices not Applied. Any notice served pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance
will automatically become final if a written petition for a hearing is not filed with the Health
and Inspections Department within ten days after the notice is served.
Section 440:110. Minnesota Department of Health and Minnesota Department of Agriculture.
The requirements contained in this ordinance are intended to be comparable to the Minnesota
Department of Health standards for food service and delicatessen licenses and the Minnesota
Department of Agriculture standards for all other food establishments. Whenever the Minnesota
Department of Health or the Minnesota Department of Agriculture amends regulations or adopts
new regulations setting higher sanitary standards than the ones established in this ordinance, the
standards set by the Minnesota Department of Health or the Minnesota Department of
Agriculture will govern and will be considered in the enforcement procedure as part of this
ordinance.
History: Ord. 2471 8-9-10; Ord. 2507 9-26-11; Ord. 2541 12-3-12; Ord. 2675 9-12-16; Ord. 2770 2-11-19
Section 441 - Lodging Establishments
Section 441:00. Regulation of Lodging Establishments, Hotels, Motels, Bed and Breakfast and
Board and Lodging Establishments.
Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to establish standards for lodging
establishments, to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the City
of St. Cloud pursuant to powers granted under Minnesota Statutes Chapters 145A and
157 with the exception of 157.16. The City adopts and incorporates by reference
Minnesota Rules Chapter 4625. The general objectives include the following:
(a) Prevent illness.
(b) Correct and prevent conditions that may adversely affect persons utilizing
lodging establishments in the City of St. Cloud.
(c) Provide minimum standards for the design, construction, operation, and
maintenance of lodging establishments.
(d) Meet consumer expectations of quality and safety of lodging establishments.
Subd. 2. Legal Authority. This ordinance is enacted pursuant to Minnesota Statute
Chapter 157 which established the authority for the State to license lodging
establishments and Chapter 145, which authorizes the Commissioner of Health to enter
into an agreement with counties and cities organized under the provisions of Section
145A to perform all or part of the licensing, inspection and enforcement duties authorized
under the provisions of these sections.
Subd. 3. Jurisdiction. These ordinances are applicable to all lodging establishments
within the legal boundaries of the City of St. Cloud. Lodging establishments will
include, but not be limited to, Hotels, Motels, Bed and Breakfast Establishments and
Board and Lodging Establishments.
Section 441:05. Definitions.
Subd. 1. "Approved" means acceptable to the City Council as determined by
conformance to the provisions of this ordinance, applicable State statutes and good public
health practice.
Subd. 2. "Bed and Breakfast Establishment" means any owner occupied, detached single
family residential structure which furnishes five or fewer sleeping rooms for rent to the
public. Provisions for cooking in any of the sleeping rooms is prohibited. Only one meal
will be provided for overnight lodging guests, which will be served during the morning
hours.
Subd. 3. "Board and Lodging Establishment" mean any building, kept, used, maintained
or advertised as, or held out to the public to be, a place where sleeping accommodations
and a meal or meals are furnished to the public for periods usually more than one week
and having five or more beds to let to the public.
Subd. 4. "Council" means the St. Cloud City Council acting under the provisions of
Minnesota Statutes 145A.
Subd. 5. "Health and Inspections Department" means the City of St. Cloud Health and
Inspections Department, its Director, staff, or contracted staff, authorized by the City
Council to carry out or enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
Subd. 6. "Regulatory Authority" means the City Council or Health Department
Section 441:10. Licenses Required. It will be unlawful for any person to operate a lodging
establishment within the City of St. Cloud who does not possess a valid license issued by the
Health and Inspections Department as required by this ordinance. Only a person who complies
with the requirements of this ordinance will be entitled to receive and retain such a license.
Licenses will not be transferable from one establishment or person to another establishment or
person. A valid license will be posted in every lodging establishment. The license year will be
from January 1 to December 31 of the year of it's issuance.
Section 441:20. Enforcement. This ordinance will be enforced by the Health Director or their
designee.
Section 441:30. Penalty for Late Payment of License Renewal Fee for Lodging Establishments
will be as prescribed in Section 500 of the 2007 City of St. Cloud Code of Ordinances.
Section 441:40. Inspections and Corrections of Violations.
Subd. 1. An operator of a lodging establishment will, upon request of the Health and
Inspections Department, permit access to all parts of the establishment at any reasonable
time for the purpose of inspection and will exhibit and allow copying of any records
necessary to ascertain sources of foods or other compliance with this ordinance.
Subd. 2. The operator will be notified of the violations found and will be given a
specific and reasonable period of time for the correction of the violations found. Failure
to remove or correct each violation within the time period noted will constitute a separate
violation of this ordinance.
Section 441: 50. Suspension of License.
Subd. 1. Licenses may be suspended temporarily by the Health Director or their designee
at any time for failure by the holder to comply with the requirements of this ordinance.
Whenever a license holder or operator has failed to comply with any notice requiring
corrective action issued under the provisions of this ordinance, the license, upon service
of the notice, is immediately suspended, and the said licensed establishment must
discontinue operation immediately. An opportunity for a hearing before the City Council
will be provided if a written request for appeal is filed by the license holder upon a form
provided by the Health and Inspections Department within ten days of the date of the
notice of suspension.
Subd. 2. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this ordinance, whenever the Health
Director or their designee finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of a
lodging establishment which in their judgment constitutes a substantial hazard to the
public health, he or she may without warning, notice or hearing, issue a written notice to
the license holder or operator citing such condition, specifying the corrective action to be
taken, and specify the time period with which such action will be taken; and if deemed
necessary, such order will state the license is immediately suspended. Any person to
whom such an order is issued will comply immediately.
Subd. 3. Any person whose license has been suspended may at any time make
application to the Health and Inspections Department for a reinspection for the purpose of
reinstatement of the license. Within five days following receipt of a written request,
including a statement signed by the applicant that the conditions causing the suspension
of the license have been corrected, the Health and Inspections Department will make a
reinspection. If the applicant is complying with the requirements of this ordinance, the
license will be reinstated.
Section 441:60. Revocation of License. For serious or repeated violations of any of the
requirements of this ordinance, the license may be permanently revoked after an opportunity for
a hearing before the City Council has been provided. Prior to such action, the Health Director
will notify the license holder in writing and advising that the license will be permanently revoked
at the end of a ten day period. A license may be suspended for cause pending its revocation.
Section 441:70. Appeal.
Subd. 1. Request for Hearing. Any person affected by the notice of suspension or
revocation will be granted a hearing on the matter before the City Council upon filing in
the office of the Health Department a written petition upon a form provided by the Health
and Inspections Department, requesting such a hearing and setting forth a brief statement
on the grounds for appearl. Said petition will be filed within ten days after the notice was
served.
Subd. 2. Date of Hearing. The hearing requested will be held at the next available
Council meeting date, providing public notice requirements are met.
Subd. 3. Notice of Hearing. The Health Department will cause five days written notice
of the Hearing to be given to the petitioner or petitioners by personal service or by
mailing to the petitioner or petitioners' last known address.
Subd. 4. Proceedings. At such hearing the petitioner, their agent or attorney, will be
given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause why the notice of suspension or
revocation should be modified or withdrawn. The Health Department will present a
detailed written statement of its findings and decision to the City Council at the time of
the Hearing.
Subd. 5. Decision of the City Council. , The Council after such hearing, will sustain,
modify or withdraw the notice of suspension or revocation depending upon its findings as
to whether the provisions of the ordinance have been complied with. A copy of the
decisions of the City Council will be served by mail on the petitioner or petitioners. Any
person aggrieved by the decision of the City Council may seek relief in any court of
competent jurisdiction as provided by the laws of the State.
Subd. 6. Record of Proceedings. The proceedings of each hearing held before the City
Council pursuant to petition, including the findings and the decision of the Health
Department, will be recorded and reduced to writing and entered as a public record
Subd. 7. Notices Not Applied. Any notice served pursuant to the provisions of this
ordinance will automatically become final if a written petition for a hearing is not filed
with the Health and Inspections Department within ten days after the notice is served.
Section 441A - Hotel, Motel Tax
Section 441A:00. Definitions.
Subd. 1. Hotel - The furnishing, for a consideration, of lodging by a hotel, tourist court,
or motel, and the granting of any similar license to use real property other than the
renting or leasing thereof for a continuous period of 30 days or more.
Subd. 2. Operator - The person who is the proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity
of owner, lessee, sublessee, licensee, or any other capacity, is an operator.
Section 441A:05. Imposition of Tax. The following tax, as authorized The Laws of Minnesota
1979, Chapter 197, will apply:
(1) For the privilege of occupancy of any hotel, each person will pay a tax in the
amount of five percent (5%) of the charge made by the operator.
(2) Those persons qualifying under paragraph one of this section will pay the tax on
the operator of the hotel or the establishment at the time the charge is paid. The
tax constitutes a debt owed to the City by the operator and is extinguished only by
payment to the City.
Section 441A:07. Distribution of Tax. The five percent (5%) tax collected will be distributed as
follows:
52.5% Convention and Visitor's Bureau
40.0% Civic Center
1.0% Finance Department
1.5% Community Festival
3.0% Municipal Athletic Complex
2.0% Municipal Gardens
Section 441A:10. Exceptions and Exemptions.
Subd. 1. Privilege of Occupancy.
(a) Exceptions. No tax will be imposed on room rentals paid by any officer or
employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provisions
of federal law or international treaty.
(b) Exemptions. No exemption from the tax imposed under this Code will be granted
except upon a claim thereof made at the time the rent is collected by the operator,
and such claim will be made in writing and under penalty of perjury. All such
claims will be forwarded to the City when the reports and collections are
submitted as required under Section 441A:15 of this Code. Such exemptions will
be granted as follows: Upon any person to whom, or occupancy to which, it is
beyond the power of the City to so tax.
Section 441A:15. Collections.
Subd. 1. Operator's Duties. Each operator will collect the tax imposed by this Code at
the time the rent is paid. The amount of tax will be separately stated from the rent
charged. Those persons paying the tax will receive a receipt of payment from the
operator.
Subd. 2. Reports. Each operator collecting such tax will make a report upon forms
distributed to the operator by the Finance Director. Such reports will contain, at a
minimum:
(a) The amount of room rentals collected.
(b) The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period.
(c) The signature of the operator or that of the agent if the operator has not made the
report.
(d) The period the return covers.
(e) The amount of room rentals uncollectible.
(f) Such additional information as the City Council, in its discretion, from time to
time requires.
Subd. 3. Payment to the City. Payment of the tax will be submitted by the operator to
the City along with the required reports. Payment will cover the tax due for the
preceding calendar month, or any alternative four-week accounting period, whichever the
case will be, and such payment will be made no later than 25 days after the end of such
calendar or alternative accounting month.
Subd. 4. Uncollectible Charges. The operator may offset against the tax due with respect
to any reporting period the amount of the taxes imposed by Section 441A:05 of this Code
previously paid as a result of any transaction which becomes uncollectible during such
reporting period, but only in proportion to the portion of such amount which becomes a
collectible.
Subd. 5. Examination of Return. After a return is filed, the Finance Director may make
any examination of the records and accounts of the person making the return which he
deems necessary for determining its correctness. The tax computed on the basis of such
examination will be the tax to be paid. If the tax due is found to be greater than that paid,
such excess will be paid within ten days after receipt of notice. Such notice will be given
either personally or sent by registered mail to the address listed on the return. If the tax
paid is greater than the tax found to be due, the excess paid will be refunded to the
operator at the address listed on the return.
Section 441A:20. Refunds.
Subd. 1. Any operator may file for a refund for taxes paid in excess of the amount legally
due for that period, provided that no such claim will be entertained unless filed within
one year after such tax was paid.
Subd. 2. Upon application, the Finance Director will determine the correctness of the
claim and return any excess paid. If no excess is found, the City will so inform the
operator. The operator may make written application for a City Council hearing within
five days after receipt of notice that the claim has been denied. The operator will be
informed at least five days in advance of the scheduled Council hearing.
Section 441A:25. Penalties.
Subd. 1. Original Deficiency. Any operator failing to make payment within the 25-day
period specified in sub-section 441A:15, Subdivision 3, of this Code will be required to
pay a penalty of five percent (5%) of the tax amount remaining unpaid. The amount of
said tax not timely paid, together with said penalty, will bear interest at the rate of seven
percent (7%) per annum from the time such tax should have been paid until paid. Any
interest and penalty will be added to the tax and be collected as a part thereof.
Subd. 2. Continuing Deficiency. If payment of the tax and the five percent (5%) penalty
imposed under subdivision 1 of this section is not paid within 30 days of the date the tax
is due as specified in sub-section 441A:15, Subdivision 3, of this Code, an additional ten
percent (10%) penalty will be imposed upon the amount of tax due plus the original
deficiency penalty of five percent (5%). If the delinquency continues beyond 30 days
after the tax is due as specified in sub-section 441A:15, Subdivision 3, of this Code, the
City Attorney may commence such action necessary to collect the tax and penalties due.
Subd. 3. Abatement of Penalties. The Mayor will have the power to abate penalties
when, in his opinion, the enforcement would be unjust and inequitable. All requests for
abatement of penalties will be in writing and will set forth the reasons for the failure to
file the return and pay the tax timely. The Mayor will report all penalty abatements to the
City Council at the next regular City Council meeting.
Section 441A:30. Tax Determined by the City Council.
Subd. 1. If the operator refuses to collect the tax imposed or fails to make the required
reports, the Finance Director will obtain facts and information and make an estimate of
the amount of tax due and report to the City Council for approval. After approval by the
City Council, the Finance Director will give the operator a statement of the tax due to his
estimate and give notice personally or through registered mail to such operator of the
amount due. Depending upon the time periods as specified in Section 441A:25 of this
Code, the amount of tax estimated will include the applicable penalties and interest.
Payments will be made within ten days after receipt of notice. For the purpose of
carrying out the provisions of this section, the Finance Director will have the right of
access to the books and records of the operator.
Subd. 2. The operator will have ten days after receipt of notice to make a written
application for a hearing on the assessed tax to the Finance Director. If no request is
made during this ten day period, the amount specified in the statement of the Finance
Director, including penalties and interest, becomes final and payable within ten days.
Subd. 3. If a hearing is properly requested, the running of the time periods described in
Section 441A:25 of this Code are automatically stayed. Notice of the hearing will be
given to the operator at least ten days in advance. All hearings are to be held before the
City Council. The Council may then determine the amount due, when it will be paid, and
whether or not the penalty time period under Section 441A:25 of this Code will resume
running until payment. Once the amount due becomes fixed under either Subdivision 1,
2, or 3, of this section, any further steps necessary to ensure collection may be taken by
the City Attorney.
Section 441A:35. Administration. The Mayor will be charged with the responsibility for
enforcement and administration of Section 441A.
Section 441A:45. Deposit in Special Purpose Fund. All revenues collected pursuant to Section
441A will be deposited in a special purpose fund, hereby established, to be known as the
"Hotel-Motel Tax Fund."
Section 441A:50. Distribution. Distribution of all revenues relating to five percent (5%) of the
charge made by the operator and collected pursuant to Section 441A will be in accordance with
the percentages established in Section 441A:07 and will be used for the purpose of the
advancement of the City of St. Cloud as a tourist and convention center or the promotion,
operation and maintenance of the convention center facility and related facilities, all in accord
with the enabling legislation. The City of St. Cloud may retain a sum not to exceed the actual
amount of its costs incurred in the collection and administration of this tax.
The following budgeting practices will be utilized by recipients of revenues to be utilized for the
purpose of the advancement of the City of St. Cloud as a tourist and convention center:
(a) The budget submitted to the City will be in the same form and format that is being
used by the City of St. Cloud. Periodically, but not less than quarterly, the
recipient will submit a financial statement showing revenue and expenditures
along with budget figures. This statement will use the same object codes used by
the City.
(b) The City will deliver to the recipient budget preparation materials at about the
same time City departments receive budget materials. The materials will contain
budget preparation instructions, budget forms, and a submission deadline. The
recipient will be responsible for preparing and submitting its budget as prescribed
in the preparation materials.
(c) Recipients of revenues from the City will separately budget and account for those
revenues and expenditures of those revenues apart from non-City revenues which
a recipient may receive or expenditures which a recipient may make.
Section 441B - Liquor and Food Tax
Section 441B:00. Authority. The Legislature has by Laws of Minnesota for 1986, Chapter 379,
authorized the City to impose additional sales taxes within the City to provide revenues to pay
certain costs related to the funding of a convention center and related facilities.
Section 441B:05. Definitions. The words, terms and phrases used in Section 441B:00 to
441B:35 will have the meaning ascribed to them in Minnesota Statutes, Section 297A.61 except
where the context clearly indicates otherwise. In addition, the following definitions will apply:
(a) "Act" means Laws of Minnesota for 1986, Chapter 379.
(b) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Revenue for the State of Minnesota,
acting under the authority of an agreement entered into between the City and the
State of Minnesota pursuant to the Act, or such other person designated to
administer and collect the St. Cloud City Sales Tax.
(c) "Restaurant" means every building or other structure or enclosure, or any part
thereof and all buildings in connection, kept, used or maintained as, or held out to
the public to be an enclosure where meals or lunches are served or prepared for
service elsewhere and will for the purpose of this Section 441B be deemed to be a
restaurant.
(d) "Place of Refreshment" means every building, structure, vehicle, sidewalk cart or
any part thereof, used as, maintained as, or advertised as, or held out to be a place
where confectionery, ice cream, or drinks of various kinds are made, sold or
served at retail. This Section 441B will not be applicable in any manner to a
general merchandise store, grocery store, oil station, cigar stand, confectionery
store, or drug store not providing meals, lunches, lodging, or fountain, bar, booth,
or table service.
(e) "Operator" means the person who is the proprietor of the restaurant, place of
refreshment or licensed on-sale liquor establishment whether in the capacity of
owner, lessee, sublessee, licensee, or any other capacity.
Section 441B:10. Imposition of Tax. On or after the 1st day of February, 1987, the following
tax as authorized by the Minnesota State Legislature in Laws 1986, Chapter 379 will apply:
(1) One percent on the gross receipts from all retail on-sales of intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages sold at licensed on-sale liquor establishments within the City of
St. Cloud, and
(2) One percent on the gross receipts from the retail sale of food and beverages not subject to
the liquor tax by a restaurant or place of refreshment within the City of St.
Cloud.
Section 441B:15. Application of Tax. The application and administration of the City sales tax
will be construed consistent with the State general sales tax and the imposition of the City tax
will be construed so that any subsequent amendment to Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 297A
affecting the sales taxable under this Article will also apply to the City tax and affect in the same
manner the sales taxable under this Article.
Section 441B:20. Separate Statement: Collection from Purchases, Advertising No Tax;
Minimum; Uniform Tax Collection Methods. The tax will be stated and charged separately from
the sale price and will be collected by the operator from the purchaser and will be a debt from the
purchaser to the operator recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts.
No operator will advertise or hold out or state to the public or any customer, directly or
indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the retailer, or that it
will not be added to the sales price or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. In
computing the tax to be collected as the result of any transaction, amounts of tax less than onehalf
of one cent may be disregarded and amounts of tax of one-half cent or more may be
considered an additional cent.
Section 441B:25. Permit. Every operator will file with the Commissioner an application for a
separate St. Cloud permit and if such person has more than one place of business in St. Cloud, an
application for each place of business must be filed. An applicant who has no
regular place of doing business and who moves from place to place will be considered to have
only one place of business and will attach such permit to his cart, stand, vehicle or other
merchandising device.
The Commissioner will issue to each applicant a separate permit for each place of business
within the City. The permit will not be assignable and will be valid only for the person in whose
name it is issued and for the transaction of business at the place designated therein.
Section 441B:30. Enforcement, Collection and Administration. Each operator will collect,
report and pay to the Commissioner the tax imposed together with the State sales and use taxes.
The taxes imposed by the City hereunder will be subject to the same interest, penalties and other
rules as are applicable to the State general sales and use tax imposed by Minnesota Statutes,
Chapter 297A. The taxes imposed by the City hereunder may be collected by the State on behalf
of the City as provided by an appropriate agreement with the Commissioner.
Section 441B:35. Tax Clearance; Issuance of Licenses. The City may not issue or renew a
license for the conduct of a trade or business in the City of St. Cloud if the Commissioner
notifies the licensing division of the City that the applicant owes delinquent City taxes as
provided in this Article, or penalties or interest due on such taxes. For the purpose of this
Section, the following terms have the meaning given:
(a) "City Taxes" include liquor and fermented beverage, and food and beverage taxes
as provided in the Article; lodging tax as provided in Chapter 379, Laws of
Minnesota for 1986; and transient lodging tax as provided in Chapter 197, Laws
of Minnesota for 1979. Penalties and interest are penalties and interest due on
taxes included in this definition.
(b) "Delinquent Taxes" does not include a tax liability if
(i) an administrative or court action which contests the amount or validity of the
liability has been filed or served,
(ii) the appeal period to contest the tax liability has not expired, or
(iii) the applicant has entered into a payment agreement and is current with the
payments.
(c) "Applicant" means an individual if the license is issued to or in the name of an
individual or the corporation or partnership if the license is issued to or in the
name of a corporation or partnership.
A copy of the notice of delinquent taxes will be sent to the applicant taxpayer. In the case of
renewal of a license, if the applicant requests in writing, within 30 days of the receipt of the
notice of hearing, then, a contested case hearing will be held under the same procedures as
provided in Minnesota Statutes, Section 270.72 for the State Sales and Use Tax imposed under
Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 297A; provided further that if a hearing must be held on the State
Sales and Use Tax, hearings may be combined.
History: Ord. 2341 3-13-07; Ord. 2473 8-9-10
Section 445 – Rental Dwelling Licensing
445:00 Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to protect the public health, safety and welfare of
the residents of rental dwellings in the City of St. Cloud and to ensure that rental housing in the
city is safe, sanitary and operated and maintained not to become a nuisance to the neighborhood
and community. The operation of rental residential properties is a business enterprise that entails
certain responsibilities.
445:10 Definitions.
Subd. 1. Agent or Property Manager. Means the person authorized to correct deficiencies and
to provide required services necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the occupants
or is able to contact the person so authorized.
Subd. 2. Contract for Deed Property. Means a residential property which has been sold by
contract for deed when:
(a) the seller owns three or more residential properties in the City of St. Cloud which
have been sold by contract for deed; and
(b) that the seller remains as the owner; and
(c) that the contract for deed has been recorded.
Subd. 3. Dwelling Unit. A "dwelling unit" consists of one or more rooms which are arranged,
designed, or used as living quarters for one family only. Individual bathrooms and complete
kitchen facilities, permanently installed, will always be included for each dwelling unit.
Subd. 4. Owner. Means the owner if such owner is a natural person; if the owner is a
corporation, by an officer thereof, if a partnership, by one of the partners; and if an
unincorporated association, by the manager, or managing officer thereof.
Subd. 5. Person. The term "person" will mean any natural person, the person’s heirs, executors,
administrators, or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their
successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
Subd. 6. Rental Property.
(a) Property which contains one or more dwelling units advertised as available for
occupancy or occupied by a person or persons in the status of resident.
(b) A structure which is not owner occupied and contains sleeping room(s) advertised as
available for occupancy or occupied by a person or persons in the status of resident.
(c) Contract for Deed Properties.
(d) Exceptions:
i.Owner-occupied dwelling units;
ii.Dwelling units occupied by a qualifying relative occupant for homestead purposes
iii.Lodging establishments licensed under Section 441.
iv.Hospitals, nursing homes licensed by state or federal agencies;
v.College student dormitories, nunneries, monasteries, and
Subd. 7. Lodging House. A building or structure providing a room or rooms intended for living
and sleeping to persons in the status of resident. This term will include boarding houses,
lodging houses, fraternity houses and sorority houses, but does not include hotels, motels,or
other boarding facilities licensed under the provisions of Section 441 or hospitals approved by
the State of Minnesota.
Subd. 8. Sleeping Room. A room or enclosed floor space in a lodging house or non-owner
occupied dwelling unit, as defined in this ordinance, used or intended to be used primarily for
sleeping purposes.
Subd. 9. Resident. One who has their place of abode a dwelling unit, lodging house or sleeping
room furnished that person for payment of a rental charge to another.
Subd. 10. Rental Charge. Any compensation, either monetary or “in lieu of” payments, such
as but not limited to utilities, upkeep or repair.
445:20 License Issuance. Applications for licenses shall be submitted to the Health & Inspections
Department. In order to protect the health, safety and welfare, the Health & Inspections
Department is empowered to conduct any and all investigations to verify the information on the
application, including ordering a criminal history inquiry and/or a driver’s license history inquiry
on the applicant. The City Council grants the authority to issue and renew licenses pursuant this
Section to the Health Director.
445:30 License Requirements. No person will occupy, allow to be occupied, let or offer to let to
another for occupancy any rental property in the City of St. Cloud without first having obtained a
rental dwelling license for such rental property from the City. The payment of fees set forth in
Section 512 will be a prerequisite to this required licensing. There will be two types of licenses:
regular and provisional.
Subd. 1. Regular rental license. Regular rental licenses are valid from January 1 to
December 31 in the year the license is issued. Renewal application for regular rental license
must be made on or before December 1 prior to the next license term.
Subd. 2. Provisional rental license. Provisional rental licenses are valid for 12 months from
the date of provisional rental license application. If a regular rental license is pending
revocation and the property is occupied, the provisional rental license must be applied for
prior to the regular license revocation date.
445:40 Application. The application for a license must be made and filed on a form furnished by
the City for such purpose and must set forth the following information:
Subd. 1. Name, residence address and phone number of the owner of the dwelling. In cases
where the owner of the dwelling lives outside of Stearns, Benton, or Sherburne counties and
more than 45 miles from the City of St. Cloud, the owner must also provide the name,
residence address and phone number of an agent authorized by the owner to accept service
of process and to receive and give receipt for notices.
Subd. 2. If applicant is a corporation, the state of incorporation. Corporations must list
principal officers together with their residence address and phone number.
Subd. 3. If applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners.
Subd. 4. Name, address and phone number of any agent actively managing said rental
property.
Subd. 5. Street address of the rental property.
Subd. 6. Number and kind of units within the rental property (dwelling units or sleeping
rooms).
Subd. 7. Certification that the applicant has received the fair housing materials provided by
the City of St. Cloud and that the applicant has given those materials and discussed that
information with the property owner, agent and caretaker of each building.
Subd. 8. Verification that the applicant or designee has completed a rental training program
approved by the Chief of Police for the City of St. Cloud. Crime Free Multi-Housing Phase
1 certification will also satisfy this requirement regardless of where the Crime Free Multi-
Housing Phase 1 certification was obtained. New applicants shall provide the verification of
certification within six months of application.
Subd. 9. Any additional information required by the Health Director.
445:50 License Conditions.
Subd. 1. Pre-license Inspection. Prior to license issuance or within 30 days of license transfer,
a pre-license inspection must be requested and completed. No rental property will be issued
a license by the City unless it complies with provisions of the ordinances of the City of St.
Cloud and statutes of the State of Minnesota which pertain to such properties.
(a) Exemption: Newly constructed single-family dwellings which have been issued
a Certificate of Occupancy in the previous 12 months.
Subd. 2. Rental History. The Health Director will consider the applicant’s rental property
management history before making a decision to issue a rental license. An applicant that has
an ownership interest or management role in other rental properties that are in a suspended,
revoked, or provisional license status will be ineligible for additional rental licenses.
Subd. 3. Ownership Transfers. Every new owner of a rental property (whether as fee owner,
contract purchaser, lessee subletting the entire dwelling, or otherwise entitled to possession)
will apply for a license within 10 business days of taking possession.
445:60 Provisional Licenses.
Subd. 1. Provisional rental license eligibility. Rental properties and/or dwelling unit(s) are
only eligible for a provisional rental license if:
(a) During a 12 month period, the property and/or dwelling unit(s) has generated four or
more related administrative citations pursuant to Section 1100, and/or Landlord
Responsibility notices of violation pursuant to Section 1051; or
(b) During a 24 month period, the property and/or dwelling unit(s) has generated ten or
more enforcement actions consisting of any, or combination of, the following:
(1) Property related notice of violation pursuant to Section 1100
(2) Property related administrative citation pursuant to Section 1100
(3) Abatement pursuant to Section 1005
(4) Landlord Responsibility notices of violation pursuant to Section 1051
(5) Violation of Minnesota Statute §617.81 Subdivision 2, Public Nuisance
Subd. 4. The Health Director will review the severity of the violations to determine whether
a provisional license applies toward a dwelling unit(s) or the entire property.
Subd. 5. Requirements for Provisional licenses.
(a) The applicant for a provisional license must submit a mitigation plan for the license
period. The mitigation plan will describe steps proposed by the applicant to reduce
the number of violations described in this subdivision to a level that qualifies for a
regular license. The mitigation plan may include such steps as: changes in tenant
screening procedures, changes in lease terms, security measures, rules and
regulations for tenant conduct, and security personnel.
(b) The application with a proposed mitigation plan will be presented to the Health
Director. The Health Director will approve, disapprove, or approve with conditions
the application and the mitigation plan. If the Health Director disapproves an
application and mitigation plan or approves it with conditions, reasons for doing so
in writing will be provided to the applicant.
(c) The licensee must comply with the mitigation plan as approved or modified by the
Health Director. No later than the tenth day after each calendar month, the licensee
must mail or deliver to the Health Director a written report describing all steps taken
in furtherance of the mitigation plan during the preceding month.
(d) Provisional License Application Fee. An application for a provisional license must
be accompanied by a provisional license application fee. Fees will be set forth in
Section 512 of this Code. An application will not be processed or considered until
the application fee is paid.
(e) Manager Certification. To qualify for a provisional license, the applicant must
provide and maintain at least one resident manager or on site managers who are on
site or available 24 hours a day and who are certified under this section. Persons
may be certified as resident or on site managers who successfully complete a rental
training program approved by the Chief of Police for the City of St. Cloud. Licenses
may be granted to applicants who are not currently providing a certified resident or
on site manager, and licenses may continue in effect on the departure of a certified
resident manager, on condition that a resident manager or on site manager register
for and complete the training program as promptly as is reasonably possible but not
more than 120 days.
445:70 Posting. Every licensee of a rental property must post the current license issued by the
city. This item must be conspicuously posted by the licensee in a public corridor, hallway or front
entrance of the rental property for which it is issued.
Subd. 1. Language Required on License. Each license must include the following
language in conspicuous type “If you believe that you have been treated unfairly regarding
housing opportunities contact: The Minnesota Department of Human Rights. Contact
information for the office will follow this statement.
445:80 Enforcement.
Subd. 1. In order to compel the compliance with the licensing requirements, the Health
Director or designated staff will have the authority to enter any building, at reasonable times
and upon five days notice to the property owner(s). The Health Director or designated staff
will have the authority to enter any building at any time by the request of the St. Cloud Police
Department or the St. Cloud Fire Department to enforce any provisions of this ordinance.
Subd. 2. Rental Dwelling licensees and their employees or agents who are found to be in
violation of fair housing audits will be required to attend a minimum of two hours of fair
housing training as approved by The Minnesota Department of Human Rights. The names
and addresses of persons found in violation of fair housing laws will be provided to the St.
Cloud City Council during a regularly scheduled meeting.
Subd. 3. Background Checks. The St. Cloud City Council has determined that the
preservation of city neighborhoods is essential to the public health, safety and welfare of its
citizens. Rental properties provide housing for approximately 50% of the citizens of St.
Cloud. Rental housing is the most densely populated of the city’s neighborhoods.
Consequently, persons residing in rental properties and engaging in criminal activity and
disorderly conduct create a hostile environment for law-abiding residents of rental properties
and adjacent neighborhoods. Therefore, it is strongly encouraged that landlords and property
managers conduct reference checks and criminal history checks for prospective residents of
rental property. Criminal history checks may be conducted using the processes established
by the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension Minnesota Justice Information Services.
445:90 Applicable Laws. Licensees will be subject to all of the ordinances of the City of St. Cloud
and the State of Minnesota relating to dwellings; and this ordinance will not be construed or
interpreted to supersede any other such applicable ordinance or law.
445:100 License Revocation, Denial and Non-Renewal Appeal Process.
Subd. 1. The Council may revoke, deny or decline to renew any license issued under this section,
for a property and/or dwelling unit(s), upon any of the following grounds:
(a) false statements on any application or other information or report required by this
Section to be given by the applicant or licensee.
(b) failure to pay any application, penalty, reinspection or reinstatement fee required
by this Section and City Council resolution.
(c) failure to correct deficiencies noted in notices of violation in the time specified in
the notice.
(d) failure to comply with the provisions of an approved mitigation plan in the case of
provisional licenses.
(e) failure to allow an authorized inspection of a rental dwelling pursuant to this
Section.
(f) any other violation of this Section.
(g) for any premises on which taxes, assessments, fines, fees, charges or other financial
claims of the City or the State of Minnesota are delinquent and unpaid.
Subd. 2. Upon finding that the property and/or dwelling unit(s) are only eligible for a
provisional rental license, the Health Director or their designee will provide written notice
that the regular rental license will be revoked and is only eligible for a provisional rental
license. The notice will list the date the regular rental license will be revoked. The regular
rental license will not be revoked until the owner has had an opportunity to appeal the
decision to City Council.
Subd. 3. A decision to revoke, suspend, deny or not renew a license will be preceded by
written notice to the applicant or licensee of the alleged grounds for the decision. The
applicant or licensee will be given twenty days, from the written notice, to appeal the
decision to City Council before final action to revoke, suspend, deny or not renew a license.
A copy of the notice will also be mailed to the tenants or occupants of the property. If the
decision is appealed, the Council will give due regard to the frequency and seriousness of
violations, the ease with which such violations could have been cured or avoided and good
faith efforts to comply and will issue a decision to deny, not renew, suspend or revoke a
license only upon written findings.
Subd. 4. Upon a decision to revoke, deny or not renew a license, no new application for the
same facility will be accepted for a period of time specified in the Council’s written decision,
not exceeding one year.
Subd. 5. A written decision to revoke, suspend, deny or not renew a license or application
will specify the part or parts of the facility to which it applies. Thereafter, and until a license
is reissued or reinstated, no rental units becoming vacant in such part or parts of the facility
may be relet or occupied. Revocation, suspension or non-renewal of a license will not excuse
the owner from compliance with all terms of this section for as long as any units in the
facility are occupied. Failure to comply with all terms of this section during the term of
revocation, suspension or non-renewal is a misdemeanor and grounds for extension of the
term of such revocation or suspension or continuation of non-renewal, or for a decision not
to reinstate the license, notwithstanding any limitations on the period of suspension,
revocation or non-renewal specified in the City Council’s written decision or the provisions
of paragraph (e) of this subdivision.
445:110 No Retaliation. No licensee will evict, threaten to evict or take any other punitive action
against any tenant by reason of good faith calls made by such tenant to enforcement agencies
relating to criminal activity, suspected criminal activity, suspicious occurrences or public safety
concerns. This section will not prohibit the eviction of tenants from a dwelling unit for unlawful
conduct of a tenant or invitee or violation of any rules, regulations or lease terms other than a
prohibition against contacting enforcement agencies.
History: Ord. 2338 2-26-07 repealed the Uniform Housing Code, Section 300:40 Subd. 1-see International Property
Maintenance Code (IPMC), Section 300:41; Ord. 2339 2-26-07 amended and enacted new Rental Dwelling Licensing
provisions, renumbered as Section 300:40; Amended by Ord. 2413 12-01-08; Ord. 2434 7-27-09; Ord. 2498 6-6-11;
Ord. 2542 12/17/12, amended the rental license renewal application date, Section 300.40; Ord. 2660 6-6-16; Ord.
2706 5-22-17 repealed Section 300:40 in its entirety. Ord. 2707 5-22-17 Section 445 replaces Section 300:40.
Section 447 - Therapeutic Massage Establishments and Massage Therapists
Section 447:00. Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to prohibit massage businesses and
services to the public except those licensed as therapeutic massage establishments and massage
therapists pursuant to this section. The licensing regulations prescribed herein are necessary to
protect businesses that are operating legitimate establishments, to ensure physical facilities are
clean, well maintained and safe, to prevent criminal activity and to protect the health, safety, and
general welfare of the community.
Section 447:01. Findings of the City Council. The City Council makes the following findings
regarding the need to license therapeutic massage establishments and therapists and to prohibit all
other types of massage businesses and services to the public:
(1) Persons who have recognized and standardized training in therapeutic
massage, health, and hygiene can provide a legitimate and necessary service
to the general public.
(2) Health and sanitation regulations governing therapeutic massage
establishments and therapists can minimize the risk of the spread of
communicable diseases and can promote overall health and sanitation.
(3) License qualifications for the restrictions on therapeutic massage
establishments and therapists can minimize the risk that such businesses and
persons will facilitate prostitution and other criminal activity in the
community.
(4) Massage services provided by persons with no specialized and standardized
training in massage can endanger citizens by facilitating the spread of
communicable diseases, by exposing citizens to unhealthy and unsanitary
conditions, and by increasing the risk of personal injury.
(5) Massage businesses which employ persons with no specialized and
standardized training can tax city law enforcement services because such
businesses are more likely to be operated as fronts for prostitution and other
criminal activity than operations established by persons with standardized
training.
(6) The training of professional massage therapists at accredited institutions is
an important means of ensuring the fullest measure of protecting the public
health, safety, and welfare.
Section 447:02. Definitions.
Subd. 1. Accredited Institution. An educational institution holding accredited status
approved by the United States Department of Education or Minnesota Office of Higher
Education.
Subd. 2. Accredited Program. A professional massage program or educational institution
accredited by the Commission on Massage Therapy Accreditation (COMTA).
Subd. 3. Issuing Authority. The City Council grants the authority to issue and renew
licenses pursuant to this Section to the Health Director or designee.
Subd. 4. Massage. Any method of pressure on, or friction against, or the rubbing, stroking,
kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating, stimulating, stretching, or rolling of the external
parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical
apparatus, or other appliances or devices, with or without such supplementary aids as
rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, power, cream, lotion, ointment, or other similar
preparation.
Subd. 5. Massage Therapist. An individual who practices or administers massage to the
public who can demonstrate to the issuing authority that he or she:
(1) Has current insurance coverage of $1,000,000.00 for professional liability
in the practice of massage;
(2) Is affiliated with, employed by, or owns a therapeutic massage
establishment licensed by the City; and
(3) Has completed certified therapeutic massage training with content that
includes subjects of anatomy, physiology, hygiene, ethics, massage theory
and research, and massage practice from an Accredited Institutions or
Accredited Program approved by the Issuing Authority.
Subd. 6. Operate. To own, manage, or conduct or to have control, charge, or custody over.
Subd. 7. Persons. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, joint venture,
or combination of individuals.
Subd. 8. Therapeutic Massage Establishment. Any individual, firm, association,
partnership, corporation, joint venture, or combination of individuals that operates a
business that employs or hires licensed therapeutic massage therapists to provide
therapeutic massage within the City for a fee or other consideration.
Subd. 9. Within the City. A physical presence as well as mobile massage operations in
which the establishment premises, although not physically located within the City, serves
as a point of assignment of employees who respond to requests for services from within
the City.
Section 447:03. License Required.
Subd. 1. Therapeutic Massage Establishment License. It shall be unlawful for any
therapeutic massage establishment to operate, engage in, or carry on, within the City,
massage services to the public for consideration without first having obtained a license
from the City pursuant to this Section. The owner/operator of a therapeutic massage
establishment need not be licensed as a therapeutic massage therapist if he or she does not
at any time practice or administer massage to the public.
Subd. 2. Massage Therapist License. It shall be unlawful for any massage therapist to
practice, administer, or provide massage services to the public for consideration within the
City without first having obtained a license from the City pursuant to this Section.
Section 447:04. Exceptions. A therapeutic massage establishment or therapist license is not
required under this section for the following persons and places where massage services are
provided by or under the direction of any of the following:
Subd. 1. Persons duly licensed or registered in this state to practice medicine, surgery,
osteopath, chiropractic, physical therapy, podiatry or registered nurses.
Subd. 2. Persons duly licenses by this state as beauty culturists or barbers who do not give
or hold themselves out to give massages or other services other than those customarily
given in such shops and places of business for beautification only. Massages customarily
given by beauty culturists or barbers will be limited to the areas of head, neck and shoulder;
hand and lower arms to the elbow; foot and ankle.
Subd. 3. Places duly licensed or operating as a hospital, clinic, nursing home, hospice, or
group home established for the hospitalization or care of human beings provided the
massage is administered only to the residents or patients of the facility as part of their care
and not provided as part of a separate service.
Subd. 4. Athletic coaches, directors, ad trainers employed by public or private schools.
Subd. 5. Accredited institutions and students of accredited institutions which provide an
accredited program of study or course work in massage therapy, provided that the massage
is provided during and as a part of the course or clinical component of the institution’s
program or course work and students are supervised by an instructor while performing the
massage.
Subd. 6. Persons providing temporary massage services such as “chair massage” provided
that all of the following requirements are met:
(1) The massage is provided in a place of business where the massage can easily
be seen by employees and visitors;
(2) The establishment where the massage is being provided does not hold a
license to sell alcoholic beverages;
(3) Massages are offered at the establishment no more than ten days per
calendar year;
(4) Each recipient of a massage remains in an upright position during the
massage, either in a seated or standing position; and
(5) Each recipient of a massage remains fully clothed in the normal daytime
attire worn when he or she enters the establishment and does not remove
any clothing, except outerwear, such as a coat or jacket.
Section 447:05. License Application.
Subd. 1. Therapeutic massage establishment license application. An application for a
therapeutic massage establishment license shall be made on a form supplied by the City
and shall contain the following information:
A. Applicant and Owner Information.
(1) Whether the applicant is an individual, corporation, partnership, or other
form of organization.
(2) Full name, address, date of place of birth, and telephone number of the
applicant, all owners and operators, including the designated on-site
manager or agent of the applicant.
(3) Whether the applicant, owners and/or operators have ever used or been
known by a name other than the applicant's name, and if so, the name or
names and information concerning dates and places where used. This
includes commonly nicknames.
(4) Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or a resident alien or
has the legal authority to work in the United States.
(5) The type, name, location, and dates of every business or occupation the
applicant has been engaged in during the preceding 10 years.
(6) Whether the applicant is currently licensed in other communities to perform
massage therapy, and if so, where.
(7) Street addresses and dates at which the applicant has lived during the
preceding 10 years.
(8) Whether the applicant has ever been arrested, charged or convicted of any
crime, or violation of any ordinance other than a minor traffic offense and,
if so, the time, place, date(s) and offense for which arrests, charges or
convictions were had.
(9) If so, the applicant shall furnish information as to the date, time, place and
offense for which arrests, charges or convictions were had.
(10) Whether the applicant has ever been engaged in the operation of massage
services. If so, applicant shall furnish information as to the name, place,
dates and length of time of the involvement of all such establishments.
(11) Whether the applicant or other owner has had an interest in, as an individual
or as part of a corporation, partnership, association, establishment, business
or firm, a massage license that was revoked, suspended, or denied within
the last 10 years of the date the license application is submitted to the issuing
authority.
(12) Proof of Workers’ Compensation Insurance as required by Minnesota Law.
(13) Such other information as the City shall require.
B. Establishment information.
(1) The legal description of the premises to be licensed together with a plan of
the area showing dimensions, location of buildings, street access, and
parking facilities.
(2) Plans and specifications showing the interior and exterior design of the
establishment. Including space allocation and utilization, equipment layout,
room finishes and specifications of all massage equipment.
(3) The current status of the premises and establishment, including whether
they are existing, planned, or under construction/renovation.
(4) The floor number, street number, suite number(s) and rooms where the
massage services are to be conducted.
(5) Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due and payable
for the premises to be licensed have been paid., and if not paid, the years
and amounts that are unpaid.
(6) Compatibility with St. Cloud Zoning Ordinances and the Comprehensive
Plan and proximity to residences, other establishments licensed as
therapeutic massage establishments, churches, schools, and public
buildings.
(7) Such other information as the City shall require.
Subd. 2. Massage Therapist License Application. An application for a massage therapist
license shall be made on a form supplied by the City and shall contain the following
information:
(1) The applicant's name and current address.
(2) The applicant's current employer.
(3) The applicant's employers for the previous five years, including the
employer's name, address and dates of employment.
(4) The applicant's addresses and dates for the previous five years.
(5) The applicant's date of birth, home telephone number, weight, height, color
of eyes, and color of hair. A color photocopy of the applicant's MN driver's
license or MN I.D. front and back, or any other government-issued I.D. If
the photocopy is not acceptable to the Police Chief, the police department
may take photographs for the file.
(6) Whether the applicant has ever been arrested, charged or convicted of any
crime, or violation of any ordinance other than a minor traffic offense and,
if so, the time, place, date(s) and offense for which arrests, charges or
convictions were had.
(7) Whether the applicant has had an interest in, as an individual or as part of a
corporation, partnership, association, establishment, business or firm, a
massage license that was denied, revoked or suspended within the last 10
years of the date the license application is submitted to the issuing authority.
(8) The names, resident and business addresses and contact information of
those residents of the metropolitan area, of good moral character, not related
to the applicant or financially interested in the premises of the business, who
may be referred to as the applicant's character.
(9) Whether the applicant is a U.S. citizen or resident alien or has the legal
authority to work in the United States.
(10) Whether the applicant has ever used or been known by a name other than
the applicant's name, and if so, the name or names and information
concerning dates and places where used.
(11) Whether the applicant has met the definition of a massage therapist in this
Section.
(12) Whether the applicant has ever been the subject of an investigation, public
or private, criminal or non-criminal, regarding massage therapy.
(13) Such other information as the City shall require.
Subd. 3. Background Investigation. The applicant will submit with the completed
application form an executed release of information authorizing the Chief of Police to
obtain any information pertaining to the applicant's character or criminal history which
may be deemed confidential, private, or privileged by the laws of the United States or of
any state. The applicant will also submit additional information that may be required by
the Planning Office, Health and Inspections Department, Police Chief and City Attorney.
No person will make a false statement in an application.
Subd. 4. Insurance Required. Each applicant for a therapeutic massage establishment
license shall file with the issuing authority a public liability insurance policy or certificate
of insurance from a company authorized to do business in the State of Minnesota, insuring
the applicant against any and all loss arising out of the use, operation or maintenance of
the therapeutic massage establishment. The policy of insurance shall be in limits of not
less than $1,000,000.00. Each applicant for a massage therapist license shall file with the
issuing authority a current certificate of insurance providing coverage of $1,000,000.00 for
personal liability in the practice of massage. No cancellation of any insurance policy will
be valid except upon 30 days prior written notice to the City. Failure to keep in full force
and effect the insurance is grounds for suspension or revocation of the license.
Subd. 5. Review and Investigation Fee. At the time of each initial application, the applicant
will pay in full a review and investigation fee. Review and investigation fees will be
determined by the City Council and set forth in Section 512 of this Code. Where a new
application is filed as a result of incorporation by an existing licensee and the ownership
control and interest in the license are unchanged, no additional license fee will be required.
The review and investigation fee will not be refunded.
Subd. 6. License Fee and License Year. The annual license fee for the therapeutic massage
establishment and massage therapist license will be in the amount set forth in Section 512
of this Code. A separate license will be obtained for each place of business. Licenses are
valid from January 1 to December 31 in the year the license is issued, unless revoked.
Renewal application for the license must be made on or before December 1 prior to the
next license term.
Subd. 7. Administrative Review. Upon the filing of an application for a license, together
with the documents required to accompany the license, the Health Director will forward a
copy of the application and accompanying documents to the Planning Office, Health and
Inspections Department, Police Chief and City Attorney.
(1) Planning Office Review. The Planning Office will review the application
and any other pertinent information relative to zoning, land use
compatibility, and comprehensive planning.
(2) Police Department Review. The Police Chief will make or cause to be made
a review of the application to determine the potential impact of law
enforcement. The Police Chief will also make or cause to be made an
investigation of the applicant's character and criminal history.
(3) Health and Inspections Department. The Health and Inspections
Department will review the license application and inspect the premises for
which the license is to be issued to confirm compliance with all
requirements of the City and State relating to health and sanitation.
(4) City Attorney Review. The City Attorney will review the application for
compliance with all applicable statutes and ordinances.
(5) Findings and Approval. Within 45 days of receipt of the initial license
application, the Planning Office, Police Chief, Health and Inspections
Department and City Attorney will submit in writing to the Issuing
Authority their respective findings and recommendations. The Issuing
Authority will review the application, findings and recommendations and
will approve or deny the application. Upon the filing of a renewal
application, the City will respond within a reasonable period of time.
Section 447:06. Issuance of Licenses for New Construction and Alterations of Existing Structures.
Subd. 1. Final Plans Reviewed. Where a license to operate a therapeutic massage
establishment is granted for premises on which new construction or alteration of existing
structures is to occur, the applicant will submit a set of detailed final plans showing interior
and exterior design, including site and space. These plans will be certified by a registered
architect or engineer and submitted to the Building Inspections Division. The Issuing
Authority will review the plans for compliance with the preliminary plans included in the
application.
Subd. 2. Certificate of Occupancy Required. For premises on which new construction or
alteration of existing structures is to occur, no license to operate a therapeutic massage
establishment will be issued until a certificate of occupancy is issued by the City for
premises constructed in accordance with the application and plans reviewed by the Issuing
Authority. Prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the Chief Building Official
will certify to the Health Director that construction was or was not in compliance with the
final plans reviewed by the Health Director. Where the construction is found not to be in
accordance with the final plans, the Chief Building Official will state all significant
deviations.
Subd. 3. Review of Deviations. Where the certification to the Health Director indicates
that construction was not in accordance with the final plans, the Health Director will not
issue the license but will return the application, together with the final plans and a statement
of deviations.
Section 447:07. Persons Ineligible for Initial License.
A. Therapeutic Massage Establishment License. The City may deny issuance of an
initial therapeutic massage establishment license in any of the following
circumstances, and this list is not intended to state the exclusive reasons for denial:
(1) Is not 18 years of age or older at the time the application is submitted to the
issuing authority.
(2) Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed
as prescribed by Minn. Stat. § 364.03, subd. 2, and who has not shown
competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to
perform the duties and responsibilities of a licensee as prescribed by Minn.
Stat. § 364.03, subd. 3.
(3) Has had an interest in, as an individual or as part of a corporation,
partnership, association, establishment, business or firm, a massage license
that was denied, revoked or suspended within the last 10 years of the date
the license application is submitted to the issuing authority.
(4) Is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien, or is legally
prohibited from working in the United States.
(5) The owner, operator, or any person who has a five percent financial interest
in the business or the appointed on-site manager or agent applicant is not of
good moral character or repute.
(6) Is not the real party in interest of the establishment.
(7) Has knowingly misrepresented or falsified information on a license
application within the preceding 10 years.
(8) Cannot meet the definition of therapeutic massage establishment in this
Section.
(9) The applicant does not have insurance coverage in effect as required by this
Section.
(10) The applicant has been denied a license under this Section within the
preceding 12 months.
(11) The proposed use is in conflict with the St. Cloud Zoning Code or the
Comprehensive Plan.
(12) The proposed use is in conflict with any health regulations or building code
regulations of the City of St. Cloud or the State of Minnesota.
(13) Owes taxes or assessments to the state, county, school district, or city that
are due and delinquent.
(14) Is the spouse of a person whose massage-related license has been denied,
suspended or revoked in the past 10 years.
(15) Allowed a license to expire or surrendered a license, unless, at the sole
discretion of the city, a license application is submitted for consideration.
The application shall be treated the same as an application for a new license,
subject to all ordinance regulations and review.
B. Massage Therapist Licenses: The City may deny issuance of an initial massage
therapist license in any of the following circumstances, this is not intended to state
the exclusive reasons for denial:
(1) Is not 18 years of age or older at the time the application is submitted to the
issuing authority.
(2) Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed
as prescribed by Minn. Stat. § 364.03, subd. 2, and who has not shown
competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to
perform the duties and responsibilities of a licensee as prescribed by Minn.
Stat. § 364.03, subd. 3.
(3) Whether the applicant has had an interest in, individually or as part of a
corporation, partnership, association, establishment, business or firm, a
massage license that was denied, revoked or suspended within the last 10
years of the date the license application is submitted to the issuing authority.
(4) Is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien, or is legally
prohibited from working in the United States.
(5) Is not of good moral character or repute.
(6) Has knowingly misrepresented or falsified information on a license
application within the preceding 10 years.
(7) Is not affiliated with, employed by, or does not own a therapeutic massage
establishment licensed by the city.
(8) The applicant does not have insurance coverage in effect as required by this
Section.
(9) The applicant has been denied a license under this Section within the
preceding 12 months.
(10) Cannot meet the definition of massage therapist in this Section.
(11) Allowed a license to expire or surrendered a license, unless, at the sole
discretion of the city, a license application is submitted for consideration.
The application shall be treated the same as an application for a new license,
subject to all ordinance regulations and review.
Section 447:08. General License Restrictions.
A. Prohibited Massages. A massage therapist must not intentionally massage or offer
to massage the penis, scrotum, mons veneris, vulva, or vaginal area of a person.
B. Coverings. When performing a massage, the massage therapist must require that
the person who is receiving the massage have their breasts (with respect to females),
buttocks, anus and genitals covered with clothing or a not-transparent material at
all times. The massage therapist must have their breasts, buttocks, anus, and
genitals covered with clothing at all times.
C. License Restrictions. Each license will be issued to the applicant only. Each
license will be issued only for the premises described in the application. No license
may be transferred to another person or place.
D. Business Hours. No customers or patrons will be allowed to enter the licensed
premises after 10:00 p.m. and before 6:00 a.m. daily. Customers or patrons will not
be allowed to remain upon the licensed premises after 10:30 p.m. and before 6:00
a.m. daily.
Section 447:09. Inspection by City Officers and Identification of Employees. Licensed premises
and license applicants will be open to unannounced inspection by City Health, Building and
License Inspectors and Police Officers during business hours. Inspected facilities will comply with
following requirements:
(1) Any person engaged in providing services in any licensed premises will
identify themselves giving their true legal name and correct address upon
demand by any police officer.
(2) Current massage license issued by the City of St. Cloud must be displayed
in the front entry or corridor of the facility.
(3) Credentials of all massage therapists are current and available on-site.
(4) Business hours must be posted on all public entryways into the massage
facility.
(5) Toilet rooms for employees and patrons are adequate and conveniently
located.
(6) Provide single-service disposable paper or clean linens to cover the table,
chair, furniture, or area on which the patron receives the massage.
(7) The massage therapist must wash their hands and arms with water and soap,
anti-bacterial scrubs, alcohol, or other disinfectants prior to and following
each massage service performed.
(8) Massage tables, chairs, and other furniture on which massages are
performed must have surfaces that can be readily disinfected after each
massage. These surfaces must be disinfected following each massage
performed. All modalities shall be performed on a raised massage therapy
table or chair.
(9) Rooms must be adequately illuminated, to allow for adequate cleaning
purposes.
(10) The facility must be maintained in good repair and in a sanitary condition,
and must take reasonable steps to prevent the spread of infections and
communicable diseases on the premises.
(11) Evidence of sexual acts is prohibited, such as semen found in the facility,
massage tables, chairs, and other surfaces.
(12) Massage therapists must be in good health, without skin infections, and
wear clean clothing when performing massage services.
(13) Facility must have an employee illness policy.
(14) Massage establishments shall not contain nor allow the use by any person
of sleeping quarters or living spaces of any kind intended for habitation,
including but not limited to beds, cots, or mattresses. Sleeping or living
quarters must be physically separated from the massage establishment.
Section 447:10. Advertising. Any advertising by a licensee or representative of the licensee of any
potential unlawful, misleading, sexually explicit, obscene or erotic conduct at the licensed
establishment shall be prohibited.
Section 447:11. Responsible for Conduct. A licensee under this Section shall be strictly
responsible for the conduct of the business being operated in compliance with all applicable laws
and ordinances, including the actions of any employee or agent of the licensee on the licensed
premises.
Section 447:12. Non-renewal, Suspension, or Revocation of License. The license may be
suspended, revoked or not renewed for any of the following reasons, and this list is not intended
to state the exclusive reasons for suspension, revocation, or non-renewal:
(1) A violation related to fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained
in a license application or a renewal application.
(2) A violation related to fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in
the course of carrying on the licensed occupation or business.
(3) Any violation of this ordinance or state law. The charging of a violation or
conviction is not required for non-renewal, suspension, or revocation of a
license.
(4) A violation by any licensee or individual that is directly related to the
occupation or business licensed as defined by Minn. Stat. § 364.03, subd. 2.
(5) Conducting the licensed business or occupation in an unlawful manner or
in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a
menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the community.
(6) If the owner, manager, lessee or any of the employees are found to be in
control or possession of an alcoholic beverage, a narcotic drug or controlled
substance on the premises, other than drugs which may be purchased over
the counter without a prescription or those for which the individual has a
prescription.
(7) If the holder of an establishment license fails to maintain with the issuing
authority a current list of all employees of such licensed premises. The list
shall include all massage therapists licensed under this section.
(8) A material variance in the actual plan and design of the premises from the
plans submitted.
(9) In the event of multiple massage establishment locations, any license
suspension/revocation shall apply to all massage establishment locations
within the City of St. Cloud.
Section 447:13. Appeal and Hearing Procedure. Before the City may revoke, suspend, deny or not
renew a license, written notice must be sent to the applicant or owner/licensee setting forth the
alleged grounds for the potential action. To appeal the revocation, suspension, denial or nonrenewal,
the applicant or owner/licensee must submit a request for appeal in writing within 10 days
of receiving the notice. The appeal will be before an independent hearing officer selected from
the list of independent hearing officers maintained by the City of St. Cloud. At the hearing, the
applicant/licensee may speak on his or her behalf and may present witnesses and other evidence
he or she deems necessary. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer, on behalf of
the City Council, shall issue a written decision that includes findings of fact. The applicant/licensee
may appeal the hearing officer’s decision to the Minnesota Court of Appeals by writ of certiorari.
Section 447:14. Immediate Suspension of License. The Health Director or designee may
immediately suspend a license, if the licensee, or any person working on behalf of the licensee, is
determined to be conducting business in an unlawful manner, any manner that constitutes a
substantial hazard to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public, or after repeated
complaints received regarding unlawful conduct of the business practices or method of solicitation.
The licensee will be given notice of the immediate suspension on site. The suspension will take
place immediately. The licensee can request a hearing within 10 days of notice of the suspension
and the hearing procedure will be the same as set forth in 447:13.
Section 447:15. Ability to Reapply After Revocation. The holder of a therapeutic massage
establishment license or massage therapist license may not reapply for a new license for a period
of 10 years if their license is revoked under this ordinance.
History: Ord. 2782 7-22-19
Section 449 - Tattooing, Body Piercing, Branding, and Scarification
History: Ord. 2480 11-15-10 Repealed in its entirety
Section 450-Sexually Oriented Businesses
Section 450.1. Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of the sexually oriented
business regulations set forth in this Ordinance is to serve a substantial government interest by
attempting to preserve the quality and vitality of neighborhoods, curtail the depression of
property values, restrain increased criminal activity and slow the spread of sexually transmitted
diseases.
Sexually oriented businesses, as defined by this Ordinance, because of their very nature,
are recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics that have a deleterious
effect upon the use and enjoyment of adjacent areas. These secondary effects are especially
evident where such uses are concentrated.
The secondary effects associated with sexually oriented businesses include an increased
level of criminal activity, increased risk of exposure to sexually transmitted diseases, depression
of property values and a significant change in the character of surrounding neighborhoods.
However, it is recognized that such regulations cannot on a de facto basis prohibit these
businesses. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. The sexually oriented
business regulations set forth herein represent a balancing of competing interests, reduction of
objectionable secondary effects through the regulation of sexually oriented businesses versus the
protected rights of the owners, operators, performers and patrons of those businesses.
Section 450.2. Definitions.
Subd. 1. Adult Motel. Means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
A. Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides
patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by
the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas;” and has a sign visible from the public right of way which
advertises the availability of this adult-type of photographic reproductions; or
B. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours;
or
C. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period
of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
Subd. 2. Employee. Means a person who performs any service on the premises of a
sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person is
denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said
person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business. Employee
does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises
or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
Subd. 3. Escort. Means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person(s), or who agrees or offers to privately model
lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person(s).
Subd. 4. Escort Agency. Means a person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or
other consideration.
Subd. 5. Establishment. Means and includes any of the following:
A. The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new
business;
B. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented
business, to any sexually oriented business;
C. The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually
oriented business; or
D. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
Subd. 6. Licensee. Means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the
application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a person in whose name a license has
been issued authorizing employment in a sexually oriented business.
Subd. 7. Nude Model Studio. Means any place where a person who appears semi-nude,
in a state of nudity, or who displays “specified anatomical areas” and is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who
pay money or any form of consideration. Nude Model Studio shall not include a proprietary
school licensed by the State of Minnesota or a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:
A. That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising
that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing, and
B. Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days
in advance of the class; and
C. Where no more than one (1) nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any
one time.
Subd. 8. Nudity or a State of Nudity. Means the showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering,
the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple,
or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
Subd. 9. Person. Means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
Subd. 10. Semi-Nude or in a Semi-Nude Condition. Means the showing of the female
breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of
the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human
female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast,
exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the
areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
Subd. 11. Sexually Oriented Business. Means an adult motel, escort agency, or nude
model studio.
Subd. 12. Specified Anatomical Areas. Means:
A. The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered, or
B. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
Subd. 13. Specified Criminal Activity. Means any of the following offenses:
A. Prostitution or promotion of prostitution, dissemination of obscenity; sale,
distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a
child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent
exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual
assault; molestation of a child; gambling; or distribution of a controlled substance;
or any similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code
of other states or countries;
B. For which:
(i) Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the
date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
(ii) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the
date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later
date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
(iii) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction
or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor
offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any
24-month period.
C. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the
disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
Subd. 14. Specified Sexual Activities. Means any of the following:
A. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks,
anus, or female breasts;
B. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sodomy, or
C. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth
in (A) through (B) above.
Subd. 15. Substantial Enlargement of a Sexually Oriented Business. Means the increase
in floor areas occupied by the business by more than twenty-five percent (25%), as the floor
areas exist on the date this Ordinance takes effect.
Subd. 16. Transfer of Ownership or Control of a Sexually Oriented Business. Means
and includes any of the following:
A. The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
B. The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business,
whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
C. The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the
ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other
operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control.
Section 450.3. Classification. Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
Subd. 1. Adult motels;
Subd. 2. Escort agencies; and
Subd. 3. Nude model studios.
Section 450.4. License Required.
Subd. 1. It is a misdemeanor for any person to operate or participate in a sexually
oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued pursuant to this
Ordinance.
Subd. 2. It is a misdemeanor for any person who operates a sexually oriented business to
employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually
oriented business employee pursuant to this Ordinance.
Subd. 3. It is a misdemeanor for any person to obtain employment with a sexually
oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business employee license pursuant
to this Ordinance.
Section 450.5. Business License Requirements.
Subd. 1. Business License Requirement and Application. No person will engage in the
business of operating or participating in a sexually-oriented business either exclusively or in
connection with any other business enterprise without being licensed as provided in this
ordinance. A written application for a license to operate a sexually-oriented business shall be
submitted on a form approved by the Chief of Police. Each application for a license, together
with the appropriate license fee as described in Section 510 will be submitted to the St. Cloud
Police Department not later than one month prior to the expiration of the previous license. A
penalty will be added to the amount of the license fee and paid by the applicant if the application
has not reached the St. Cloud Police Department by the dates designated. Any person who
operates a sexually-oriented business without submitting an application and appropriate fee will
be deemed to have violated this ordinance and will be subject to prosecution as provided in this
ordinance.
Subd. 2. Qualification of Application. All applications must be qualified according to
the provisions of this Ordinance. The application may request, and the applicant shall provide,
such information as to enable the City to determine whether the applicant meets the
qualifications established in this Ordinance.
Subd. 3. Application Signatures. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is an individual, the person must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a
person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each
individual who has a twenty percent (20%) or greater interest in the business must sign the
application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under the following
Section and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
Subd. 4. Application Information. All Applicants must be eighteen (18) years old,
whether applying as an individual, a partner of a partnership or a stockholder in a corporation
and submit proof of age with the application. The completed application for a sexually oriented
business license shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the
following documents if the applicant is:
A. An individual shall state his/her legal name and any aliases;
B. A partnership shall state its complete name, and the names of all partners, whether
the partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if
any;
C. A corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence
that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of its state of
incorporation, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal
stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of
the registered office for service of process.
Subd. 5. Assumed Name. If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented
business under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she must state:
A. The sexually oriented business’s fictitious name; and
B. Submit the required registration documents.
Subd. 6. Criminal History. Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the
applicant, has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this Ordinance, and, if
so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of each.
Subd. 7. Previous License. Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the
applicant, has had a previous license under this Ordinance or other similar sexually oriented
business ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the
name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended
or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant
or a person residing with the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director
or principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed under this Ordinance whose license has
previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually
oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of
denial, suspension or revocation.
Subd. 8. Multiple Licenses. Whether the applicant or a person residing with the
applicant holds any other licenses under this Ordinance or other similar sexually oriented
business ordinance from another city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other
licensed businesses.
Subd. 9. License Classification. The single classification of license for which the
applicant is filing.
Subd. 10. Location of Business. The location of the proposed sexually oriented
business, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number(s), if
any.
Subd. 11. Mailing Address. The applicant’s mailing address and residential address.
Subd. 12. Photograph. A recent photograph of the applicant(s).
Subd. 13. Identification Cards. The applicant’s driver’s license number, Social Security
number, and/or his/her state or federally issued Tax Identification Number.
Subd. 14. Diagram of Premises. A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or
diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn
with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6)
inches.
Subd. 15. Survey. A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared by a
registered land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any existing
sexually oriented businesses within five hundred (500) feet of the property to be certified; or the
property lines of any established religious institutions/synagogue, school, or public park or
recreation area within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property to be certified shall be submitted
with the application. The survey must have been prepared within 30 days of the application
submission. For purposes of this Section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is
in existence at the time an application is submitted.
Subd. 16. Requirements for Business with Viewing Room. If an applicant wishes to
operate a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the
premises, in a viewing room or booth of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor
space, films, video cassettes, other video reproductions, or live entertainment which depict
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant shall comply with the
application requirements set forth in Section 450.11.
Subd. 17. Criminal Background Checks. The applicant will submit with the completed
new or renewal application form an executed release of information authorizing the Chief of
Police to obtain any information pertaining to the character or criminal history of the applicant,
employee or licensee which may be deemed confidential, private, or privileged by the laws of the
United States or of any state. The criminal background check may include fingerprinting by the
St. Cloud Police Department. If an applicant, employee or licensee is found to have been
convicted of a specified criminal activity or a crime related to a specified sexual activity, in the
State of Minnesota or elsewhere, a license will not be issued or renewed.
Section 450.6. Issuance of Business License Application. Within 30 days after receipt
of a completed sexually oriented business application, the St. Cloud Police Department shall
approve or deny the issuance of a license to an applicant.
Section 450.7. Non-Issuance of Business License Application. The St. Cloud Police
Department shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant unless it is determined by a
preponderance of the evidence that one (1) or more of the following findings is true:
Subd. 1. An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
Subd. 2. An applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is overdue in payment
to the City of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in relation
to any business.
Subd. 3. An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for
issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the
application form.
Subd. 4. An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been denied a
license to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding twelve (12) months or whose
license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12)
months.
Subd. 5. An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been
convicted of a specified criminal activity defined in this Ordinance.
Subd. 6. The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been
approved by the health inspector designated by the City, fire department, and the building
official as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
Subd. 7. The license fee and/or application fee required by this Ordinance has not been
paid.
Subd. 8. An applicant of the proposed business is in violation of, or is not in compliance
with, any of the provisions of this Ordinance.
Subd. 9. A person who is not of good moral character or repute.
Section 450.8. Posting. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented
business and the classification for which the license is issued pursuant to Section III. All
licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented
business so that they may be easily read at any time.
Section 450.9. Inspection. The health inspector designated by the City, fire department,
and the building official shall complete their certification that the premises is in compliance or
not in compliance within twenty (20) days of receipt of the application by the St. Cloud Police
Department.
Section 450.10. One Classification. A sexually oriented business license shall issue for
only one classification as found in Section 450.3.
Section 450.11. Employee Application.
Subd. 1. Employee Identification Information. Before any applicant may be issued a
sexually oriented business employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided
by the St. Cloud Police Department the following information:
A. The applicant’s name or any other name (including “stage” names) or aliases used
by the individual;
B. Age, date, and place of birth;
C. Height, weight, hair and eye color;
D. Present residence address and telephone number;
E. Present business address and telephone number;
F. Date, issuing state and number of driver’s permit or other identification card
information;
G. Social Security Number; and
H. Proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
Subd. 2. Employee Photographs. A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing
the applicant’s face, and the applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the St. Cloud Police
Department shall be attached to the application form for a sexually oriented business employee
license. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant.
Subd. 3. Employee Statement. A statement detailing the license history of the applicant
for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including
whether such applicant previously operated or is seeking to operate, in this or any other county,
city, state, or country has ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do business denied,
revoked, or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked,
or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the name, the
name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reason for the denial,
revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be
attached to the application.
Subd. 4. Employee Criminal History. A statement whether the applicant has been
convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this Ordinance and, if so, the specified
criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each.
Section 450.12. Issuance of Employee License. Upon the filing of said application for
a sexually oriented business employee license, the St. Cloud Police Department shall issue a
temporary license to said applicant. The application shall then be referred to the appropriate
departments for an investigation to be made on such information as is contained on the
application. The application process shall be completed within thirty (30) days from the date the
completed application is filed. After the investigation, the St. Cloud Police Department shall
issue a license.
Section 450.13. Non-Issuance of Employee License. A sexually oriented business
employee license shall not be issued if it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that
one (1) or more of the following findings is true:
Subd. 1. The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for
issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the
application form;
Subd. 2. The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years;
Subd. 3. The applicant has been convicted of a “specified criminal activity” as defined
in this Ordinance;
Subd. 4. The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment
in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by a
particular provision of this Ordinance; or
Subd. 5. The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked
by the City within two (2) years of the date of the current application. If the sexually oriented
business employee license is denied, the temporary license previously issued is immediately
deemed null and void. Denial, suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this
Subsection shall be subject to appeal as set forth in Section 450.19.
Section 450.14. Annual Renewal of Licenses. A license granted pursuant to this
Section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a
finding by the St. Cloud Police Department that the applicant has not been convicted of any
specified criminal activity as defined in this Ordinance or committed any act during the existence
of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The
renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in Section 450.15,
Subd. 3.
Section 450.15. Fees. The following fees shall be submitted to the St. Cloud Police
Department at the time of application for business and/or employee licenses:
Subd. 1. Application Fee. Every application for a sexually oriented business license
(whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application and investigation fee established in the St. Cloud Fee Schedule Ordinance
Section 510.
Subd. 2. License Fee. In addition to the application and investigation fee required
above, every sexually oriented business that is granted a license (new or renewal) shall pay to the
City an annual non-refundable license fee established in the St. Cloud Fee Schedule Ordinance
Section 510 within thirty (30) days of license issuance or renewal.
Subd. 3. Employee License Fee. Every application for a sexually oriented business
employee license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be
accompanied by an annual, non-refundable application, investigation, and license fee established
in the St. Cloud Fee Schedule Ordinance Section 510.
Section 450.16. Random Inspections.
Subd. 1. Inspection. An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Police
Department, health inspector designated by the City, Fire Department, Zoning Department, or
other City departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the
purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.
Subd. 2. Penalty. A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his/her agent or
employee commits a misdemeanor if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the
premises at any time it is open for business.
Section 450.17. Expiration and Renewal of License.
Subd. 1. Expiration. All licenses issued by the St. Cloud Police Department unless
sooner revoked by the St. Cloud Police Department as hereinafter provided will expire on
December 31st of each year.
Subd. 2. Renewal. When the St. Cloud Police Department denies renewal of a license,
the applicant shall not be issued a license for one (1) year from the date of denial. If, subsequent
to denial, the St. Cloud Police Department finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license
has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days
have elapsed since the date denial became final.
Section 450.18. Suspension. The St. Cloud Police Department shall suspend a license
for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a
licensee has:
Subd. 1. Violated or is not in compliance with any Section of this Ordinance;
Subd. 2. Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as
authorized by this Chapter.
Section 450.19. Revocation.
Subd. 1. Revocation Determination. The St. Cloud Police Department shall revoke a
license if a cause of suspension in Section 450.18 occurs and the license has been suspended
within the preceding twelve (12) months. The St. Cloud Police Department may also revoke a
license if it determines that:
A. A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during
the application process;
B. A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled
substances on the premises;
C. A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
D. A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of
time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
E. Except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee has knowingly allowed any act of
sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to
occur in or on the licensed premises; or
F. A licensee is delinquent in payment to the City, County, or State for any taxes or
fees past due.
Subd. 2. Revocation Period. When the St. Cloud Police Department revokes a license,
the revocation shall continue for one (1) year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually
oriented business license for one (1) year from the date the revocation became effective. If,
subsequent to revocation, the St. Cloud Police Department finds that the basis for the revocation
has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days
have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
Subd. 3. Administrative Review. After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal
of an application, or suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee may seek
prompt administrative review of such action by a hearing which will be held before an
independent hearing officer pursuant to the procedure established in St. Cloud City Ordinance
Section 1100, subd. 12. At the time of the hearing, the licensee may appear and present any
material evidence. The hearing officer will make findings of fact as to whether a violation
occurred to support the denial, suspension or revocation of the license. The decision of the
hearing officer shall be final without any further right of administrative appeal.
Subd. 4. Judicial Review. An aggrieved party may obtain judicial review of the decision
of the hearing officer by petitioning the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a writ of certiorari
pursuant to Minnesota Statute Section 606.01.
Section 450.20. Transfer of License. A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to
another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license
at any place other than the address designated in the application.
Section 450.21. Location and Penalties.
Subd. 1. A person commits a misdemeanor if that person operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business in any zoning district other than those areas which are
zoned as I-1 and I-2 pursuant to Article 10, Table 10-1 of the St. Cloud Land Development Code.
Subd. 2. A person commits an offense if the person operates, or causes to be operated, a
sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of:
A. A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for
religious worship and related religious activities;
B. A public or private educational facility including, but not limited to, child day
care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools,
private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high
schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special
education schools, junior colleges, and universities; school includes the school
grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and
only incidentally as a school;
C. A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or
recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park, playground, nature
trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts,
pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar public land within the
City which is under the control, operation, or management of the City park and
recreation authorities;
D. The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use;
E. An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children or family
entertainment; or
F. A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control
regulations of the State.
Subd. 3. A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the
operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a
sexually oriented business within five hundred (500) feet of another sexually oriented business.
Subd. 4. A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the
operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one (1) sexually oriented business in the
same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented
business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented
business.
Subd. 5. For the purpose of this Section, measurements shall be made in a straight line,
without regard to the intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or
structure used as the part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the
nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in Subd. 2, Subsection B of this Section .
Presence of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes
of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this Section.
Subd. 6. For purposes of this Section, the distance between any two (2) sexually oriented
businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or
objects or political boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each
business is located.
Section 450.22. Adult Motels.
Subd. 1. Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial
establishment has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less
than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as
that term is defined in this Ordinance.
Subd. 2. A person commits a misdemeanor if, as the person in control of a sleeping
room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually
oriented license, he/she rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours
from the time the room is rented, he/she rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room again.
Subd. 3. For purposes of Subdivision 2 of this Section, the terms “rent” or “sub-rent”
mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
Section 450.23. Exhibition of Sexually Explicit Films, Videos or Live Entertainment
in Viewing Rooms. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less
than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, live entertainment,
or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
Subd. 1. Upon application for a sexually oriented license, the application shall be
accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one
(1) or more manager’s stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating
any portion of the premises in which patrons shall not be permitted. A manager’s station may
not exceed thirty two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at
which the permit shall be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in
the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram
should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a
designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of
all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6”) inches. The City
may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that
was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered
since it was prepared.
Subd. 2. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
Subd. 3. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s station may be
made without the prior approval of the City.
Subd. 4. It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one (1)
licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager’s station at all times that any patron is
present inside the premises.
Subd. 5. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is
an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron
is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video
reproduction equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more manager’s stations designated, then
the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from
at least one (1) of the manager’s stations. The view required in this Subsection must be by direct
line of sight from the manager’s station.
Subd. 6. It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified in
Subdivision 5 remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise,
display racks or other materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to
any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons shall not be
permitted in the application filed pursuant to Subdivision 1 of this Section.
Subd. 7. No viewing room may be occupied by more than one (1) person at any time.
Subd. 8. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient
intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not
less than five (5.0) foot candles as measured at the floor level.
Subd. 9. It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described
above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
Subd. 10. No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms
or booths.
Subd. 11. No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between
viewing booths or rooms.
Subd. 12. The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls
between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist.
Subd. 13. The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be
nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
Subd. 14. The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing
booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material.
No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within forty-eight
(48) inches of the floor.
Section 450.24. Penalty. A person having a duty under Subdivisions 1 through 14 of
Section 450.23 commits a misdemeanor if he/she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
Section 450.25. Escort Agencies.
Subd. 1. An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years.
Subd. 2. A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as
an escort for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
Section 450.26. Nude Model Studios.
Subd. 1. A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen
(18) years.
Subd. 2. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an offense if the person
appears semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a
defense to prosecution under this Subsection if the person under eighteen (18) years was in a
restroom not open to public view or visible to any other person.
Subd. 3. A person commits an offense if the person appears in a state of nudity, or
knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio
premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way.
Subd. 4. A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any
room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public.
Section 450.27. Public Nudity.
Subd. 1. It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly and intentionally, in a
sexually oriented business, appears in a state of nudity or depicts specified sexual activities.
Subd. 2. It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly or intentionally in a
sexually oriented business appears in a semi- nude condition unless the person is an employee
who, while semi-nude, shall be at least ten (10) feet from any patron or customer and on a stage
at least two (2) feet from the floor.
Subd. 3. It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude in a sexually
oriented business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer or for any patron or
customer to pay or give any gratuity to any employee, while said employee is semi-nude in a
sexually oriented business.
Subd. 4. It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude, to touch a
customer or the clothing of a customer.
Section 450.28. Prohibition against Children in a Sexually Oriented Business. A
person commits a misdemeanor if the person knowingly allows a person under the age of
eighteen (18) years on the premises of a sexually oriented business.
Section 450.29. Hours of Operation. No sexually oriented business, except for an adult
motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays
and Saturdays, and 10:00 p.m. Saturday night to 12:00 p.m. on Sundays.
Section 450.30. Exemptions.
Subd. 1. It is a defense to prosecution under Section 450.27 that a person appearing in a
state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
A. By a proprietary school, licensed by the State of Minnesota, a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
B. By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational
programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
C. In a structure:
(i) which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other
advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
(ii) where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three
(3) days in advance of the class; and
(iii) where no more than one (1) nude model is on the premises at any one (1)
time.
Subd. 2. The following sexually-oriented businesses are exempt from the requirements
of this ordinance: adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult arcades, adult
cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult theater and sexual encounter establishment or center.
Section 450.31. Injunction. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business without a valid license or in violation of Section 450.22 of this Ordinance is
subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Such violations
shall be a misdemeanor. Each day a sexually oriented business so operates is a separate offense
or violation.
Section 450.32. Severability. If any Section, Subsection, or clause of this Ordinance
shall be deemed to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the remaining
Sections, Subsections, and clauses shall not be affected.
History: New Ord. 2639 12-9-15;
Section 457:00-Pawnbrokers
Section 457:00. Definitions.
Subd. 1. Pawnbroker. Any natural person, partnership or corporation, acting as principal, agent or
employee thereof, who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or other valuable
thing, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property, or other valuable thing on condition of
selling the same back again at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage
on personal property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so mortgaged. To the
extent that a pawnbroker' s business includes buying personal property previously used, rented or
leased, or selling it on consignment, the provisions of this chapter will be applicable.
Subd. 2. Reportable transaction. Every transaction conducted by a pawnbroker in which
merchandise is received through a pawn, purchase, consignment or trade, or in which a pawn is
renewed, extended or redeemed, or for which a unique transaction number or identifier is generated
by their point-of-sale software, is reportable except:
(a) The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used merchandise from a merchant,
manufacturer or wholesaler having an established permanent place of business, and the
retail sale of said merchandise, provided the pawnbroker must maintain a record of such
purchase or consignment which describes each item, and must mark each item in a
manner which relates it to that transaction record.
(b) Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally received by pawn or purchase, and
for which all applicable hold and/or redemption periods have expired.
Subd. 3. Billable transaction. Every reportable transaction conducted by a pawnbroker except
renewals, redemptions or extensions of existing pawns on items previously reported and
continuously in the licensee's possession is a billable transaction.
Section 457:05. License Required. No person will engage in or carry on the business of
pawnbroker without first obtaining a license to carry on such business in compliance with the
provisions of this code.
Section 457:10. Application. Any person, corporation or association, either as principal or agent,
desiring to engage in or carry on the business or occupation of a pawnbroker within the corporate
limits of the City of St. Cloud, will file an application for a license for that purpose with the City
Clerk, which application will be made in writing at least twenty (20) days before issuance, wherein
the applicant will state his name, his proposed place of business, the name of the proposed manager
of the business, the length of time for which he desires to do business, and will make payment of the
required license fee.
Section 457:15. License Fee and Term. Every person, corporation, association or co-partnership
requiring a license will on or before the time for filing the application for a pawnbroker license, pay
the required fee to the City Treasurer of the City of St. Cloud. The license fee will be for one year
or any part of a year and each license year will terminate on December 31st.
Section 457.16. Billable Transaction License Fee. The billable transaction license fee will reflect
the cost of processing transactions and other related regulatory expenses as determined by the city
council, and will be reviewed and adjusted, if necessary, every six months. Licensees will be
notified in writing thirty (30) days before any adjustment is implemented. Billable transaction fees
will be billed monthly and are due and payable within 30 days. Failure to do so is a violation of this
chapter.
Section 457:20. Records. At the time of any reportable transaction other than renewals, extensions
or redemption, every licensee must immediately record in English the following information in a
computerized record approved by the St. Cloud Police Department:
Subd. 1. A complete and accurate description of each item including, but not limited to, any
trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other
identifying mark on such an item.
Subd. 2. The purchase price, amount of money loaned upon or pledged.
Subd. 3. The maturity date of the transaction and the amount due, including monthly and
annual interest rates and all pawn fees and charges.
Subd. 4. Date, time and place the item of property was received by the licensee, and the
unique alpha and/or numeric transaction identifier that distinguishes it from all other
transactions in the licensee's records.
Subd. 5. Full name, current residence address, current residence telephone number, date of
birth and accurate description of the person from whom the item of the property was
received, including: sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes and color of hair.
Subd. 6. The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of
identification of the seller:
(a) Current valid Minnesota driver's license.
(b) Current valid Minnesota identification card.
(c) Current valid photo identification card issued by another state or province of
Canada.
Subd. 7. The signature of the person identified in the transaction.
Subd. 8. For renewals, extensions and redemption, the licensee will provide the original
transaction identifier, the date of the current transaction, and the type of transaction.
Subd. 9. The records must be open for inspection by the police department at all times the
licensee is open for business. Data entries must be retained for at least three years from the
date of transaction.
Section 457:21. Daily Reports to Police Department.
Subd. 1. Effective no later than sixty (60) days after the police department provides
licensees with computerized record standards, licensees must submit every reportable
transaction to the police department daily in the following manner:
(a) Licensees must provide to the police department all information required in Section
457:20, (1) through (6) and other required information, by transferring it from their
computer to the Automated Pawn System via modem. All required records must be
transmitted completely and accurately after the close of business each day in accordance
with standards and procedures established by the issuing authority using procedures that
address security concerns of the licensees and the issuing authority. The licensee must
display a sign of sufficient size, in a conspicuous place in the premises, which informs
all patrons that all transactions are reported to the police department daily.
(b) Billable transaction fees. Licensees will be charged for each billable transaction reported
to the police department.
(1) If a licensee is unable to successfully transfer the required reports by
modem, the licensee must provide the police department printed copies
of all reportable transactions along with the video tape(s) for that date, by
12 noon the next business day;
(2) If the problem is determined to be in the licensee's system and is not
corrected by the close of the first business day following the failure, the
licensee must provide the required reports as detailed in Section 457:21
(b)(1), and may be charged a fifty dollar ($50.00) reporting failure
penalty, daily, until the error is corrected; or
(3) If the problem is determined to be outside the licensee's system, the
licensee must provide the required reports in 457:21 (b)(1), and resubmit
all such transaction via modem when the error is corrected.
(4) Regardless of the cause or origin of the technical problems that
prevented the licensee from uploading their reportable transactions, upon
correction of the problem, the licensee will upload every reportable
transaction from every business day the problem had existed.
(5) Section 457:21 (b) (1) through (3) notwithstanding, the police
department may, upon presentation of extenuating circumstances, delay
the implementation of the daily reporting penalty.
Section 457:25. Bond. Before the license will be issued to any person or persons as provided in
this ordinance, the licensee will cause to be filed with the City Clerk a surety bond, to be approved
by the City Attorney, as to form, in the sum of $1,000.00 conditioned that said licensee will comply
with all the provisions of this ordinance, and will account for and deliver to any person who is
legally entitled any and all goods, wares and merchandise, article or thing which may come into his
possession while engaged in said business or occupation of a pawnbroker.
Section 457:30. Minors, Intoxicated Persons. It will be unlawful and it will be a violation of this
ordinance for any pawnbroker to purchase or receive on deposit or pledge anything of value as
security for a loan of money from any person, under age of 18 or from intoxicated persons.
Section 457:32. Prohibited Acts. The following acts are unlawful and will be a violation of this
ordinance:
Subd. 1. For a licensee to receive any goods, unless the seller presents identification in the
form of a valid State of Minnesota driver’s license, a valid State of Minnesota identification
card, or current valid photo driver’s license or identification card issued by the state of
residency of the person from whom the item was received.
Subd. 2. For a licensee to receive any item of property that possesses an altered or
obliterated serial number or operation identification number or any item of property that has
had its serial number removed.
Subd. 3. No person may pawn, pledge, sell consign, leave or deposit any article of property
not their own; nor will any person pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave or deposit the property
of another, whether with permission or without; nor will any person pawn, pledge, sell,
consign, leave or deposit any article of property in which another has a security interest;
with any licensee.
Subd. 4. No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell consign, leave, or deposit any article of
property will give a false or fictitious name, false date of birth, an out of date address of
residence or telephone number; nor present a false or altered identification, or the
identification of another; to any licensee.
Section 457:35. Redemption Period. Any person pledging, pawning or depositing an item for
security must have a minimum of 90 days from the date of that transaction to redeem the item
before it may be forfeited and sold. During the 90 day holding period, licensees are prohibited from
redeeming any item to anyone other than the person to whom the receipt was issued or, to any
person identified in a written and notarized authorization to redeem the property identified in the
receipt, or to a person identified in writing by the pledger at the time of the initial transaction and
signed by the pledger, or with approval of the police license inspector. Written authorization for
release of property to persons other than original pledger must be maintained along with original
transaction record in accordance with Section 457:20 (9).
Section 457:40. Police Order to Hold Property.
Subd. 1. Investigative hold. Whenever a law enforcement official from any agency notifies
a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the premises. The
investigative hold will be confirmed in writing by the originating agency within 72 hours
and will remain in effect for 15 days from the date of initial notification, or until the
investigative order is canceled, or until an order to hold/confiscate is issued, pursuant to
Section 457:40 (b), whichever comes first.
Subd. 2. Order to hold. Whenever the chief of police, or the chief's designee, notifies a
licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the licensed premises
until authorized to be released by the chief or the chief's designee. The order to hold will
expire ninety (90) days from the date it is placed unless the chief of police or the chief's
designee determines the hold is still necessary and notifies the licensee in writing.
Subd. 3. Order to confiscate. If an item is identified as stolen or evidence in a criminal case,
the chief or chief's designee may:
(a) Physically confiscate and remove it from the shop, pursuant to a written order
from the chief or the chief's designee, or
(b) Place the item on hold or extend the hold as provided in Section 457:40 (b), and
leave it in the shop.
Subd. 4. When an item is confiscated, the person doing so will provide identification upon
request of the licensee, and will provide the licensee the name and phone number of the
confiscating agency and investigator, and the case number related to the confiscation.
Subd. 5. When an order to hold/confiscate is no longer necessary, the chief of police, or
chief's designee will so notify the licensee.
Section 457:41. Denial, Suspension or Revocation. Any license under this chapter may be denied,
suspended or revoked for one or more of the following reasons:
Subd. 1. The proposed use does not comply with the any applicable zoning code.
Subd. 2. The proposed use does not comply with any health, building, building maintenance
or other provisions of this Code of Ordinances or state law.
Subd. 3. The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with one or more provisions of this
chapter.
Subd. 4. The applicant is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien, or upon
whom it is impractical or impossible to conduct a background or financial investigation due
to the unavailability of information.
Subd. 5. Fraud, misrepresentation or bribery in securing or renewing a license.
Subd. 6. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the application and
investigation for, or in the course of, the applicant's business.
Subd. 7. Violation within the preceding five years, of any law relating to theft, damage or
trespass to property, sale of a controlled substance, or operation of a business.
Subd. 8. The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not qualify for a
license under the terms of this chapter.
Section 457:45. Hours. Licensed pawnbrokers may operate between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m. on any day of the week. Further, no pawnbroker will be open for business of any kind on
the following holidays: Easter Sunday, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
Section 457:50. Separability. Should any section, subsection, clause or other provision of this
ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision will not
effect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part other than the part declared invalid.
1
Section 470 - Public Swimming Pools
Section 470:00 Applicability of Minnesota Department of Health Rules.
Subd. 1. Minnesota Rules, Chapter 4717 relating to public swimming pools and Minnesota Statutes
Section 144.1222 are adopted by the City of St. Cloud by reference and will be controlling within
the City of St. Cloud. Three copies of Minnesota Rule, Chapter 4717, Public Swimming Pool Rules
will be marked as official copies and filed for use and examination by the public in the Office of the
City Clerk.
Section 470:10. Swimming Pool License.
Subd. 1. License Required. It will be unlawful for any person to own, operate, maintain, lease or be
responsible for any public swimming pool as defined in Minnesota Rules, Chapter 4717, regardless
of whether a fee is charged for such use, unless the City Public Swimming Pool License has been
obtained.
a. The license will be displayed in the vicinity of the swimming pool or conveniently
accessible upon demand.
b. Licenses are not transferable.
Subd. 2. Application for License. Application for a City public swimming pool license will be
submitted to the Health and Inspections Department in such form and manner as the Health Director
prescribes.
Subd. 3. License Expiration and Renewal. Licenses issued under this ordinance will expire on the
30th of April each year. License renewal applications must be filed with the City Clerk prior to
April 1 of each year.
Subd. 4. License Fees. License fees will be set forth in Section 555 of this Code.
Subd. 5. License Fee Exemptions. Licenses are required for public swimming pools owned,
operated or maintained by the City of St. Cloud but no license fee will be charged.
Section 470:20. Approval of New Construction, Repair, Remodeling or Alteration. No person will
construct, enlarge, convert, or alter any public swimming pool without first submitting plans to and
obtaining the approval of the Minnesota Department of Health as outlined in Minnesota Rules,
Chapter 4717, Section 4717:.0450 and the City of St. Cloud Building Safety Department.
Section 470:30. Access, Inspections, and Testing. The Department of Health and Inspections is
authorized to conduct such inspections and testing procedures as it deems necessary to ensure
compliance with all provisions of this ordinance and will have right of entry at any reasonable hour
to the licensed premises for this purpose.
Section 470:35. Removal and Correction of Violations. Any person given notification of one or
2
more violations of this ordinance will correct or remove each violation within a reasonable period of
time as determined by the Department of Health and Inspections. The length of time for the
correction or removal of each violation will be noted on the inspection report. Failure to remove or
correct each violation within the time period noted on the inspection report will constitute a separate
violation of this ordinance.
Section 470:40. Excessive consumption of inspection services, fee and liability.
Subd. 1. The city will be entitled to collect its costs of enforcement from a operator or owner
who consumes excessive inspection services. An excessive consumption of inspection
services occurs when:
a. After an initial routine inspection, written notice of a violation(s) is served with
compliance dates, and a re-inspection to determine compliance occurs; and
b. An additional re-inspection is performed at the same location within a consecutive
twelve-month period after the first initial routine inspection; and the enforcement officer
finds violations of which are either new violations or violations based upon failure to
correct previous violations; and
Subd. 2. Fee imposed. The fee for excessive consumption of inspection services will be
applied to each consecutive re-inspection within a consecutive twelve-month period after
the inspections set forth in subdivision 1 at which the enforcement officer finds violations
which are either new violations or violations based upon failure to correct previous
violations.
a. The fee for each additional re-inspection or re-inspection thereafter will be
$150.00.
b. Owners who have received a notice of warning will be jointly and severally liable
for the excessive consumption of inspection services fees.
c. The amount of the excessive consumption of inspection services fee will be
recovered by assessing the cost of the enforcement action against the real property
upon which the nuisances existed and to certify the same for collection in the same
manner as taxes and special assessments are certified and a debt owed to the city by
the responsible person or persons.
d. The fee will be based upon the number of inspections performed and will include,
but not be limited to, the pro-rata salaries of enforcement officers performing
inspections of the subject property, the pro-rata cost of equipment, materials and all
other overhead costs used during inspections of the subject property.
e. Action under this section does not preclude any other civil or criminal enforcement
procedure.
3
Section 470:50. Suspension of License.
Subd. 1. Licenses may be suspended temporarily by the Health Director or their designee
at any time for failure by the holder to comply with the requirements of this ordinance.
Whenever a license holder or operator has failed to comply with any notice requiring
corrective action issued under the provisions of this ordinance, the license, upon service
of the notice, is immediately suspended, and the said licensed establishment must
discontinue operation immediately An opportunity for a hearing before the City Council
will be provided if a written request for appeal is filed with the Health and Inspections
Department within ten days of the date of the notice of suspension.
Subd. 2. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this ordinance, whenever the Health
Director or their designee finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of a public
swimming pool which in their judgment constitutes a substantial hazard to the public
health, he or she may without warning, notice or hearing, issue a written notice to the
license holder or operator citing such condition, specifying the corrective action to be
taken, and specify the time period with which such action will be taken; and if deemed
necessary, such order will state the license is immediately suspended. Any person to
whom such an order is issued will comply immediately.
Subd. 3. Any person whose license has been suspended may at any time make
application to the Health and Inspections Department for a reinspection for the purpose of
reinstatement of the license. Within five days following receipt of a written request,
including a statement signed by the applicant that the conditions causing the suspension
of the license have been corrected, the Health and Inspections Department will make a
reinspection. If the applicant is complying with the requirements of this ordinance, the
license will be reinstated.
Section 470:60. Revocation of License. For serious or repeated violations of any of the
requirements of this ordinance, the license may be permanently revoked after an opportunity for
a hearing before the City Council has been provided. Prior to such action, the Health Director
will notify the license holder in writing and advising that the license will be permanently revoked
at the end of a ten day period. A license may be suspended for cause pending its revocation.
Section 470:70. Appeal.
Subd. 1. Request for Hearing. Any person affected by the notice of suspension or
revocation will be granted a hearing on the matter before the City Council upon filing in
the office of the Health Department a written petition upon a form provided by the Health
and Inspections Department, requesting such a hearing and setting forth a brief statement
on the grounds for appeal. Said petition will be filed within ten days after the notice was
served.
Subd. 2. Date of Hearing. The hearing requested will be held at the next available
Council meeting date, providing public notice requirements are met.
Subd. 3. Notice of Hearing. The Health Department will cause five days written notice
of the Hearing to be given to the petitioner or petitioners by personal service or by
mailing to the petitioner or petitioners' last known address.
Subd. 4. Proceedings. At such hearing the petitioner, their agent or attorney, will be
given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause why the notice of suspension or
revocation should be modified or withdrawn. The Health and Inspections Department
4
will present a detailed written statement of its findings and decision to the City Council at
the time of the Hearing.
Subd. 5. Decision of the City Council. The Council after such hearing, will sustain,
modify or withdraw the notice of suspension or revocation depending upon its findings as
to whether the provisions of the ordinance have been complied with. A copy of the
decisions of the City Council will be served by mail on the petitioner or petitioners. Any
person aggrieved by the decision of the City Council may seek relief in any court of
competent jurisdiction as provided by the laws of the State.
Subd. 6. Record of Proceedings. The proceedings of each hearing held before the City
Council pursuant to petition, including the findings and the decision will be recorded and
reduced to writing and entered as a public record.
Subd. 7. Notices Not Applied. Any notice served pursuant to the provisions of this
ordinance will automatically become final if a written petition for a hearing is not filed
with the Health and Inspections Department within ten days after the notice is served.
History: Ord. 2473 8-9-10; Administrative amendment to correct statutory reference 12-4-17.
Section 472:00 Taxicabs
Section 472:00. Definitions.
Subd. 1. Unless the context clearly require a different meaning, the following words and
phrases as used in this ordinance will be defined as set forth in the following subdivisions.
Subd. 2. "Person" will mean and include any individual, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
Subd. 3. A "taxicab" is a vehicle driven by mechanical power of which a taximeter is
affixed. The term "taxicab" will include any motor vehicle for hire designed to carry seven
persons or less, operated upon any highway in this City or on call or demand, accepting or
soliciting passengers indiscriminately for transportation for hire between points along
streets or highways as may be directed by the passenger or passengers so being transported.
Subd. 4. The word "taximeter" will mean a mechanical instrument and device by which
the charge for hire is mechanically calculated and upon which such charge is being
indicated by means of figures plainly visible.
Section 472:05. Meters. All taxicabs will have affixed thereon a taximeter and no person will
operate or permit to be operated any taxicab unless the taximeter has been first inspected, tested
and approved by the Police Department or its authorized representative. No taxicab will be
operated when a taximeter is out of order or for any reason does not correctly register the fare
charge; provided that a variance of 3% will be considered correct. No person will operate or
permit to be operated a taxicab equipped with a taximeter not having the case thereof sealed and
the cover and gear thereof intact. Every taximeter will be so affixed that the amount of the fare
will be plainly visible to the passenger thereof, and after dark the same will be illuminated by
suitable light. Taximeters may be examined and tested by the Police Department at any time and
said department will keep a record of all such inspections, approvals and disapprovals.
Section 472:10. License Required for Taxicab Vehicle. No person will operate or permit to be
operated for hire upon the streets of the City of St. Cloud any taxicab as hereinafter defined,
without first obtaining a license therefor in the manner hereinafter provided and paying the
required license fees.
Section 472:15. Application for Taxicab Vehicle License. Application for license will be made to
the St. Cloud Police Department upon a form to be provided for that purpose.
Section 472:30. Transfer of Taxicab Vehicle License. Upon any transfer of ownership of any
taxicab, the St. Cloud Police Department may, where the transferor indicates that the vehicle is no
longer to be operated as a taxicab, validate by appropriate endorsements thereon such license for
use on another taxicab to be designated by such transferor. The provision of the foregoing
sentence will also apply where the licensee will produce satisfactory evidence that such taxicab has
through destruction or otherwise ceased to be used as a taxicab. Upon any transfer of ownership of
any taxicab where the transferor indicates that such vehicle is to continue in use as a taxicab, the
St. Cloud Police Department may, by appropriate endorsements thereon validate such license in
the hands of the transferee. Upon the death of any person owning a vehicle licensed hereunder, the
St. Cloud Police Department may, upon receipt of satisfactory evidence of such death, at the
request of the deceased's personal representative, validate by appropriate endorsement thereon
such license in the hands of the person in whose name title to such taxicab will have vested by
reason of such death. In no event, however, will any transfer be made as hereinbefore
contemplated unless and until the transferee in all other respects complies with the terms and
provisions of this ordinance.
Section 472:35. Term of Taxicab Vehicle License. All licenses issued by the St. Cloud Police
Department unless sooner revoked by the City of St. Cloud as hereinafter provided will expire on
December 31 of each year. When such license will have been granted, the Clerk will issue suitable
tags or stickers for each cab so licensed. Such tags or stickers will be displayed in a prominent
place on each taxicab or motor vehicle for hire while it is in use. Each tag or sticker will bear the
vehicle identification number (VIN) of the vehicle so licensed. Such license will be issued by the
St. Cloud Police Department upon the applicant paying the required license fee and upon
providing proof of insurance hereinafter required.
Section 472:40. Insurance or Bond for Taxicab Vehicle. Before the issuance of a license to
operate a taxicab, the licensee will file:
A certificate signed by a duly authorized officer of a company authorized to write insurance in the
State of Minnesota to the effect that a policy of insurance has been issued and is in full force and
effect, issued to the licensee, and that premiums have been paid as required thereon, together with
a true copy of the policy contract or certificate of insurance, or in lieu thereof the original policy,
and will provide in a minimum that coverage required by Minnesota Statutes Section 65B.48
entitled "Reparation Security Compulsory." Minnesota Statutes 65B.48 and other sections of the
Minnesota Statutes referenced therein is hereby incorporated into this ordinance by reference the
same as if it were fully set forth. Such insurance policy will be filed for each and every motor
vehicle for which a license is applied. Such policy of insurance will contain a provision for a
continuing liability thereunder to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon,
and that until the policy is revoked as herein provided, the insurance company will not be released
from liability on account of non-payment of premium, failure to renew license at the end of the
year, or any act or omission of the named assured. Any insurance company whose policy has been
so filed pursuant to this section may file a notice in the office of the St. Cloud Police Department
of its intention to terminate and cancel such policy and give notice thereof to the named licensee.
Whereupon after ten (10) days after such filing licensee or owner will cease to operate or cause to
be operated within the City of St. Cloud such taxicab or motor vehicle for hire, and the license
issued therefor will be automatically revoked and liability on such policy will cease and terminate
unless another insurance policy is forthwith issued, approved and filed in lieu of said cancelled
policy, provided that the liability of the insurance company therein for any act or omission of the
licensee or owner occurring prior to the effective date of the cancellation will not be thereby
discharged or impaired.
If the financial condition of any such insurance companies will at any time be found unsatisfactory
or insecure with reference to the extent of the risks assumed or policies outstanding, the St. Cloud
Police Department will be forthwith notified thereof, and after ten (10) days notice to the owner or
owners of any vehicle covered or affected by insurance policies issued by any such company or
companies in pursuance to the provisions of this ordinance, the St. Cloud Police Department will
revoke the licenses of such owner or owners, unless a satisfactory policy or policies, bond or
bonds, will have been previously filed in the manner and form herein required.
Section 472:45. Taxicab Drivers Licenses Required. No person will drive or operate a taxicab in
the City of St. Cloud unless duly licensed as hereinafter provided.
Section 472:50. Application for Taxicab Driver License. Every applicant for an initial license and
renewal license as a driver of a taxicab or motor vehicle for hire will file a verified application
with the St. Cloud Police Department on a form provided for that purpose. Such application will
set forth that the applicant (1) is a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent
residence, or who has otherwise obtained work authorization from the U.S. Immigration and
Naturalization Service; (2) is the holder of a valid Minnesota driver's license authorizing operation
of the licensed vehicle; (3) is able to speak, read and write the English language; (4) is eighteen
years of age or over; (5) has obtained and provided a doctor's certificate indicating the applicant is
free from any infirmity, physical or mental, which would render the applicant unfit for the safe
operation of the licensed vehicle, will be provided every three years after the date the initial license
was issued; (6) has no felony convictions in this State or elsewhere in the last ten (10) years; no
gross misdemeanor convictions in this State or elsewhere within the last five (5) years; no
misdemeanor convictions in this State or elsewhere in the last three (3) years involving alcoholrelated
driving offenses, theft, damage to property, check forgery, the use or threat of use of force,
possession or sale of a controlled substance, prostitution or indecent conduct; no convictions in
this State or elsewhere of three (3) or more traffic code violations within the preceding twelve (12)
months. For purposes of this ordinance, traffic code ordinances will be defined pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 169 and Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 171. The applicant’s verified
status must be maintained during the entire licensing period.
A person who has been convicted of a crime, as defined in this ordinance will not be disqualified
from obtaining taxicab driver's license if the person can show competent evidence of sufficient
rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of the public employment sought or the
occupation for which the license is sought pursuant to Minnesota Statutes §364:03. Sufficient
evidence of rehabilitation may be established by the production of:
(a) A copy of the local, state, or federal release order; and
(b) Evidence showing that at least one year has elapsed since release from any local, state, or
federal correctional institution without subsequent conviction of a crime; and evidence showing
compliance with all terms and conditions of probation or parole; or
(c) A copy of the relevant department of corrections discharge order or other documents showing
completion of probation or parole supervision.
In addition to the documentary evidence presented, the licensing or hiring authority will consider
any evidence presented by the applicant regarding:
(1) The nature and seriousness of the crime or crimes for which convicted;
(2) All circumstances relative to the crime or crimes, including mitigating circumstances or social
conditions surrounding the commission of the crime or crimes;
(3) The age of the person at the time the crime or crimes
were committed;
(4) The length of time elapsed since the crime or crimes were committed; and
(5) All other competent evidence of rehabilitation and present fitness presented, including, but not
limited to, letters of reference by persons who have been in contact with the applicant since the
applicant's release from any local, state, or federal correctional institution.
At the time of filing said initial application or renewal application, the applicant will exhibit to the
St. Cloud Police Department the driver's license issued to the applicant by the State of Minnesota
and will furnish a card prepared by the Police Department of the City of St. Cloud and certified by
the Chief of Police showing that the fingerprints of the applicant together with his photograph
taken by or under the supervision of said Police Department. Prior to issuance of said card, the
Police Department will conduct a driving record and criminal history investigation regarding each
individual applicant. A card may be issued to each applicant not in violation of the criteria set
forth in this section.
All initial licenses and renewal licenses issued pursuant to this section will be issued for a period
of twelve months from the date of issuance. License application forms will be obtained from the
St. Cloud Police Department.
Section 472:55. Fee. Before such license is issued the applicant will pay to the City Treasurer the
required license fee.
Section 472:60. Revocation. A taxicab driver's license or taxicab vehicle license may be revoked,
suspended or not renewed at any time for cause pursuant to the provisions of this chapter upon
notice and hearing by the City Council.
Any time that a licensee's Minnesota driver's license is suspended, revoked or canceled, his or her
taxicab driver's license will likewise be immediately suspended, revoked or canceled. No person
will operate a taxicab without a valid Minnesota driver's license.
Any person holding a taxicab driver's license whose Minnesota driver's license is suspended,
canceled or revoked for any reason will immediately surrender his or her taxicab driver's license to
the St. Cloud Police Department. The taxicab driver's license will be returned to the licensee upon
reinstatement of the Minnesota driver's license or issuance of a limited license authorizing
operation of a taxicab; provided, however, that suspension, cancellation or revocation of a
Minnesota driver's license due to refusal to submit to a legally required blood alcohol test under
the state implied consent statute will be grounds for the revocation, nonissuance or nonrenewal of
the taxicab driver's license.
Any licensed taxicab driver whose Minnesota driver's license has been revoked and who has been
issued a limited license authorizing the operation of a taxicab will immediately notify the St.
Cloud Police Department of the same. At that time, the licensee will furnish to the St. Cloud
Police Department a copy of the limited license and a written statement containing a schedule of
the days and hours of each day during which he or she will be driving a taxicab during the term of
the limited license. No deviation from the schedule will be permitted. In addition, the licensee will
personally furnish to the St. Cloud Police Department copies of all trip sheets for all shifts worked
during the term of the limited license. The limited license documentation and trip sheets must be
furnished weekly, i.e., every Monday by 12:00 noon, to the St. Cloud Police Department.
Any person holding a taxicab driver's license will notify the St. Cloud Police Department
immediately whenever he or she is convicted of an alcohol-related driving offense, whether or not
it involves the operation of a taxicab.
Refusal to take and/or failure to pass a standard breathalyzer test administered pursuant to Minn.
Stat. § 169.123 while on duty will be grounds for revocation of a taxicab driver's license.
Failure to comply with the provisions of this section will be grounds for revocation of a taxicab
driver's license.
Section 472:65. Rates of Fares, Taxicabs. The rates to be charged and collected for service,
including waiting time, by taxicabs will be such as the Council from time to time will fix therefor,
and no charge will be made for extra passengers. Waiting time will include the time when the
taxicab is not in motion, beginning with the arrival at the place to which it has been called or the
time consumed while standing at the direction of the passenger, but no charge will be made for the
time lost for inefficiency of the taxicab or its operators, or time consumed by premature response
to a call. There will be posted in a conspicuous place on the inside of the taxicab a card on which
will be printed in plain legible type the rates of fare.
Section 472:75. Continued Service; Equipment Inspection. Suspension of service for a period of
five consecutive days without the approval of the City Council will be deemed sufficient cause for
revocation or cancellation of the license of the company, provided, however, that no order of
revocation will issue until the company has been afforded a hearing on rule to revoke the license of
the company. The Police Department will have jurisdiction over the lighting equipment, safety
and sanitary condition of all taxicabs and autos for hire and will cause inspection to be made
before registering the same and from time to time thereafter as will be deemed necessary for the
convenience and protection and safety of passengers and public.
Section 472:80. Emergency Service. In case of emergency, and to give service, autos for hire may
be used temporarily for taxicab services at the same rate as the taxicab or vice versa, taxicabs may
be used as autos for hire but in case of any dispute over such use the Police Department will be the
final judge.
Section 472:85. Baggage Regulations. Ordinary hand baggage of passengers (not exceeding 50
pounds) will be carried in the cab free of charge.
Section 472:90. Taxicabs Licensed Outside St. Cloud. Taxicabs having no St. Cloud license and
whose place of business is not in the City of St. Cloud may bring passengers into St. Cloud but
may not pick up passengers for any destination or accept any business within the City of St. Cloud.
Section 472:95. Unauthorized Carrying of Passengers Prohibited. The carrying of passengers as a
business for compensation by any vehicle other than a public vehicle or a designated driver
service, duly licensed under and operating in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, or
by motor buses operating under proper authority, is hereby forbidden.
Section 472:100. Change of Fare; Adjustment of Meter. No change of fare will be made until
approved by the Council and the meter will be adjusted to said changed rate and approved by the
Police Department, and no fare in excess of or less than the indication shown by said taximeter
will be charged.
History: Ord. 2534 8-20-12
Section 473:00 Designated Driver Service
Section 473:00. Definitions.
Subd. 1. Unless the context clearly require a different meaning, the following words and phrases
as used in this ordinance will be defined as set forth in the following subdivisions.
Subd. 2. "Person" will mean and include any individual, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
Subd. 3. A "designated driver service" is a business model whereby the “designated driver”
operates the vehicle of the “customer” for hire between points along streets or highways as may be
directed by the registered owner or authorized driver of the vehicle. Designated driver service
also includes the operation of additional motor vehicles in support of the designated driver.
Section 473:10. Designated Driver Service Licenses Required. No person will operate a
designated driver service in the City of St. Cloud unless duly licensed as hereinafter provided.
Designated driver service includes the designated driver as well as the driver or operator of
additional motor vehicles used in designated driver service operations. Designated driver services
that utilize a support vehicle may not transport passengers for hire in the support vehicle.
Passengers may only be transported in the customer’s vehicle.
Section 473:15. Application for Designated Driver Service License. Every applicant for an initial
license and renewal license as a designated driver service for hire will file a verified application
with the St. Cloud Police Department on a form provided for that purpose. Such application will
set forth that the applicant (1) is a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent
residence, or who has otherwise obtained work authorization from the U.S. Immigration and
Naturalization Service; (2) is the holder of a valid Minnesota driver’s license authorizing operation
of the licensed vehicle; (3) is able to speak, read and write the English language; (4) is eighteen
years of age or over; (5) has obtained and provided a doctor’s certificate indicating the applicant is
free from any infirmity, physical or mental, which would render the applicant unfit for the safe
operation of the licensed vehicle, will be provided every three years after the date the initial
license was issued; (6) has no felony convictions in this State or elsewhere within the last ten (10)
years; no gross misdemeanor convictions in this State or elsewhere within the last five (5) years;
no misdemeanor convictions in this State or elsewhere within the last three (3) years involving
alcohol-related driving offenses, theft, damage to property, check forgery, the use or threat of use
of force, possession or sale of a controlled substance, prostitution or indecent conduct; no
convictions in this State or elsewhere of three (3) or more traffic code violations within the
preceding twelve (12) months. For purposes of this ordinance, traffic code offenses will be
defined pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 169 and Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 171. The
applicant’s verified status must be maintained during the entire licensing period.
A person who has been convicted of a crime, as defined in this ordinance will not be disqualified
from obtaining a designated driver service license if the person can show competent evidence of
sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of the public employment sought
or the occupation for which the license is sought pursuant to Minnesota Statutes §364.03.
Sufficient evidence of rehabilitation shall include the production of:
(a) A copy of the local, state, or federal release order; and
(b) Evidence showing that at least one year has elapsed since release from any local, state, or
federal correctional institution without subsequent conviction of a crime; and evidence showing
compliance with all terms and conditions of probation or parole; or
(c) A copy of the relevant department of corrections discharge order or other documents showing
completion of probation or parole supervision. In addition to the documentary evidence presented,
the licensing or hiring authority will consider any evidence presented by the applicant regarding:
(1) The nature and seriousness of the crime or crimes for which convicted;
(2) All circumstances relative to the crime or crimes, including mitigating circumstances
or social conditions surrounding the commission of the crime or crimes;
(3) The age of the person at the time the crime or crimes were committed;
(4) The length of time elapsed since the crime or crimes were committed; and
(5) All other competent evidence of rehabilitation and present fitness presented,
including, but not limited to, letters of reference by persons who have been in contact
with the applicant since the applicant's release from any local, state, or federal
correctional institution.
At the time of filing said initial application or renewal application, the applicant will exhibit to
the St. Cloud Police Department the driver's license issued to the applicant by the State of
Minnesota and will furnish a card prepared by the Police Department of the City of St. Cloud and
certified by the Chief of Police showing that the fingerprints of the applicant together with his
photograph taken by or under the supervision of said Police Department. Prior to issuance of said
card, the Police Department will conduct a driving record and criminal history investigation
regarding each individual applicant. A card may be issued to each applicant not in violation of
the criteria set forth in this section.
All initial licenses and renewal licenses issued pursuant to this section will be issued for a period
of twelve months from the date of issuance. License application forms will be obtained from the
St. Cloud Police Department.
Section 473:20. Term of Designated Driver’s License. All licenses issued by the St. Cloud Police
Department unless sooner revoked by the City of St. Cloud as hereinafter provided will expire on
December 31 of each year. When such license will have been granted, the Clerk will issue the
license.
Section 473:25. Display of Designated Driver Service License. Each individual employed in
performing designated driver services, including operation of support vehicles, shall have and
maintain in their possession the City issued designated driver service license. Such license shall
be produced at any time at the request of the consumer or the St. Cloud Police Department. Such
license will be issued by the City Clerk upon the applicant paying the required license fee and
upon providing proof of insurance hereinafter required.
Section 472:30. Insurance and Liability for Designated Driver Service. Before the issuance of a
license to operate a designated driver service, the licensee will file:
Subd. 1. Insurance Required. Each applicant for a designated driver service license shall
file with the City Clerk a public liability policy or certificate of insurance from a
company licensed to do business in the State of Minnesota insuring the applicant against
any and all liability incurred in the use or operation of vehicles in the course of providing
designated driver services. The policy of insurance shall be in the limits of not less than
one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) for injury or death to one person, three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000) for injury or death for each occurrence and twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000) for property damage. The insurance policy shall also include
non-owned automobile coverage. The policy is subject to the approval of the St. Cloud
City Attorney. No cancellation of any insurance policy will be valid except upon 30 days
written notice to the City. Failure to keep in full force and effect the insurance is grounds
for revocation of the license.
Subd. 2. Liability and Claims. All persons accepting a license under this chapter and
operating under it assume all liability for any and all accidents, injuries and damages that
may be caused to any person or property by the operation of designated driver services
and shall at all times save the City harmless from all claims, damages, actions or causes
of action arising therefrom including reasonable attorney’s fees and all expenses and, on
ten (10) days notice from the City, shall appear and defend all suits against the City as a
result of any accident, injury or damage.
Section 473:40. Fee. Before such license is issued the applicant will pay to the City Treasurer the
required license fee.
Section 473:50. Revocation. A designated driver's service license may be revoked, suspended or
not renewed at any time for cause pursuant to the provisions of this chapter upon notice and
hearing by the City Council.
Any time that a licensee's Minnesota driver's license is suspended, revoked or canceled, his or her
designated driver service license will likewise be immediately suspended, revoked or canceled. No
person will operate a designated driver service without a valid Minnesota driver's license.
Any person holding a designated driver service license whose Minnesota driver's license is
suspended, canceled or revoked for any reason will immediately surrender his or her designated
driver service license to the St. Cloud Police Department. The designated driver service license
will be returned to the licensee upon reinstatement of the Minnesota driver's license or issuance of
a limited license authorizing operation of a designated driver service; provided, however, that
suspension, cancellation or revocation of a Minnesota driver's license due to refusal to submit to a
legally required blood alcohol test under the state implied consent statute will be grounds for the
revocation, nonissuance or nonrenewal of the designated driver service license.
Any licensed designated driver whose Minnesota driver's license has been revoked and who has
been issued a limited license authorizing the operation of a designated driver service will
immediately notify the St. Cloud Police Department of the same. At that time, the licensee will
furnish to the St. Cloud Police Department a copy of the limited license and a written statement
containing a schedule of the days and hours of each day during which he or she will be performing
designated driver services during the term of the limited license. No deviation from the schedule
will be permitted. In addition, the licensee will personally furnish to the St. Cloud Police
Department copies of all trip sheets for all shifts worked during the term of the limited license.
The limited license documentation and trip sheets must be furnished weekly, i.e., every Monday
by 12:00 noon, to the St. Cloud Police Department.
Any person holding a designated driver service license will notify the St. Cloud Police Department
immediately whenever he or she is convicted of an alcohol-related driving offense.
Refusal to take and/or failure to pass a standard breathalyzer test administered pursuant to Minn.
Stat. § 169.123 while on duty will be grounds for revocation of a designated driver service license.
Failure to comply with the provisions of this section will be grounds for revocation of the
designated driver service license.
Section 473:60. Designated Driver Services Licensed Outside St. Cloud. Designated Driver
Services having no St. Cloud license and whose place of business is not in the City of St. Cloud
may bring passengers into St. Cloud but may not pick up passengers for any destination or accept
any business within the City of St. Cloud.
History: Ord. 2533 08-20-12
Section 475 - Peddlers/Transient Merchants
Section 475:00 Definitions.
Subd. 1. The word "person" includes the singular and the plural and also means any person,
firm, corporation, association, club, co-partnership, society or any other organization.
Subd. 2. The word "peddler" means any person traveling by foot, wagon, motor vehicles or
any other type of conveyance, from place to place, house to house or from street to street,
carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, food, farm products or
provisions, offering for sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers or who,
without traveling from place to place, will sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon,
motor vehicle, or other conveyance or from a vacant lot or open sales lot., A person who
solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers is a peddler
subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
Subd. 3. The words "transient merchant" means any person, who engages temporarily in the
business of selling and delivering goods, wares, or merchandise within the municipality and
who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure,
vacant lot, motor vehicle, trailer or railroad car.
Section 475:05. Permit and License Required. It will be unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of a peddler or transient merchant and to sell or offer for sale any goods, wares or
merchandise within the corporate limits of the City of St. Cloud or to sell or offer for sale any goods,
wares or other articles of value upon or along the streets or other public places without first
obtaining a permit and license. It is unlawful to sell or offer for sale any goods, wares or
merchandise on any right-of-way or on any public lands within the City without a special permit
granted by the City Council.
Subd. 1. Exemptions. This ordinance does not apply to persons licensed or specifically
exempted from licensing under Article I, Section 8 of the United States Constitution, the
constitution and laws of the State of Minnesota or the ordinances of this municipality at such
times as such persons are conducting only the activity described by said laws and
ordinances; This ordinance does not apply to persons making an initial uninvited call upon
the householders of this municipality as a preliminary to the subsequent establishment of a
regular route service for the sale and delivery to customers of the daily necessities of life
which are perishable or subject to spoiling within a reasonable period of time; This
ordinance does not apply to charitable organizations or their representatives duly registered
under the laws of Minnesota as set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 309.50 - 309.61 or
those specifically exempted from registration, including but not limited to schools, scouts,
organized youth athletic leagues and their representatives. Nor will it include or apply to
farmers or truck gardeners who offer for sale or sell or who peddle from house to house or in
the markets, vegetables, butter, eggs or other farm or garden products produced and raised by
said farmer or truck gardener from lands occupied and cultivated by him within this State.
Provided however that every such farmer or truck gardener claiming the exemption from the
license requirements of this ordinance will, upon request of the City Clerk, present
satisfactory proof that the farmer or truck gardener is entitled to license exemption. It is a
misdemeanor to execute a false sworn statement or make any false representation which
induces the City to grant an exemption.
Subd. 2. Application. Applicants for a license under this ordinance must file with the Clerk a
sworn application, which application will be made in writing at least thirty (30) days before
issuance thereof, in duplicate, on a form to be furnished by the Clerk, wherein the applicant
will give the following information:
(a) Full legal name and physical description and date of birth of the applicant;
(b) Address (legal and local);
(c) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold and in the case
of products of farm or orchard, whether produced or grown by the applicant;
(d) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing
the exact relationship;
(e) The specific length of time and the dates for which the t permit to do business is desired;
(f) If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with license number or other
means of identification;
(g) Driver's license number and licensing state;
(h) If sales are to be made from an open lot, vacant land or an open sales lot, then the
applicant will indicate on the application where these sales will be conducted and will file
written permission from the landowner showing knowledge and consent on the landowner's
part to proposed sales activity and to the applicant's use. All setback, parking, and other
requirements for that zoning use district where the lands are located will apply to the
temporary license. The applicant will will be provided a copy of the zoning use district
regulations applicable to the location where he intends to engage in the temporary sales;
(i) A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of the
filing of the application. The picture will be 2" x 2" showing the head and shoulders of the
applicant in a clear and distinguishable manner;
(j) The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two reliable property owners of
the Counties of Stearns, Benton or Sherburne, State of Minnesota, who will certify as to the
applicant's good character and business responsibility or, in lieu of the names of references,
any other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the
applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business
responsibility;
(k) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime,
misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, including the nature of the offense
and the punishment or penalty assessed.
(l) At the time of filing the application, a fee will be paid to the City Clerk to cover the cost
of investigation in the amount set by the Council;
(m) The City Clerk will refer the application to the Zoning and Building Department for
comment and recommendation.
Subd 3. Investigation and Issuance.
(a) Police Chief to Investigate. Upon receipt of a license application, the original will be
referred to the Police Chief, who will investigate the applicant's business and moral
character.
(b) Disapproval of Application. If the Police Chief finds the applicant’s business and moral
character to be unsatisfactory, then the Chief will endorse disapproval on the application and
the reason for the disapproval. The application will then be forwarded to the City Clerk who
will notify the applicant that the application has been disapproved and that a license will not
be issued.
(c) Approval of Application. If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Chief of Police will endorse
approval on the application and return the application to the City Clerk who will, upon
payment of the prescribed license fee, deliver to the applicant the license. The license will
contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and show the name, address and
photograph of the licensee, the class of license issued and the kind of goods to be sold under
the license the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance, and the length of time the license
will be operative, as well as the license number and other identifying description of any
vehicle used in such peddling. The City Clerk will keep a permanent record of all licenses
issued.
Subd. 4. Fees. License fees will be in an amount set by the Council from time to time. The City
Council may prescribe daily, weekly, monthly or yearly fees.
Section 475:10. Bond.
Subd. 1. Every transient merchant or peddler operating within the City of St. Cloud, in addition to
the required license fee, will deposit with the City Clerk a surety bond equivalent to 5% of the retail
value of the inventory offered for sale. In any case, the amount of the surety bond will be not be less
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
Subd. 2. A transient merchant who claims to be exempt from the license requirements of this
ordinance will, upon request, present to the City Clerk satisfactory proof of intentiont o locate
permanently in the City. Additionally, the transient merchant will deposit with the City Clerk a
surety bond in the sum of $500 which becomes payable to the City of St. Cloud in the event the
transient merchant does not remain in the City for more than 6 months. After being in the same
business for a period of at least 6 months the transient merchant may execute a sworn statement
which will serve as proper proof that the transient merchant has become an authorized permanent
merchant
Subd. 3. The bond will be executed by a surety company holding a certificate of the Insurance
Commissioner of the State of Minnesota. The bond must to be approved as to form by the City
Attorney, conditioned upon the complete compliance with the terms and requirements of this
ordinance, and also conditioned to indemnify or reimburse any purchaser of goods, wares, or
merchandise in a sum equal to at least the amount of any payment or payments such purchaser may
have been induced to make through misrepresentation as to kind, quality or value of such goods,
wares or merchandise.
Section 475:20 Requirements and Prohibitions.
Subd. 1. License Plates and Badges. The City Clerk will issue to each licensee at the time of
delivery of the license an identification card which the licensee will exhibit upon request.
Subd. 2. Transfer. No license or identification card issued under the provisions of this ordinance
will be used or exhibited at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued.
Subd. 3. Nuisance. No peddler will conduct his business so as to annoy any other person or to
become a nuisance or so as to obstruct travel upon any street, highway or public place in the City.
Subd. 4. Loud Noises and Speaking Devices. No peddler or any associate will shout, make any
cryout, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, including any loud speaking radio or sound
amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places or upon any private
premises where sound is emitted or produced and is plainly audible upon the streets, avenues, alleys,
parks or other public places for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or
merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell.
Subd. 5. Signs. The use of open lots or vacant properties for sales licensed by this ordinance does
not authorize signs which are not in compliance with the sign ordinances. All applicants are
required to comply with Section 469 of the City Code.
Subd. 6. Use of Streets. No peddler will have any exclusive right to any location in the public
streets, nor will any be permitted a stationary location, nor will any peddler be permitted to operate
in any congested area where operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose
of this ordinance, the judgment of a police officer, good faith is assumed and is deemed conclusive
as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced.
Subd. 7. Exhibition of Identification Card. Peddlers are required to exhibit their identification card
at the request of any citizen.
Section 475:65. Duty of Zoning and Building Department and Police to Enforce. It will be the duty
of the Zoning and Building Department and any Police Officer of this City to require any person
seen peddling and any transient merchant, who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to
produce his identification card and to enforce the provisions of this ordinance against any person
found to be violating the same.
Section 475:70. Records. The Police Chief will report to the City Clerk all convictions for violation
of this ordinance. The Clerk will maintain a record for each license issued and record the reports of
violation therein.
Section 475:75. Revocation of License.
Subd. 1. Licenses issued under the provisions of this ordinance may be revoked by the
Council after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
(a) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license;
(b) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his
business as peddler;
(c) Any violation of this ordinance;
(d) Conviction of any crime or penal offense involving moral turpitude;
(e) Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general
welfare of the public.
Subd. 2. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license will be given in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Notice will be
mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at The last known address at least five (5) days prior
to the date set for hearing.
Section 490 - Alarms
Section 490:00. Purpose.
The City’s Police Department has no obligation to respond to private alarms, they do so only as a
public service. The alarms can serve a beneficial function to those who choose to install them in
their businesses or residences. This benefit must be balanced against the costs incurred by the
City as a result of false alarms. The intent of this ordinance is to reduce the number of false
alarms occurring within the City and the resultant waste of City resources by providing for
corrective administrative action, including fees, listing for no emergency response to alarms and
criminal penalties for violations.
Section 490:05. Definitions. For the purposes of this ordinance, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Subd. 1. "Alarm System" means any device or system which transmits a signal visibly,
audibly, electronically, mechanically or by a combination of these methods which
indicates a hazard or occurrence requiring urgent attention and to which police are
expected to respond. Alarm system will not include personal, direct telephone call
requesting emergency services from a person at the premises in question. Automobile
alarm devices will not be considered an alarm system under the terms of this ordinance.
Subd. 2. "Alarm User" means the person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind in control of any building, structure, or facility
wherein an alarm system is maintained.
Subd. 3. "Police Dispatch Center" is the facility used to receive emergency requests for
service and general information from the public to be dispatched to Police patrol units.
Subd. 4. "Indirect Alarm Transmittal" means any security alarm system which does not
directly terminate in the Police dispatch center, but which causes a third party, answering
services or central station to notify the Police dispatch center of the alarm activation.
Subd. 5. "False Alarm" means an alarm signal eliciting a response by Police personnel
when a situation requiring a response does not, in fact, exist and which is caused by the
activation of the alarm system through mechanical failure, alarm malfunction, improper
installation or the inadvertence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his/her
employees or agents. False alarms do not include alarms caused by climatic conditions
such as tornadoes, thunderstorms, utility line mishaps, violent conditions of nature or any
other conditions of nature or other conditions which are clearly beyond the control of the
alarm manufacturer, installer or owner.
Subd. 6. "Automatic Dialing Device" means a device, which is interconnected to a
telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and
transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for
emergency response.
Section 490:10. False Alarms, Civil Penalties, Fees, corrective action, no response list.
Subd. 1. For police response to any false alarm, the City will charge and collect a civil
penalty fee from the alarm user. During each calendar year, commencing with the first
response, the following police response policy and penalty structure will apply:
(a) First False Alarm Response. A civil penalty will not be charged for the first false
alarm response with the calendar year. Notice of conditions and requirements of this
chapter shall be given to the alarm user or occupant of the premises on which the false
alarm occurred and upon which the alarm system is located.
(b) Second False Alarm Response. For a second false alarm response to premises within
the calendar year a civil penalty of $75.00 will be charged. The alarm user shall, within
five working days after notice to do so, make a written report to the Police Chief, setting
forth:
1. The cause of such false alarm;
2. The corrective action taken;
3. Whether and when such alarm has been inspected by authorized service personnel;
4. Such other information as the Police Chief may reasonably require to determine the
cause of such false alarm, and any mitigating circumstances and corrective action
necessary.
(c) Third and Fourth False Alarm Response. For a third or fourth false alarm response to
premises within the calendar year a civil penalty of $150.00 will be charged.
(d) Fifth and Subsequent False Alarm Responses. For a fifth or subsequent response to
premises a civil penalty of $250 will be charged. The alarm user will also be given a
“restricted response” status and the Police Deparment will be no longer respond to the
alarm system. The “restricted response” status will last until the alarm user has satisfied
the Police Chief that the causes of the false alarms have been corrected and are not likely
to reoccur.
Subd. 2. Any alarm user which is required by the Police Department to pay a civil penalty
as the result of a false alarm or alarms may make a written appeal of the false alarm civil
penalty to the within ten days of the notice by the Police Department of the false alarm
charge. The Police Chiefs decision may be appealed to the City Administrator who will
have authority to make a final determination as to whether the alarm user is to be charged
with a false alarm or alarms.
Section 490:15. Payment of Fees.
Subd. 1. Payment of civil penalties provided for under Section 490:10 must be paid to the
City Cashier within 30 days from the date of the notice by the City to alarm user. Failure
to pay the penalty within 30 days will cause the alarm user to be considered delinquent
and subject to a late fee penalty equal to the original. civil penalty.
Subd. 2. If the alarm user fails to provide the information required in Section 490:10,
Subdivision (b) within the prescribed time or fails to pay the penalty together with any
late fee within 60 days from the date of notice by the City to alarm user, the Police
Department will inform the alarm user that THE POLICE DEPARTMENT WILL NO
LONGER RESPOND TO THEIR ALARM SYSTEM. The “restricted response” status
will last until all information has been provided and penalties and late fees have been
paid.
Section 490:30. Duties of Alarm Users. It shall will be the responsibility of the alarm users to
instruct employees or others who may have occasion to activate an alarm that alarm systems are
to be used in emergency situations to summon an immediate police response. Alarm users shall
also instruct appropriate employees as to the operation of the alarm system, including setting,
activation and resetting of the alarm. All instructions pertaining to alarm systems and procedures
shall be in written form, suitable for distribution to employees. The alarm user will be
responsible for maintaining the alarm system in proper working order.
Section 490:35. Deliberate False Alarms. It is unlawful for any person to deliberately and
without just cause activate an alarm system to summon the police in a non-emergency situation.
Periodic testing of direct transmittal alarms may be conducted when sufficient notice is given to
the Police Dispatch Center.
Section 490:40. Confidentiality.
Subd. 1. All information submitted in compliance with this ordinance shall be held in
confidence and shall be deemed a confidential record exempt from discovery to the
extent permitted by law.
Subd. 2. Subject to requirements of confidentiality, the Police Chief may develop and
maintain statistics for the purpose of ongoing alarm system evaluation.
Section 490:45. Police Dispatch Center.
Subd. 1. No alarm user will install, maintain or operate automatic devices which are set
or programmed to directly dial, activate, call or in any other manner make direct contact
with any emergency telephone line or radio circuit of the Police Dispatch Center. Alarm
users are only allowed to use indirect alarm systems.
Section 490:55. Exceptions. The penalties of this ordinance will not be applied to any alarm
system used, operated or installed in any premises or place owned, leased, occupied or under the
control of the United States Government, the State or any of its political subdivisions, including
the counties and school districts in which the City is located together with any officer, agent or
employee of governmental agencies while acting or employed in their official capacity.
Section 490:60. Enforcement and Penalties. Failure or omission to comply with section 490:35
or 490:45 of this ordinance shall be deemed a misdemeanor.
CHAPTER V.
FEES, CHARGES AND RATES
Section 500 - Fees, Charges and Rates Established
Section 500:00. Fees, Charges and Rates Authorized and Defined. The fees, charges, and rates
for licenses, permits, and municipal services will be in the amounts set forth in this chapter.
Other portions of the City Code may reference these fees, charges and rates by using such terms
as "required fee", "established fee", "required license fee", "license fee" and "license fee in the
required amount", without specific reference to this chapter, in which event the amounts set forth
in this chapter will be applicable. Fees, charges and rates for the River’s Edge Convention
Center will be set by City Administration with input and recommendations from the River’s
Edge Convention Center Advisory Board.
Section 500:05. Priority of Application. If fees, charges, and rates are set forth specifically in
parts of this code other than this Chapter V. or in other ordinances of the City which are now in
effect, but have not been set forth in this Chapter V., in that event, the fees, charges, and rates
thereby specifically set forth will be effective for all purposes. In the event that such amounts
will appear in other places in this code or in other ordinances or codes of the City, but will appear
in this Chapter V., the amounts appearing in Chapter V. will supersede the others.
Section 500:10. Late Fee, Generally. Failure to submit any completed license and/or permit
application to the Office of the City Clerk or other department set forth by ordinance prior to the
expiration of any license and/or permit will result in a late fee penalty equal to the original
license and/or permit fee.
History: Ord. 2555 6-10-12
Section 510 - Business Licenses, Permits, & Fees
Section 510:00. Business Licenses and Permits. The fees, charges and rates for business licenses and
permits, the duration or term of the license or permit, and applicable conditions are set forth in the
subdivisions which follow:
Subd. Code Type of Conditions and
No. Section License Terms Amount
1 407:00 Amusement For 0-1,000 sq. ft. ............................................ $170.00
Centers Annual For 1,001 to 3,000 sq. ft ................................ $245.00
Fee More than 3,000 sq. ft ................................... $340.00
2 406:00 Amusement Annual fee, each machine ................................. $15.00
Devices, Fee, if issued after
Mechanical, July 31st ............................................................... $8.00
Pinball, etc. All to expire December 31 following issuance
3 510:00 Applications For each original application ........................ $5,000.00
for Issuance of For each amendment thereto ....................... $2,500.00
Industrial Revenue
Bonds
4 409:30 Billiards or Pool First table ........................................................... $19.50
Each additional table ........................................ $10.50
5 409:30 Bowling Alleys For each lane...................................................... $10.50
6 409:00 Circuses, For each day's performance for each
Menagerie and car, coach, or other unit of transporta-
Circuses combined, tion used not exceeding 35 ............................... $13.50
and Wild West And in excess of 35, for each car,
Shows coach or other unit of transportation ................. $12.00
Minimum fee per day .................................... $340.00
7 409:00 Carnival Daily Fee…………………………………...$290.00
8 409:20 Opera House, Hall, Annual, expires December 31 ......................... $400.00
or other enclosure If issued after July 01 ..................................... $200.00
other than a theatre
in which shows,
performances,
exhibitions or
entertainments
are given
9 457:00 Pawnbroker Annual, all expire December 31...................... $190.00
10 475:05 Peddlers and Minimum fee, period of 7 days ....................... $145.00
Transient Each additional day .......................................... $17.00
Merchants Each Helper 7 days…………………………. $18.50
Helper each additional day…………………. $ 7.75
Investigation fee……………………………. $70.00
11 409:30 Skating, Annual ............................................................... $58.00
Public Place After July 1st .................................................... $39.00
With 3-2 Liquor Fee not to be
pro-rated ......................................................... $150.00
12 472:10 Taxis First Taxicab for hire ......................................... $22.00
Each additional ................................................. $10.50
13 472:45 Taxi Driver Initial License Application Fee ......................... $32.00
Annual Renewal Fee ......................................... $17.50
14 409:15 Theatre, Movie or Annual fee, expires December 31st ................ $252.00
live performance Additional fee per screen or stage ..................... $64.00
15 424:00 Tobacco Sales Annual fee or for portion of year,
for each location, expires
December 31st after issuance ......................... $130.00
If issued after July 31st ...................................... $65.00
16 408:00 Gambling Annual
investigation fee................................................ $30.00
Gambling exemption permit fee ....................... $13.75
17 405:00 Dance Establishments Annual fee or for portion of year expires
December 31 after issuance ............................ $125.00
If establishment is licensed as an amusement center
the annual fee is ................................................ $63.50
18 410:00 Gambling Hall Annual Fee or for portion
of year, expires December
31st after issuance .......................................... $240.00
19 790 Valet Parking Fees—Annually ............................................................. $150.00
20 433 Explosives Permit ........................................................................... $29.00
History: Ord. 2373 9-10-07; Ord. 2403 8-18-08; Ord. 2009-17 10-26-09; Ord. 2566 10-21-13.
Section 511-Liquor Licensing Fees
511:00 Liquor Licensing Fees.
Subd. Code Type of Conditions and
No. Section License Terms Amount
1 810:00 Liquor License, Class A, B and Class C
Intoxicating For 0-3,000 sq. ft...................3800.00
For 3,001 tp 5,000 sq. ft........4300.00
For more than 5,000 sq. ft.....5000.00
Annual Fee-Dancing ...............500.00
Annual Fee-Multiple Bars ....... 500.00
Class D (Clubs, on-sale):
For a veteran’s organization
or fraternal club with a
membership of
200 or less...............................300.00
Between 201 and 500..............500.00
Between 501 and 1,000...........650.00
Between 1,001 and 2,000........800.00
Between 2,001 and 4,000......1000.00
Between 4,001 and 6,000......2000.00
Over 6,000.............................3000.00
Class E (Exclusive Liquor Store,
Off-sale)..................................300.00
Class H (Special Sunday)........200.00
Class J (Temporary on-sale)...100.00
810:05 Subd. 6 Class I
(Wine) .................................... 500.00
Class M (Brewery Taproom)..800.00
Class N (Consumption and Display)
……………………………….300.00
Class O-(Brew Pub Off
Sale Intoxicating).......................300.00
Class P-(Small Brewer’s Off-
Sale Intoxicating).......................300.00
Class Q-Sunday Growler
Off-Sale .......................................50.00
For Class A, Class B and Class C
Licenses when the application
Is made after January 1 of the
License year, the fee will be
50% of the fee listed above
Review and Investigation Fee:
For a single natural person......325.00
For a partnership.....................500.00
For a corporation.....................500.00
For a second or subsequent license
For a license holder at another
Location ....................................210.00
2 Late Fee, Intoxication Liquor. Failure to submit a completed license and/or permit application
to the Office of the City Clerk by April 1 will result in a late fee penalty of $100.00 for each
business day the application is late. The maximum penalty will be a late fee equal to the original
license and/or permit fee. Failure to submit a completed license and or permit application may
result in the interruption of liquor service. An application submitted by mail will be deemed to
be submitted on the day it is postmarked by the U.S. Post Office. If April 1 falls on a Saturday,
Sunday or legal holiday the application will be due the next business day.
3 800.30 Liquor License, Off Sale ...................................100.00
3-2 On Sale ....................................300.00
Club ...........................................75.00
Temporary On Sale ...................30.00
Review and Investigation Fee:
For a single natural person ......325.00
For a partnership .....................500.00
For a corporation .....................500.00
For a second or subsequent license
For a license holder at another
Location ..................................210.00
4 Late Fee, 3.2% Malt Liquor. Failure to submit any completed license and/or permit
application to the Office of the City Clerk by May 15 will result in a late fee penalty equal to the
original license and/or permit fee.
History: Ord. 2508 9-26-11; Ord. 2565 9-9-13; Ord. 2607 12-22-14; Ord. 2622 6-8-15; Ord. 2644 12-21-15;
Section 512 - Health and Inspections Department Fees
Section 512:00. Food Establishment Fees.
Subd. 1. Food handlers. The annual license fee to be paid by the following classes of food
establishments, will be as follows:
a. Prepackaged, nonperishable food handler .....................................................................$93.00
Exempt if principle mode of business is not food handling and only prepackaged ice, bottled
or canned soft drinks, prepackaged candy or nuts are sold
b. Retail Food Handlers: Grocery, Meat Markets, Commissaries, Retail Bakeries and
Micromarkets. All areas used for food and food related sales, processing, packaging, serving,
and storage at the premises will be used in determining the square footage for the license fee.
1,000 square feet or less ................................................................................$138.00
More than 1,000 square feet but not more
than 5,000 square feet .................................................................................$181.00
More than 5,000 square feet but not more
than 7,500 square feet .................................................................................$226.00
More than 7,500 square feet but not more
than 10,000 square feet ...............................................................................$308.00
More than 10,000 square feet but not more
than 15,000 square feet ...............................................................................$459.00
More than 15,000 square feet. .......................................................................$644.00
Each additional food license present in a establishment licensed under Subd. 1.b.
under same ownership and management, including food manufacturing,
distribution, and above listed types ............................................................ $138.00
c. Vending Machines:
Each machine dispensing foods, per location .............................................................$20.00
Exempt if only prepackaged bottled or canned soft drinks
Subd 2. Mobile Food Units / Vehicles.
a. Annual license fees –due 30 days prior to operation
(1) Mobile Food Units holding a current Minnesota Department of Health
license… ................................................................................................................... $138.00
(2) Mobile Food Units not holding a current Minnesota Department of Health or
Minnesota Department of Agriculture license:
i. Limited: Pre-packaged food requiring no reheating ........................................$138.00
ii. All other food service…................................................................................. $250.00
(3) Annual fee for mobile food units operating within Central Business District, regardless
of primary licensing agency… ..................................................................................$200.00
Subd. 3. Seasonal Establishments
a. Annual license fees – due 30 days prior to operation
(1) Food Cart: nonmotorized vehicle self-propelled by operator
Per Cart ..............................................................................................................$138.00
(2) Seasonal Temporary or Seasonal Permanent Food Stand
Whole produce… ............................................................................................ $90.00
Limited food (minimal prep, reheating) … .................................................... $138.00
Full food (cooking, extensive holding, etc.) … ............................................. $191.00
(3) Special event food stand-per event/per location (1-4 days) … ......................... $62.00
Subd. 4. Food Service Establishments: any building, structure, enclosure or any part of a
building, structure or enclosure used as, maintained as, advertised as, or held out to be an
operation that prepares, serves or otherwise provides food or beverages, or both for human
consumption. The annual license fee to be paid by the following classes of food and
beverage service establishments will be based on the average number of full-time
equivalent employees.
a) For restaurants, cafes, banquet centers, commercial kitchens, caterers, place of
beverage/refreshment, boarding homes, assisted living facilities, commissaries:
Number of full-time equivalent employees Fee
1 - 4 $191.00
5 - 18 $315.00
19 - 28 $459.00
29 - 35 $630.00
36 and over $734.00
Additional food service: is either catering service or a location at a food and
beverage service establishment, other than the primary food preparation and service
area, used to prepare or serve food to the public under the same ownership and
management
Permanent location… ................................................. $160.00
Portable beverage service… ........................................ $60.00
b) Limited food menu selection as defined in MN Statute 157 in a licensed lodging
establishment… ............................................................................................... $103.00
c) Food service operated by a school (preK through 12) or daycare:
Full base kitchen/commisary-1-4 full-time equivalent employees .......................$191.00
if two assessments are required by USDA .......................................................$310.00
Full base kitchen/commissary->4 full-time equivalent employees .......................$315.00
if two assessments are required by USDA .......................................................$536.00
Limited preparation – sandwich prep, reheating foods, utensil washing ..............$145.00
if two assessments are required by USDA .......................................................$239.00
Serving site or satellite feeding location, milk &/or non-perishable food storage. $60.00
if two assessments are required by USDA ....................................... .................$85.00
Off premises catering… ........................................................................ additional $85.00
Additional school food service: is a location at a school, other than the primary food
preparation and service area, used to prepare or serve food to the public:
Under school management… ........................................................................ $85.00
Under non-school management… ................................................................ $110.00
Exempt: Concession stands serving commercially prepared non-potentially hazardous
food.
d) Food service operated as part of a Bed & Breakfast… ..................................... $95.00
Subd. 5. Plan review application fees
New food establishments and significant remodels of the food preparation &/or food
storage areas of existing establishments. ............................. equal to the annual un-prorated
license fee
Mobile or seasonal establishments which provide current approved plans from the Minnesota
Department of Health, Minnesota Department of Agriculture or their delegated agencies…
.............................................................................. equal to one-half (1/2) un-prorated license fee.
Special event food stands… .............................................................................................. no fee
Section 512:10 Lodging Establishment Fees.
Subd. 1.
a. Hotels, board & lodging facilities, assisted living facilities (does not include food
license)
Annual license fee… ............................................................... $145.00 plus $7.00 per room
b. Bed & Breakfast with five rooms or less (does not include food license)
Annual license fee....................................................................................................... $105.00
Subd. 2. Plan review application fee for new establishments and significant remodels of existing
facilities… ............................................... an amount equal to annual un-prorated license fee
Section 512:20. Pro-rating Annual Fees. Pro-rating will be allowed for food and lodging
establishments with the exception of seasonal stands, food carts, vending machines, food vehicles,
as follows:
License for less than 3 months: 50% of annual fee
License for 3 to 6 months: 75% of annual fee
Section 512:30 Public Swimming Pool Fees
Subd. 1.
Public swimming pool license – per pool
Year around or seasonal operation ................................................................................. $236.00
Section 512:40 Massage Facility fees
Subd. 1. Therapeutic Massage Establishment License ...................................................... $300.00
Subd. 2. Massage Therapist License… ............................................................................... $50.00
Subd. 3 Initial plan review and investigation fee for Therapeutic Massage Establishment License:
Number of massage therapists: Fee:
1-3 ………………………………………………………………………………. $300.00
4-10 ………………………………………………………………………………$400.00
More than 10 .................................................................................................................. $500.00
Section 512:50 Animal Control fees
Subd. 1. Dog Licenses, Kennels, Animal Registration, and Permit Fees. Annual licenses, permits
and registrations are effective June 1 or date of issuance (whichever is later) to May 31.
All spayed or neutered dogs over 6 months, male and female ...................................... $12.00
All unspayed or unneutered dogs, male and female ...................................................... $29.00
Late fee for dog licenses ..................................................................................................... $11.00
Duplicate tags ........................................................................................................................ $7.00
Dog kennel license:
3-10 dogs .................................................................................................................... $150.00
Over 10 dogs .............................................................................................................. $200.00
Dangerous Animal
Annual registration ..................................................................................................... $500.00
Multiple Animal Permit
Initial permit application review ................................................................................ $25.00
Annual permit ................................................................................................................. $35.00
Subd. 2 Non-domestic animal permit fees (circuses, petting zoos, etc.)
Per non-domestic animal per event…………………………. $25.00 maximum of $400.00
Subd. 3 Impound and Boarding Fees:
Impound fee .................................................................................................................... $60.00
Second Impound within 12 months ............................................................................... $200.00
Third and Subsequent impound within 12 months…………………………………
.........................................................................................................................................$350.00
Each Additional day of board after impoundment ........................................................... $25.00
Subd. 4. St. Cloud Animal Shelter Fees.
Adoption fees (not to exceed):
Cats: not altered/ unknown.................................................................................................$40.00
Cats: spayed / neutered .......................................................................................................$60.00
Dogs: not altered / unknown .............................................................................................. $80.00
Dogs: spayed / neutered .................................................................................................. $100.00
Pocket pets (mice, rats, hamsters, etc.) .......................................................................... $10.00
Birds, reptiles, other mammals ......................................................................................$5-200
Unique breeds / special situations ............................................................ add $20.00 – 250.00
Transportation fee ............................................................................................................... $40.00
Section 512:60 Rental License fees.
Subd. 1 Initial Rental License Application fee
Per property – includes one inspection and reinspection… ............................ $150.00
Exception: Newly constructed single-family dwellings which have been issued a certificate
of occupancy within 12 months preceding application are exempt from this fee and
inspection.
Each additional inspection prior to licensure ................................................ $80.00
Subd 2. Annual fees.
The license fee for each dwelling unit or sleeping room will be paid on or before December 15 for
the following license year, or for new licenses, prior to the date due indicated on correspondence.
(a) Annual license
Non-Owner Occupied Rental Property-1st unit ..................................................... $155.00
Each additional unit… .................................................................... $16.00
Owner Occupied Rental Property-1st unit ................................................................. $70.00
Each additional unit… ............................................................................... $16.00
Rental Training Program Support fee
per dwelling unit /sleeping room ................................................................ $6.00
Subd. 3. Any existing dwelling, not licensed in previous 12 months shall be subject to a rental
conversion fee at the time it is initially licensed as a rental ........................................... $500.00
Subd. 4. Provisional Rental Dwelling License
Application Fee – per property. ........................................................................ $2,500
If an application is rejected, 50% of the license fee will be refunded to the applicant.
Subd. 4. Rental license exemptions.
a. Portions of property which are licensed as lodging facilities through city ordinance section
441.
b. Portions of property which are licensed through the State of Minnesota as a nursing home.
Section 512:70 Vacant Building Registration Permit.
Subd. 1 Annual registration fee for vacant buildings per Section 310 ................................. $2,000
Section 512:90 Late Fees. Unless specifically listed otherwise, license application fees, renewal
application fees, and other fees received after the due date are subject to a double fee. Due dates
for Health & Inspections Department fees are listed in Ordinances 440, 441, 447, 512, and 1040.
History: Ord. 2373 9-10-07; Ord. 2403 8-18-08; Council Agenda Item #39 1-27-08; Ord. 2507 9-26-11; Ord. 2568 10-21-13; Ord.
2581 1-27-14, Ord. 2598 8-11-14; Ord. 2662 6-6-16; Ord. 2664 6-6-16; Ord. 2677 9-12-16; Ord. 2783 7-22-19
Section 520 - Police Department Fees
520:00. False Alarm Fees.
False Alarm (4th and subsequent violations). ...................................................................various
2nd Violation within calendar year............................................................ $75.00
3rd Violation ........................................................................................... $150.00
4th Violation............................................................................................ $150.00
5th Violation............................................................................................ $250.00
Any Subsequent False Alarm................................................................. $250.00
520:05. Billable Transaction Fee (Pawnbrokers/per billable transaction)....................................... $1.50
520:10. Motor Vehicle Forfeiture Storage Fees …….$25.00 per day up to a maximum of $400.00.
A fee of $25 per day will be charged for the storage of motor vehicles that are seized and
subject to forfeiture pursuant to Minnesota law. The total accumulated fee charged will not
exceed $400.00. Vehicles that have been seized pursuant to Minnesota forfeiture laws will not
be released until the storage fees have been paid in full.
History: Ord. 2373 9-10-07; Ord. 2009-17 10-26-09; Ord. 2451 1-25-10
Section 525 – Fire Department Fees
525:00 False Alarm Fees
3rd False Alarm within a Calendar Year......................................................................$ 150.00
4th False Alarm within a Calendar Year......................................................................$ 200.00
5th False Alarm within a Calendar Year…..................................................................$ 250.00
Any Subsequent false Alarms within Calendar Year………………………………..$ 300.00
525:05 Fireworks
Subd. 1. Fireworks Display………………………………….…per display location $ 150.00
Sub. 2. Fireworks Sales
(a) Indoor Sales (Annual Permit)………………………….……………$ 50.00
(b) Outdoor Sales (Annual Permit)……………………………………$ 350.00
525:10 Burning Permits
Subd. 1. Agricultural Burning Permits (5 day permit)…………………………………$ 15.00
Sub. 2. Natural Resource Management Permits
(a) Less than one acre…………………………………………………………$ 15.00
(b) One to ten acres………………………………………………...………....$ 30.00
(c) Greater than ten acres ……………………………………………..…….$ 45.00
Subd. 3. Annual Recreational Burning Permit…………………………………………$ 25.00
525:15 Flammable Liquids
Subd. 1. Bulk Storage
(a) Bulk Storage of Flammable Liquids…………………………………….$ 190.00
(b) Bulk Storage of Liquefied Petroleum (LP)…...........................................$ 190.00
(c) Miscellaneous Storage of Flammable Liquids………………………..…$ 45.00
Subd. 2. Fuel Dispensing
(a) Flammable Fuel Dispensing Permit…......................................................$ 110.00
(b) Liquefied Petroleum Dispensing Station...................................................$ 45.00
Subd. 3. Fuel Tank Installation and Removal Fees
(a) Above or Underground Fuel Tank Installation..........................................$ 50.00
(b) Underground Tank Removal…................................................................$ 50.00
525:20 Special Automatic Fire Extinguishing Systems (Ansul, Halon, Paint Booths, etc. Does Not
Include Sprinkler Systems)
Sub. 1. Installation Inspection
(a) 1.2% of System Cost………………………………….....Minimum Fee $ 50.00
525:25 Fire Alarm System Installation
Subd. 1. Installation Inspection
(a) 1.2% of System Cost………………………………………Minimum Fee $ 50.00
525:30 Hotel/Motel Inspections ………………………………….................. $ 145 min. plus
$2.25 per room
(Annual Inspection)
525:35 New Day Care and Foster Care Site Inspections……………………………………..$ 50.00
525:40 Re-inspection Fee
When inspections schedule by an installer or contractor are preempted, prevented, or otherwise not
able to be completed as scheduled due to circumstances beyond the control of the inspector, a
supplemental inspection fee of $50 per hour may be assessed in writing by the inspector.
525:45 Use of Specialized Equipment
The fire department may bill the property owner for the cost incurred for specialized equipment that
is needed to successfully mitigate an incident.
525:50 Responses that exceed Eight (8) Hours
The fire department may bill the property owner for all incident costs incurred that exceed the first
eight (8) hours of operations.
History: Ord. 2009-17 10-26-09; Ord. 2544 12-17-12; Ord. 2641 12-21-15;
Section 530 - Zoning and Subdivision Action Fees
Section 530:00. Fees Established.
Subd. 1. The fees, rates and charges for municipal services arising out of zoning and
subdivision actions, will be for the term, upon the conditions, and in the amounts set forth
in the subdivisions which follow.
Subd. 2. Zoning Action Fees. The following schedule of fees applies to each zoning
action:
Category Fee
Rezoning ................................................................................................................ $ 675.00
PUD General Development Plan Amendment.......................................................... 675.00
Medical District Application/Amendment................................................................ 675.00
Conditional Use Permit..............................................................................................600.00
Variances:
Homestead Property.......................................................................................... 64.00
Non-Homestead Property................................................................................ 600.00
Appeal of Zoning Administrator
Decisions to Zoning Board of Appeals..................................................................... 525.00
Land Use Change Permit…………………………………………………………… 600.00
Appeals to the Council............................................................................................... 525.00
Homestead Property..........................................................................................64.00
Non-Homestead Property................................................................................525.00
Vacation.................................................................................................................... 475.00
Subd. 3. Subdivisions.
Preliminary Plat
Single Family Residential ………………………….... 500 + 5 per unit with max. of 700
Multiple Family, Commercial, Industrial ………….. 500 + 20 per acre with max. of 700
Final Plat
Single Family Residential ……………..……….. 250 + 5 per unit with max. of $600.00
Multiple Family, Commercial, Industrial …….… 250 + 20 per acre with max. of $600.00
Certificates of Survey.................................................150.00+20 per acre with max of 600
Variances................................................................................................................... 600.00
Subd. 4. Cash Payment in Lieu of Park and Open Space Land Dedication:
Single Family Development ........... 1.96 per square foot ($1,196 per dwelling unit)
Multi-Family Development .............. 1.65 per square foot ($ 792 per dwelling unit)
Subd. 5. Annexation Petitions…………………....…3 per acre with 100 min. and 500
max.
Subd. 6. Environment Assessment Worksheet Review ……………………………500.
540-Municipal Athletic Complex Fees
Section 540:00. Definitions. Municipal Athletic Complex Fees
Subd. 1. Hourly Ice Rental Rates and Charges – The time period between September and May in which charges
are levied for ice rentals – Rates apply to hours starting within the parameters listed and the majority of the
block must be within the specific time period to qualify.
“Prime” “Off Peak” “Day Time”
Sundays 8:00 a.m. – 9:59 p.m. 6:00 a.m. - 7:59 a.m.
10:00 p.m. – 5:59 a.m.
NA
Saturdays 8:00 a.m. – 9:59 p.m. 6:00 a.m. – 7:59 a.m.
10:00 p.m. – 5:59 a.m.
NA
Weekdays 2:30 p.m. – 9:59 p.m. 6:00 a.m. – 7:59 a.m.
10:00 p.m. – 5:59 a.m.
8:00 a.m. – 2:29 p.m.
Effective
1. Hourly Ice Rental Rates: 6/1/2019
Prime Time $180.00
Off Peak Time $140.00
Day Time $105.00
Discounts
• $5 per hour will be applied to single purchase contracts purchasing 50 hours or more of ice from
September 1, 2018 – May 2019
Paid Admission Hockey Games: Effective
(Minimum Guarantee) 4/1/2016
1. High School Single Game $620.00
2. College Single Game $850.00
3. High School Single Game w/JV $960.00
4. High School Double Header $1,120.00
5. College Double Header $1,435.00
6. High School Triple Header $1,440.00
7. High School Double Header-no gate split $2,300.00
8. High School Single Game-no gate split $1,800.00
Subd. 2. Gate Split - All of the above game packages are subject to the 60/40 Game Split. Percentage split is
taken from all receipts net of sales tax and minimum guarantee. Split is 60% to Arena and 40% to Lessee.
Effective
4/1/2016
1. Maximum City Gate Split NA
Free Admission Games:
1. Free Admission High School Games $200.00
2. Free Admission College Games $200.00
Individual Charges (1 to 2-hour sessions): Effective
6/1/15
1. Open Hockey (all levels) $ 6.00
2. Open hockey Youth $ 5.00
2. Open Freestyle (1 hour) $10.00
3. Open Skating: Adults $ 6.00
Students (18 and Under) $ 4.00
4 and under FREE with Adult Free
Subd. 3. Hourly Ice Rental Rates and Charges (Summer) – The time period between June - August in which
charges are levied for ice rentals – Rates apply to hours starting within the parameters listed:
“Prime” “Off Peak” “Day Time”
Sundays ALL DAY
NA NA
Saturdays ALL DAY
NA NA
Weekdays
Excludes holidays
ALL DAY NA NA
Summer Clinic Rate Card Effective
(June 1 – August 31) 4/1/2019
1 – 9 hours $180.00
10 – 19 hours $175.00
20 – 29 hours $170.00
30 – 39 hours $165.00
40 – 49 hours $160.00
50 – 59 hours $155.00
60 – 69 hours $150.00
70 – 79 hours $145.00
80 – 89 hours $140.00
90 – 99 hours $135.00
100 and more hours $130.00
200 and more hours $125.00
Subd. 4. Baseball Game Rates – Fees charged for field rentals.
Effective
Day Game Rates: 4/1/2016
1. Single Day Games
1 – 7 Inning Day Game $185.00
1 – 9 Inning Day Game $205.00
1 Partial Game Rate $130.00
2. Double Header Day Games
2 – 7 Inning Day Games $275.00
2 – 9 Inning Day Games $320.00
1 – 7, 1 – 9 Inning Day Games $300.00
3. Youth Morning Game (start time 9 a.m. to 1 p.m., non-Holiday or weekend, not part of a tournament)
1 -7 Inning Day Game $100.00
2 -7 Inning Day Games $180.00
Night Game Rates: Effective
4/1/2016
1. Single Night Games
1 – 7 Inning Night Game $230.00
1 – 9 Inning Night Game $255.00
1 Partial Night Game Rate $180.00
2. Double Header Twi-Light Games
2 – 7 Inning Twi-Light Games $320.00
2 – 9 Inning Twi-Light Games $355.00
3. Double Header Night Games
2 – 7 Inning Night Games $345.00
2 – 9 Inning Night Games $385.00
Standard Game Time Allotments (SGTA):
The rental rates listed above are based on the following SGTA:
1 – 7 Inning Game 140 minutes (2 hours & 20 minutes)
1 – 9 Inning Game 180 minutes (3 hours)
2 – 7 Inning Games 300 minutes (5 hours)
2 Games, 7 & 9 Inning 340 minutes (5 hours & 40 minutes)
2 – 9 Inning Games 380 minutes (6 hours & 20 minutes)
The purpose of this ordinance amendment is…
Subd. 5. Extended Play Penalties – Fees applied above and beyond the normal field rental charges due to games
longer than typical.
Effective
4/1/2016
Day Games
Exceeds a 7 or 0 Inning Day Game SGTA $ 30.00
(per 15-minute increment exceeding SGTA)
Night Games
Exceeds a 7 or 9 Inning Night Game SGTA $ 50.00
(per 15-minute increment exceeding SGTA)
Game Cancellations
Single Game Cancellation $ 100.00
Double Header Game Cancellation $ 170.00
Game/Events which are not canceled prior to 30 days of the schedule game/event (contact must be officially
made with the Field Superintendent), may be subject to the game cancellation penalties. This fee may be
waived in the event of inclement weather or act of God or by actions caused by the MAC management and its
staff. In the case of inclement weather, contact must be made with the Field Superintendent a minimum of 2 ½
hours prior to the game/event to avoid said penalties.
Gate Split on Paid Admission Games: Effective
4/1/2016
Maximum Single Game Gate Split $400.00
Maximum Double Header Game Gate Split $650.00
The City reserves the right to assess the above admission gate splits for all games/events. The Gate Split for the
Lessor shall be 50% of the ticket receipts collected in excess of the applicable Sales Taxes and Stadium Rental
Rate. The City’s percentage take shall not exceed the maximum game percentage take.
The Gate Split for the Lessee shall be 50% of the ticket receipts collected in excess of the applicable Sales
Taxes and Stadium Rental rate plus the excess of the City’s maximum percentage take if any. All other
game/event charges will be charted to the Lessee’s remaining percentage split balance, if any.
Subd. 6. Game Personnel – Fees charged for personnel for baseball games
Game Rates included 2 maintenance personnel only. Additional game personnel are available for hire on a
seasonal or individual game basis; charges for their services will be competitive with the existing market (see
current game personnel rate schedules).
Personnel available include: Ticket sellers, ticket takers, pass gate attendants, announcer, scoreboard operator,
official scorer, press stewards, trainers, police ushers, tournament administrative assistants, tournament
headquarter stewards, ball shaggers and parking attendants.
Tournament Headquarters Rentals:
The Dick Putz Field Tournament Headquarters is available for rental/use as a viewing suite/headquarters during
baseball games to booster clubs, faculty associations, private parties, etc. Food and beverage services are also
available. In the event of a Tournament, the following fee may be waived (see current Tournament HQ rental
rate schedule).
Effective
4/1/2016
1. Single Games $100.00
2. Double Header $150.00
Field Tarp Usage Fee: $250.00
Joe Faber Field has available for our customers an infield tarp. Due to its size and weight, the tarp will be the
sole responsibility of the lessee to unroll and re-roll back onto its tube with their team and staff. The MAC staff
will be available for consultation purposes but does not have the staff in place (10-15 people) it takes to
manipulate this procedure. The MAC assumes no liability or responsibility for the Lessee and their players, staff
and administrations for damages or loss for the deployment of said field tarp. Any damage to the tarp itself will
be billed directly to the Lessee.
Golf Course Rates and Charges
Green Fee Rates: (all rates include tax)
Effective
4/1/2019
Daily Rates (9 Holes)
Weekday $10.91+tax=$11.75
Weekday, Additional 9 holes $7.20+tax=$7.75
Weekday, Senior Rate $8.82+tax=$9.50
Weekend, Holiday $12.08+tax=$13.50
Weekend, Additional 9 holes $9.29+tax=10.00
Cart Rental Fee (9 holes): $12.08+tax=$13.00
Annual Passes:
Effective
4/1/2019
Family $599.00
Single (age 25+) $425.00
Senior, Single (55+) $395.00
Senior, Couple $500.00
Individual (13-24 years) $270.00
Yearly Trail Fee $105.00
Adult Couple $540.00
*Daily Membership golfing fee $.50 is charged in addition to the yearly membership fee*
Footnotes:
1. Family members include five (5) people (2 adults and 3 youth under the age of 17).
2. Additional Family Memberships for Youth @ $70.
3. Youth defined as age 10 – 17 (inclusive) as of April 1.
4. Seniors defined as 55 and older.
5. For Senior couple both members must be 55 and older.
6. $.50 Daily membership fee
Varied promotional rates may also be used including senior discounts, youth promotional rates, early season
discounts, twi-light golf, etc.
Memberships, League Play Fees, Etc.
All Memberships, League Fees, Instructional Leagues, etc. will be based on the Green Fee Rates
History: Ord. 2486 12-20-10; Ord. 2544 12/17/12; Ord. 2619 5-18-15; Ord. 2643 12-21-15; Ord. 2775 3-25-19
Section 541 - Whitney Senior Center Fees
Subd. 1. Deposit. A $75.00 deposit is required upon application to cover damage expenses,
custodial set-up and take-down of groups and cleanup. Deposit will be applied to rental fee if
manpower is supplied for set-up and take-down of group, cleanup and no damages occur. In cases
of cancellation, 20 percent of the deposit will not be refunded. Deposit will not be returned if
lessee fails to cancel and does not show up for date applied.
Subd. 2. Rental Fees:
Group A
--Senior organizations, senior advocate and senior support groups
--Nutrition Centers Program/United Way of St. Cloud Area
--City of St. Cloud Employee Bargaining Units/City of St. Cloud Departments
--City authorized activities and committees
Fee Per Hour .............................................................................................................No Fee Assessed
Group B
--District 742 Schools
--St. Cloud area non-profit organizations
--Private parties for honoring only persons age 55 years of age or older sponsored by St. Cloud
area individuals; i.e., anniversaries, birthdays and retirements
1. Clemens Hall
Rental Fee Per Hour............................................................................................................. $48.00
2. Meeting Room C, D & E (Combined)
Rental Fee Per Hour..............................................................................................................$37.00
3. Meeting Room C or D or E
Rental Fee Per Hour............................................................................................................. $27.00
4. Classrooms: Herberger/Whitney
Combined: Brewer/Olson
Rental Fee Per Hour..............................................................................................................$37.00
5. Classrooms: Herberger, Whitney, Brewer or Olson
Rental Fee Per Hour..............................................................................................................$27.00
Persons in Group B may not rent the Whitney Senior Center for fundraising events.
Group C
--Non-St. Cloud area organizations
--Commercial group rentals
1. Clemens Hall Base Fee
--From 1 to 4 hours............................................................................................................ $405.00
--Every hour after 4 hours................................................................................................... $103.00
2. Nikle, Boltuck and Kelly Meeting Rooms Combined
--From 1 to 4 hours............................................................................................................. $265.00
--Every hour after 4 hours..................................................................................................... $95.00
3. Nikle, Boltuck and Kelly Meeting Rooms
--From 1 to 4 hours............................................................................................................. $205.00
--Every hour after 4 hours.................................................................................................... $52.00
Subd. 3. Additional Rental Information:
--PA system, movie screen and podiums.................................................................... $20.00 per item
--Coffee pots, movie projector, slide projector, and white boards will be provided if available.
1. No liquor (including beer, wine, alcohol of any kind).
2. The Whitney Senior Center is a non-smoking facility. There are no exceptions.
Subd. 4. Service Fees & Charges. To include the following:
Member Non-Member
Classes (12 scans) $42.00 $60.00
Classes (6 scans) $21.00 $30.00
Fitness Card (Annual) $90.00 $150.00
Fitness Card (Tri-Annual) $36.00 $60.00
Woodshop (Annual membership) $90.00 $150.00
Woodshop (Tri-Annual) $36.00 $60.00
Woodshop (Daily Use Fee) $ 6.00 $ 7.50
Garden Plots (Season) $20.00 $50.00
Subd. 5 Membership. The Whitney Senior Center is a facility intended primarily for City
residents aged 55 and over. The programming and administration of the facility will be
supported, in part, by membership fees. Access to the Center will be limited to enrolled
members, except for certain public or private events. Residents of other jurisdictions will be
accepted as members upon payment of the required fee.
Membership fees. Effective January 1, 2017 the fee for membership in the Whitney Senior
Center shall be $50.00 per person. Membership is annual, for a calendar year. Each individual
must pay the fee; there is no special rate for married couples. The first $40.00 of the fee for St.
Cloud residents is waived, reducing the fee to $10.00 per year. Residents of other jurisdictions
shall pay the full fee.
Membership is open to individuals who are either age 55 or over or the spouse of an individual
aged 55 or over. There is only one class of membership.
Management will have the authority to waive some or all of the membership fee for individuals
who demonstrate that their income is below the federal poverty level, but only for individuals
who are St. Cloud residents.
Participants in special programming will pay an additional fee, but the non-member rate will be
higher, as set from time to time by ordinance.
Certain events and services at the Whitney Senior Center will be open to non-members, if funded
by restrictive grants or sponsored by private entities or declared by management to be public
events.
History: Ord. 2373 9-10-07; Ord. 2403 8-18-08; Ord. 2678 9-12-16
Section 542 City Hall Meeting Room Facilities
Section 542:00. City Hall Meeting Room Facility Charges.
Subd. 1. Room Rental, Monday through Friday. Eligible groups, as set forth by
resolution, will be charged for use of City Hall meeting facilities as follows:
Council Chambers $155.00 per day
Conference Room $77.00 per day
Audio/Video Technician $52.00 per hour
Rooms are available for a half day at half the rate. There is a four-hour minimum charge
for use of the rooms.
Subd. 2. Room Rental, Saturday. Eligible groups, as set forth by resolution, will be
charged for City Hall meeting facilities as follows:
Council Chambers $206.00 per day
Conference Room $103.00 per day
Audio/Video Technician $52.00 per hour
An hourly janitorial fee will be charged if a City employee or a City elected official is not
present for opening, clean-up and lock-up. Rooms are available for a half day at half the
rate. There is a four hour minimum charge for use of the rooms.
Section 543 - Central Services Building Meeting Room
Facility Charges
Subd. 1. Room Rental, Monday through Friday. Eligible groups or individuals, as set forth
by resolution, will be charged for the use of Central Services Building meeting facilities as
follows:
Conference Room..........................................................$ 44.00 per day
Room is available for one-half day at the rate of one-half the full
day rate. Minimum room charge will be four hours.
Subd. 2. Room Rental, Saturday. Eligible groups or individuals as set forth by resolution
will be charged for the use of Central Services Building meeting facilities as follows:
Conference Room..........................................................$ 56.00 per day
An additional janitorial fee will be charged if a City employee or a
City elected official is not present for opening, clean-up and lock-up.
The Conference Room is available for one-half day at the rate of onehalf
the full day rate. Minimum room charge will be four hours.
Section 544 - Airport Fees
Subd. 1. Airport Hangar Fees.
40 x 12 foot door with electric door opener ...................................................... $137.00
40 x 12 foot door without electric door opener ................................................. $128.75
44 x 14 foot door with electric door opener ...................................................... $149.50
44 x 16 foot door with electric door opener ...................................................... $163.75 Hangar 7 – Bay 6 ............................................................................................... $170.00
Hangar 11 – Bays 1-4 & 6-10 ........................................................................... $163.75
Hangar 11 – Bay 5 (larger unit) ........................................................................ $190.50
Airport Hangar Storage Unit ............................................................................... $33.00
Airport Hangar Storage Unit Hangar 11 ............................................................. $48.50
Seasonal fee for engine heater ............................................................................. $39.00
There will be a 20% premium added to hangar rental if the tenant desires a
month to month agreement.
Subd. 2. Landing Fees.
Aircraft under 12,500 lbs.-minimum landing fee .............................................. $14.00
Otherwise $0.63 per 1,000 pounds
Subd. 3 Airport Permit.
Administration Fees, Cost of Collection, and cost of Analysis work ................. $30.00
Subd. 4. Room Rental, Monday through Friday. Eligible groups or individuals
identified in Section 200 of this ordinance, shall be charged for the use of the
St. Cloud Regional Airport Building meeting facilities as follows:
Conference Room (per day) ................................................................................ $48.50
Room is available for one-half day at the rate of one-half the full day rate.
Minimum room charge shall be four hours.
Subd. 5. Room Rental, Saturday. Eligible groups or individuals identified in Section
200 of this ordinance, shall be charged for the use of the St. Cloud Regional
Airport Building meeting facilities as follows:
Conference Room (per day) ................................................................................ $57.00
An additional janitorial fee if a City employee or a City elected official is not
present for opening, clean-up and lock-up.
Subd. 6 Airport Badges
Secure Identification Display Area (SIDA) Badge..................................... $55.00 plus
Shipping charges
Airport Operations Area (AOA) Badge .............................................................. $25.00
Subd. 7 Non-Signatory Overnight Ramp Fee
Aircraft 50,000 lbs or less ................................................................................... $50.00
Aircraft more than 50,000 lbs ........................................................................... $100.00
History: Ord. 2373 9-10-07; Ord. 2403 8-18-08; Ord. 2009-17 10-26-09; Ord. 2609 1-5-15; Ord. 2642 12-
21-15
REPEALED
Section 545:00 - Civic Center Rates, Fees and Charges
Daily Civic/
Room Rented Rental Rate Charitable
Rate
Glenn Carlson Hall $1,350.00 $925.00
½ Glenn Carlson Hall $850.00
(Includes curtain)
Move In/Move Out Day - Carlson Hall $550.00 N/A
Terry Haws Center $1,900.00 $1,325.00
½ Terry Haws Center $1,100.00
Move In/Move Out Day - Haws Center $550.00 $ 400.00
Opportunities Suite: $ 475 $ 285
Bell Room 95 60
Alexander Room 95 60
Weidner Room 160 90
Clarke Room 80 45
Edelbrock Room 80 45
Wilson Suite: $ 235 $ 140
First American Room 150 95
Thielman Room 115 70
Stockinger Suite: $ 450 $ 285
Swisshelm Room 130 75
Whitney Room 130 75
Mitchell Room 130 75
Schilplin Room 130 75
Herberger Suite: $ 750 N/A
Coborn Room 180 N/A
Helgeson Room 140 N/A
Metzroth Room 150 N/A
Marsh Room 150 N/A
Fandel Room 140 N/A
Board Room $ 150 $ 125
Commons Area $400
Move In For Meeting Rooms-Half of Room Rental
Item Rented Daily Rental Fee
* 6' x 30" Table $ 7.00
* 8' x 30" Table 7.00
*72" Round Table 7.00
*16" x 8' Seminar Table 7.00
* 6' x 8' Stage Section 25.00
*Upholstered Chair 2.50
*Table Drapes - Per Table 10.00
**Chalkboard 15.00
**Easels 15.00
**White Boards 15.00
**Table Top Podium 15.00
**Free Standing Podium 25.00
**Flip Chart w/markers 25.00
Rope & Stanchions (10') - Each Stand 7.00
Forklift - 1 drop w/driver 25.00
Forklift - 1 hr. w/driver 100.00
Forklift - 1 day without driver 150.00
High Reach 150.00
**Screen - 7' x 9' - 6' x 8' 25.00
**Rear Screen 60.00
**Overhead Projector 25.00
**Slide Projector 35.00
**Video Projector 110.00
**Computer Projector 200.00
**VCR or DVD Player 30.00
**Monitor 45.00
**Big Screen TV 90.00
**Cassette Tape Recorder 30.00
**Projection Cart 15.00
**Piano 75.00
**Laser Pointer 25.00
Follow Spot - Small 60.00
Follow Spot Light - Large 125.00
+ $2.00 per 15 min.
State Spot Install 175.00
Stage Spots on Request 30.00
**Microphone (Additional) 10.00
**Cordless Microphone 35.00
*Divider Curtain - Hung 200.00
*Dance Floor 125.00
*Carpet 4,000.00
Door Guards, Ushers, Ticket Takers - Hr. Going Rate
General Labor - Hr. Going Rate
St. Cloud Police Going Rate
Private Security Going Rate
Electrician Going Rate
Carpenter Going Rate
Stage Hand Going Rate
A/V Person Going Rate
*Rental Rate Per Event
**½ of Rental Rate for each Additional Day
Hourly Rate for Use of Building Prior to 6 AM
and After Midnight
$150/per hour
Electrical Orders
500 Watt Outlet $30.00
501 to 1000 Watt Outlet 35.00
1001 to 1500 Watt Outlet 40.00
1501 to 2000 Watt Outlet 45.00
20 AMP 110/208 V 70.00
30 AMP 110/208 V 80.00
40 AMP 110/208 V 90.00
50 AMP 208 V 100.00
25' Extension Cord 7.00
Add 25% for 3-phase
Special hookups or wiring At Going Rate
NOTE: All wiring must be in accordance with local and State electrical codes. All wiring will be
executed by in-house and/or house-appointed electrician.
*A 20% surcharge will be applied to all orders not received 10 days prior to show and to orders
without full payment. Payment must accompany order.
Telephone and Internet Orders
Local Line $150.00
Long Distance Line 175.00
Wireless High Speed Internet 125.00
Miscellaneous Permits
Civic Facilities Decorating Permit - $150.00/year
Civic Facilities Catering Permit - $200.00/year
Finance Charge on overdue accounts - 1%/30 days
12%/year
Service Commissions
Catered Food Commission 7% of gross food charges (does not include taxes and tip)
Decorating Commission 5% of total decorating charges (does not include taxes)
History: Ord. 2403 8-18-08; Repealed Ord. 2556 6-10-13
Section 550 - Electrical Inspection Fee Schedule
Section 550:00 Inspection Fee Schedule. City electrical inspection fees shall be calculated in
accordance with subdivisions 550.05 – 550.60.
550:05 Fee for each separate inspection. The minimum fee for each separate inspection of an
installation, replacement, alteration, or repair is $35. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, the maximum number of separate inspections allowed without payment of an additional
fee is the whole number resulting from dividing by 35 the total fee calculated in accordance with
this section. Where additional separate inspections are necessary, additional fees are required to
result in a value equal to the total number of separate inspections multiplied by 35. The fee for
any inspections needed after a "final inspection" is performed shall be calculated without
consideration of any fee paid before the final inspection.
550:10 Fee for services, generators, other power supply sources, or feeders to separate
structures. The inspection fee for the installation, addition, alteration, or repair of each service,
change of service, temporary service, generator, other power supply source, or feeder to a
separate structure is:
(1) 0 ampere to and including 400 ampere capacity, $35;
(2) 401 ampere to and including 800 ampere capacity, $60; and
(3) ampere capacity above 800, $100.
Where multiple disconnects are grouped at a single location and are supplied by a single set of
supply conductors the cumulative rating of the overcurrent devices shall be used to determine the
supply ampere capacity.
550:15 Fee for circuits, feeders, feeder taps, or sets of transformer secondary conductors.
The inspection fee for the installation, addition, alteration, or repair of each circuit, feeder, feeder
tap, or set of transformer secondary conductors, including the equipment served, is:
(1) 0 ampere to and including 200 ampere capacity, $6; and
(2) ampere capacity above 200, $15.
Where existing feeders and circuits are reconnected to overcurrent devices installed as part of the
replacement of an existing disconnect, switchboard, motor control center, or panelboard, the
inspection fee for each circuit or feeder is $2.
550:20 Inspection fee for dwellings.
(a) The inspection fee for a one-family dwelling and each dwelling unit of a two-family dwelling
is the following:
(1) the fee for each service or other source of power as provided in 550:10;
(2) $100 for up to 30 feeders and circuits; andfor each additional feeder or circuit, the fee as
provided in 550:15.
(3) This fee applies to each separate installation for new dwellings and where 15 or more
feeders or circuits are installed or extended in connection with any addition, alteration, or
repair to existing dwellings. Where existing feeders and circuits are reconnected to
overcurrent devices installed as part of the replacement of an existing panelboard, the fee
for each reconnected feeder or circuit is $2. The maximum number of separate inspections
shall be determined in accordance with 550:05. The fee for additional inspections or other
installations is that specified in 550:05,:15,:25, and:35. The installer may submit fees for
additional inspections when filing the request for electrical inspection. The fee for each
detached accessory structure directly associated with a dwelling unit shall be calculated in
accordance with 550:10 and 550:15. When included on the same request for electrical
inspection form, inspection fees for detached accessory structures directly associated with
the dwelling unit may be combined with the dwelling unit fees to determine the maximum
number of separate inspections in accordance with 550:05.
(b) The inspection fee for each dwelling unit of a multifamily dwelling with three or more
dwelling units is $70 for a combination of up to 20 feeders and circuits and $6 for each
additional feeder or circuit. This fee applies to each separate installation for each new dwelling
unit and where ten or more feeders or circuits are installed or extended in connection with any
addition, alteration, or repair to existing dwelling units. Where existing feeders or circuits are
reconnected to overcurrent devices installed as part of the replacement of an existing
panelboard, the fee for each reconnected feeder or circuit is $2. The maximum number of 2
separate inspections for each dwelling unit shall be determined in accordance with 550:05. The
fee for additional inspections or for inspection of other installations is that specified in
subdivisions 550:05, :15, :25, and :35 These fees include only inspection of the wiring within
individual dwelling units and the final feeder to that unit where the multifamily dwelling is
provided with common service equipment and each dwelling unit is supplied by a separate
feeder or feeders extended from common service or distribution equipment. The fee for
multifamily dwelling services or other power source supplies and all other circuits is that
specified in 550:05 and 550:15.
(c) A separate request for electrical inspection form must be filed for each dwelling unit that is
supplied with an individual set of service entrance conductors. These fees are the one-family
dwelling rate specified in paragraph (a).
550:25 Additions to fees of subdivisions 550:10 – 550:20.
(a) The fee for the electrical supply for each manufactured home park lot is $35. This fee
includes the service or feeder conductors up to and including the service equipment or
disconnecting means. The fee for feeders and circuits that extend from the service or
disconnecting means is that specified in 550:15.
(b) The fee for each recreational vehicle site electrical supply equipment is $6 for each circuit
originating within the equipment. The fee for recreational vehicle park services, feeders, and
circuits is that specified in 550:10 and 550:15.
(c) The fee for each street, parking lot, or outdoor area lighting standard and each traffic signal
standard is $5. Circuits originating within the standard or traffic signal controller shall not be
used when calculating the fee for each standard.
(d) The fee for transformers for light, heat, and power is $15 for transformers rated up to ten
kilovolt-amperes and $30 for transformers rated in excess of ten kilovolt-amperes. The previous
sentence does not apply to Class 1 transformers or power supplies for Class 1 power-limited
circuits or to Class 2 or Class 3 transformers or power supplies.
(e) The fee for transformers and electronic power supplies for electric signs and outline lighting
is $5 per unit.
(f) The fee for technology circuits or systems, and circuits of less than 50 volts, is 75 cents for
each system device or apparatus.
(g) The fee for each separate inspection of the bonding for a swimming pool, spa, fountain, an
equipotential plane for an agricultural confinement area, or similar installation is $35. Bonding
conductors and connections require an inspection before being concealed.
(h) The fee for all wiring installed on center pivot irrigation booms is $35 plus $5 for each
electrical drive unit.
(i) The fee for retrofit modifications to existing lighting fixtures is 25 cents per luminaire.
(j) When a separate inspection of a concrete-encased grounding electrode is performed, the
fee is $35.
(k) The fees required by 550:10 and 550:15 are doubled for installations over 600 volts.
550:30 Investigation fees: work without a request for electrical inspection.
(a) Whenever any work for which a request for electrical inspection is required has begun
without the request for electrical inspection form being filed with the city, a special investigation
shall be made before a request for electrical inspection form is accepted.
(b) An investigation fee, in addition to the full fee required by subdivisions 1 to 6, shall be paid
before an inspection is made. The investigation fee is two times the minimum fee specified in
550:05 or the inspection fee required by 550:00 to 550:25, whichever is greater, not to exceed
$1,000. The payment of the investigation fee does not exempt any person from compliance with
all other provisions of the department rules or statutes nor from any penalty prescribed by law.
550:35 Reinspection fee. Notwithstanding the provisions of 550:05 and 550:20, when
reinspection is necessary to determine whether unsafe conditions identified during a final
inspection have been corrected and the conditions are not the subject of an appeal pending
before the commissioner or any court, a reinspection fee of $35 shall be assessed in writing by
the inspector.
550:40 Supplemental fee. When inspections scheduled by the installer are preempted,
obstructed, prevented, or otherwise not able to be completed as scheduled due to
circumstances beyond the control of the inspector, a supplemental inspection fee of $35 shall be
assessed in writing by the inspector.
550:45 Special inspection. For inspections not covered in this section, or for requested special
inspections or services, the fee $80 per hour, including travel time, plus the standard 3 mileage
rate per mile traveled, plus the reasonable cost of equipment or material consumed. This
provision is applicable to inspection of empty conduits and other jobs as may be determined by
the city.
.
550:50 Inspection of transitory projects.
(a) For inspection of transitory projects including, but not limited to, festivals, fairs, carnivals,
circuses, shows, production sites, and portable road construction plants, the inspection
procedures and fees are as specified in paragraphs (b) to (c).
(b) The fee for inspection of each generator or other source of supply is that specified in 550:10.
A like fee is required at each engagement or setup.
(c) In addition to the fee for generators or other sources of supply, there must be an inspection of
all installed feeders, circuits, and equipment at each engagement or setup at the hourly rate
specified in subdivision 10, with a one-hour minimum.
550:55 Handling Fees. The handling fee to pay the cost of printing of the form requesting an
inspection is $2.00.
550:60 National Electrical Code used for interpretation of provisions. For purposes of
interpretation of this section and Minnesota Rules, chapter 3800, the most recently adopted
edition of the National Electrical Code shall be prima facie evidence of the definitions,
interpretations, and scope of words and terms used.
History: Ord. 2373 9-10-07; Ord. 2434 7-27-09.
Section 551 - Plumbing and Water Conditioning Permit Fees
Section 551:00. Permit Fees. Except as specifically provided, the fees for all plumbing permits will
be computed on the basis of the number of plumbing fixtures and/or devices provided for in such
permit:
1. A minor residential improvement permit fee will not exceed $15.00 or five percent of the
cost of the improvement, installation, or replacement, whichever is greater, for the
improvement, installation, or replacement of a residential fixture or appliance that:
a. Does not require modification to electrical or gas service;
b. Has a total cost of $500.00 or less, excluding the cost of the fixture or appliance; and
c. Is improved, installed, or replaced by the home owner or a licensed contractor.
2. Each new fixture or device installation or
rough-in...............................................................................................................................$10.50
3. Each sanitary sewer connection with a
building - per inspection.......................................................................................................19.00
4. Each City water connection with a building
per inspection ....................................................................................................................... 19.00
5. Each City storm sewer connection with a
building or area drain - per inspection .................................................................................19.00
6. Each lawn sprinkler system when connected
with domestic water............................................................................................................. 19.00
7. Replacing water distribution piping - per
inspection ..............................................................................................................................19.00
8. Replacing only drain and/or vent piping
per inspection ........................................................................................................................19.00
9. Repair of sanitary sewer - per inspection ....................................................................................19.00
10. Repair of water services - per inspection....................................................................................19.00
11. Repair of storm sewer - per inspection.......................................................................................19.00
12. Each fixture replacement or relocation.......................................................................................10.50
13. Ground water heat pump discharge to storm
sewer......................................................................................................................................25.00
14. Each manhole ..............................................................................................................................10.50
15. Water conditioners: New installation or
Replacement....................................................................(See new fixture fee or Minimum Fee)
16. Re-inspection fee for additional inspections
in excess of normal rough-in and/or final
per inspection ........................................................................................................................19.00
17. Disconnect water service - per inspection..................................................................................19.00
18. Disconnect sewer service - per inspection..................................................................................19.00
19. Minimum fee for numbers 1 through 17 ....................................................................................30.00
20. Plumbing Contractor .................................................................................................................132.00
21. Sewer Cleaning Contractor .........................................................................................................39.00
22. Master Plumber ...........................................................................................................................14.00
23. Journey Worker Plumber ............................................................................................................11.00
24. Apprentice Plumber.......................................................................................................................9.00
25. Water Treatment Installers..........................................................................................................38.00
26. Non-emergency work in progress without a valid permit
In addition to permit fees identified herein........................................................................160.00
History: Ord. 2373 9-10-07.
Section 552 - Sign Erectors, Signs, and Sign Inspection
Subd. 1. Sign Erectors Annual, expires December 31 .........................................................$39.00
Subd. 2. Signs
Wall Sign, not exceeding 100
square feet in area........................................................................................33.00
For each additional 50 sq. ft.
or fraction thereof in excess
of 100 sq. ft. of area.......................................................................................8.50
Ground Signs for the first
10 sq. ft. of area ...........................................................................................33.00
For each additional 5 sq. ft.
of area ............................................................................................................8.50
Temporary Signs - Annual Permit..............................................................67.00
Subd. 3. Sign Inspection
Advertising Signs:
Annual, per sign ..........................................................................................33.00
Business Signs:
For each inspection of all
signs upon the same premises ........................................................21.00
Subd. 4. Non-Emergency work in progress without
a valid permit..........................................................................................................155.00
(In addition to normal permit fees)
Section 553 - Building Permits, Inspections and Fees
Section 553:00. Permits, inspections, and fees will be charged as follows:
Total Valuation Fee
$1.00 to $500.00 $17.50
$501.00 to $2,000.00 $17.50 for the first $500.00 plus $2.30 for each
additional $100.00 or fraction thereof, to and including
$2,000.00
$2,001.00 to $25,000.00 $52.00 for the first $2,000.00 plus $10.50 for each
additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including
$25,000.00
$25,001.00 to $50,000.00 $292.50 for the first $25,000.00 plus $7.50 for each
additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including
$50,000.00
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $482.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $5.20 for each
additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including
$100,000.00
$100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $744.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $4.00 for each
additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including
$500,000.00
$500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00 $2,372.00 for the first $500,000.00 plus $3.50 for each
additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including
$1,000,000.00
$1,000.001.00 and up $4,126.50 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus $2.30 for each
additional $1,000.00 of fraction thereof
$23.00 minimum fee except for a single family dwelling basement finish which will have a
$65.00 minimum fee.
Other Inspections and Fees:
(i) When inspections scheduled by the installer are preempted, obstructed, prevented, or otherwise
not able to be completed as scheduled due to circumstances beyond the control of the inspector,
a supplemental inspection fee of $53 per hour may be assessed in writing by the inspector.
(ii) For inspections not covered in this section, or for requested special inspections or services, the
fee will be $53 per hour, including travel time, plus 59.5 cents per mile traveled, plus the
reasonable cost of equipment or material consumed (minimum charge – 2 hours).
(iii) Inspections for which no fee is specifically
indicated (minimum charge-1/2 hour) .................................................................... $53.00 per hour
(iv) Additional plan review required by changes,
additions or revisions to approve plans
(minimum charge-1/2 hour) .................................................................................... $53.00 per hour
(v) Residing Permit Fee .............................................................................................................. $60.00
With Replacement Windows ........................................... $75.00
(vi) Reroofing Permit Fee With Residing .................................................................................... $75.00
(vii) Replacement Window Fee ..................................................................................................... $60.00
(viii) Deck Permit Fee ..................................................................................................................... $60.00
Section 553:10. Plan Check Fees. When the Building Inspector requires that a blueprint must be
submitted and a plan review must be conducted by the City staff. The plan review fee will be 65
percent of the building permit fee except in the case of single family dwellings, apartments and their
accessory structures, the plan review fee will be 40 percent of the building permit fee as set forth in
Section 553:00 of this Code. Repetitive plan review fees will be 25 percent of the building permit fee.
In addition to the permit fee required above, the applicant will pay a surcharge to be remitted to the
Minnesota Department of Administration as prescribed by Minnesota Statute 16b.70.
Section 553:20. Building Valuation Data. When the Building Inspection Division issues a permit for
building construction, the value of the construction will be determined by the 2015 Building Valuation
Data as published by the Minnesota Department of Labor and Industry or by the value of the
construction certified by the applicant, whichever is higher. The Building Inspection Division will
provide copies of the Valuation Data upon request.
Section 553:30 Permit Fee Doubled. No construction, installation, alteration or repair, for which a
permit is required, will commence without first obtaining a permit. If the work is commenced on a
weekend or holiday then a permit will be obtained the next business day. A violation of this permit
requirement will result in the permit fee being doubled in addition to any other penal provision of the
code of ordinances.
Section 553:40. Single Family Housing Fee Reduction. Fees established by Section 553 will be reduced
by $1,500 for each of the first 30 single family detached residences permitted between March 1, 2013
and September 1, 2013. 15 of the single family detached residences receiving the fee reduction must be
upon tax-forfeited parcels.
History: Ord. 2531 6-18-12; Ord. 2547 01-28-13; Ord. 2645 12-21-15;
Section 554 - Heating, Ventilating, Air Conditioning
and Refrigeration Examinations, Licenses, Permits
Section 554:00. Examination Fees For Original Certificates of Competency. The examination
fee, in addition to the fee to be paid for an applicant's original certificate of competency will be
as follows, and each annual fee for a certificate of competency will be as follows:
A. Master A Installers:
Examination $60.00
Original and
Annual Renewal 13.00
B. Master B Installers:
Examination 47.00
Original and
Annual Renewal 13.00
C. Journeyman Installers:
Examination 29.00
Original and
Annual Renewal 13.00
D. Appliance Installers:
Examination 36.00
Original and 13.00
Annual Renewal
Section 554:05. Heating Contractor License Fee. The fee for a Heating Contractor License
will be $132.00 per year or fraction thereof.
Section 554:10. Heating, Ventilation and Refrigeration Permit Fees.
Subd. 1. Fee Required. Before issuing any permits for the construction, installation or
alteration of any furnace, boiler or heating plant or any equipment to be connected
therewith, or to be connected to any chimney or stack of any ventilation system or sheet
metal or ductwork or equipment therewith, will require the payment by the applicant for
such permit of the fee in the amount herein provided.
Subd. 2. Residential Permits.
(a) Minor residential improvement permit fee will not exceed $15.00 or five percent
of the cost of the improvement, installation, or replacement, whichever is greater,
for the improvement, installation, or replacement of a residential fixture or
appliance that:
1. Does not require modification to electric or gas service;
2. Has a total cost of $500.00 or less, excluding the cost of the fixture or
appliance; and
3. Is improved, installed, or replaced by the home owner or a licensed contractor.
(b) For the new installation of any warm air furnace and ductwork, or of any hot
water or steam boiler and radiation or the installation of conversion burners on
existing furnaces with an input of 149,000 B.T.U.H. or less, including gas piping
or oil tank installation, and air exchangers or central exhaust systems, the permit
fee will be $40.00.
(c) When the domestic hot water supply line is part of the house heating system,
$29.00 will be added to the fee.
(d) For gas piping air testing mobile home hookups, the fee will be $29.00. For gas
piping only, each system, the fee will be $29.00. For each additional opening
provided, the fee will be $13.00.
(e) For new gas piping and the installation of domestic type of appliances such as
gas dryers, ranges, water heaters, barbecues, incinerators, hot plates, etc., the fee
will be $29.00.
For each additional appliance on any permit, the fee will be $23.50.
Domestic appliances are any appliance with an input of 149,000 B.T.U.H. or less
and installed in a residential building.
For over 149,000 B.T.U.H. see Commercial Schedule.
Subd. 3. Commercial Permits.
(a) For the installation or replacement of any commercial cooking equipment or
process equipment or laboratory burners, commercial water heaters, dryers,
etc., including gas piping:
INPUT FEE
Not exceeding 99,999 BTU ....................................................................................... $34.00
100,000 BTU but not exceeding 199,999 BTU ............................................................37.00
200,000 BTU but not exceeding 399,999 BTU ............................................................61.00
400,000 BTU but not exceeding 599,999 BTU ............................................................82.00
600,000 BTU but not exceeding 999,999 BTU ..........................................................104.00
1,000,000 BTU but not exceeding 2,499,999 BTU ....................................................175.00
Subd. 4. Commercial Heating.
(a) For the installation or replacement of any furnace or boiler, gas or oil conversion
burner, dual fuel burners, stokers, powdered fuel burners, direct fired air heaters, etc.,
including gas piping:
INPUT FEE
Not exceeding 200,000 BTU ......................................................................................$37.00
200,000 BTU but not exceeding 399,999 BTU ........................................................... 61.00
400,000 BTU but not exceeding 599,999 BTU ............................................................82.00
600,000 BTU but not exceeding 999,999 BTU ..........................................................104.00
1,000,000 BTU but not exceeding 2,499,999 BTU ....................................................175.00
2,500,000 BTU but not exceeding 9,999,999 BTU ....................................................217.00
10,000,000 BTU but not exceeding 49,999,999 BTU ................................................289.50
50,000,000 BTU but not exceeding 74,999,999 BTU ................................................421.50
75,000,000 BTU and over.......................................................................................... 555.00
Appliances: Air to Air Exchangers-2000 cfm or less………………………………………30.00
Gas Fireplace…………………………………………………………………. 40.00
(b) For the installation of infrared heaters or unit heaters not exceeding 200,000 B.T.U.H.:
$35.00 each for the first two, and $23.50 each on the same permit thereafter.
(c) For alterations to existing burners or equipment with an input of less than 1,000,000
B.T.U.H. or the installation of ductwork or radiation for such equipment, the permit fee
will be $30.00.
(d) For the alteration to existing burners or equipment with an input of 1,000,000 B.T.U.H.
or more or for the installation of radiation or ductwork to such equipment, the permit
fee will be one-half of the fee scheduled for new equipment of that size.
(e) For the installation of gas piping only, or where one contractor is installing the
equipment and another fuel supply piping, the fee will be $29.00 for each separate
system.
For each additional opening, the fee will be $13.00.
(f) Temporary heating permits will be $30.00 for each appliance or unit used.
Subd. 5. Ventilation
(a) General ventilation, including fan and duct system:
Up to 2,000 CFM ..............................................................................................$30.00
Each additional 1,000 CFM or fraction
thereof ...............................................................................................................13.00
(b) For commercial kitchen hoods including fan and welded duct system:
Up to 2,000 CFM ................................................................................................30.00
Each additional 1,000 CFM or fraction
thereof ...............................................................................................................13.00
(c) Noxious vapors and/or flammable material spraying, painting or dipping ventilation,
including fan and duct system:
Up to 2,000 CFM ................................................................................................30.00
Each additional 1,000 CFM or fraction
thereof ...............................................................................................................13.00
Subd. 6. Duplicate Permits Not Required.
(a) No additional permits are required for replacement only of domestic type
storage water heaters of under 60,000 B.T.U.H. input for which a permit has
been issued under an ordinance adopting the State Plumbing Code.
Subd. 7. Penalty for Work Performed Without a Valid Permit.
(a) Non-emergency work in progress without a valid permit will be assessed
$160.00 in addition to permit fees and late penalties.
Subd. 8. Re-inspection fee………………………………......Minimum 29.00/54.50 per hour
History: Ord. 2373 9-10-07.
Section 555 -Miscellaneous Licenses and Permit Charges
Section 555:00. Miscellaneous Licenses and Permit Charges.
Subd. 1. The fees, rates and charges for miscellaneous licenses and permits of the following
kinds will be for the term, upon the conditions, and in the amounts set forth in the
subdivisions which follow.
Subd. 2. Special Assessments.
For each certificate...........................................................................................................$25.75
Subd. 3. Commercial Contractor.
Class A, Annual........................................................................$144.00
After July 1st.................................................................................95.00
After August 1st............................................................................46.00
Class B, Annual ............................................................................74.00
After July 1st.................................................................................46.00
After August 1st............................................................................26.00
Class C, Annual ............................................................................38.00
After July 1st.................................................................................26.00
After August 1st............................................................................16.00
Subd. 4. Excavating Contractor.
Annual Fee......................................................................................................................$125.00
Subd. 5. Building and House Movers.
Moving Permit
First 400 square feet.........................................................................................................$17.00
Each additional 400 square feet .......................................................................................$11.00
Subd. 6. Right of Way Management.
1. Registration Fee......................................................................................................$32.00
2. Excavation Permit Fees
A. Permit Fee .......................................................................................................$69.00
B. Trench/Trenchless.............. $37.00 per 100 lineal feet of trench plus the permit fee
3. Obstruction Permit Fee...........................................................................................$30.00
4. Annual Right-of-Way Obstruction Permit .............................................................$30.00
5. Permit Extension Fee..............................................................................................$42.00
6. Delay Penalty $22.00 per day for minor/local streets
$106.00 per day for collector streets
$530.00 per day for arterial streets
Subd. 7. Mobile Home Parking
Parking mobile home more than 72 hours.........................................................................$4.00
Subd. 8. Duplicate/Replacement of License, Certificate or Tag ..............................2.75
Subd. 9. Change Location of Licensed Premises......................................................6.89
Subd. 10. Keg Permit ..................................................................................................5.25
Subd. 11. Disposal of Petroleum Contaminated Soil..........................................................1000.00
Subd. 12. Use of Waste Material for Fertilizer and Soil Treatment .....................................$35.00
Subd. 13. Commercial Haulers Licensed under Section 240:24 of the Code ........................50.00
History: Ord. 2373 9-10-07; Ord. 2403 8-18-08; City Council Agenda Item #39 10-27-08; Ord. 2009-17 10-26-09;
Ord. 2493 3-28-11; Ord. 2499 6-6-11; Ord. 2567 10-21-13; Ord. 2671 08-22-2016.
Section 560 - Park & Recreation Department Fees
Subd. 1. WEED/GRASS TREE REMOVAL.
Removal cost .......................................... $85.00 per person per hour plus all applicable taxes.
Administrative/inspection fee ............................................. $75.00 plus all applicable taxes.
Minimum fee: one hour removal cost plus administrative/inspection fee.
Contractor Fee: In the case that a contractor is hired for the removal, the fee that is charged by the
Contractor plus the Administrative/inspection fee and all applicable taxes will be passed on to the
property owner.
Certification fee: A $50.00 charge will be added to all accounts certified to the County Auditor’s
office for collection. This fee is to be considered separate and distinct from any penalty or interest
that may be charged by the County as a result of the certification.
THE FOLLOWING PARK AND RECREATION FEES DO NOT INCLUDE SALES OR ANY
APPLICABLE FEES
Subd. 2. MUNSINGER AND CLEMENS GARDENS WEDDINGS AND SPECIAL EVENTS.
NO WEDDING CEREMONIES, OR SPECIAL EVENTS WILL BE ALLOWED IN THE
UPPER GARDEN OR VIRGINIA CLEMENS ROSE GARDEN AREA
Weddings and special events will be limited to a maximum of fifty (50) persons.
(a) Resident Wedding Ceremonies/Special
Events at Munsinger Gardens.
Two (2) hour maximum ....................................................................................$250.00
Non-resident Wedding Ceremonies/Special
Events at Munsinger Gardens.
Two (2) hour maximum ....................................................................................$300.00
(b) Wedding and Special Events Refund Policy. If a reservation is cancelled 30 or more calendar
days before the event, the total fee minus a $50.00 Administrative Fee will be refunded. If a
reservation is cancelled and fewer than 30 calendar days remain before the event only 50% of
the total fee will be refunded, minus the $50.00 Administrative Fee.
Day of the event cancellations due to severe weather only are subject to review by the Parks &
Recreation Director for any refunds or letters of credit.
Subd. 3. PORTRAIT PHOTOGRAPHY AT MUNSINGER GARDENS IN
DESIGNATED AREAS
(a) Fee: Includes non-refundable administrative fee of $16.00. The fee must be paid in full
within 10 business days of making the reservation.
(b) Resident groups under twelve (12) .................................................... $35.00 per session
Resident groups over twelve (12) ....................................................... $70.00 per session
(c) Non-resident groups under twelve (12) ............................................. $45.00 per session
Non-resident groups over twelve (12) ................................................ $90.00 per session
(d) Munsinger Gardens Photography Sessions Refund Policy-If a reservation is cancelled at least
24 hours before the session, a full refund minus a $16.00 booking fee will be issued in the
form of a refund or credit. Cancellations occurring due to severe weather are subject to the
review of the Park & Recreation Director for refunds or letters of credit.
Professional Photography at Clemens Gardens in Designated Areas
Photography Sessions for Clemens Gardens-All reservations for the Clemens Gardens photography
sessions must be paid in full in order to reserve your session date and time.
Sessions are two hours long.
(e) If a reservation is cancelled at least 24 hours before the session, a full refund minus a $50.00
Administrative Fee will be refunded. Cancellations occurring due to severe weather are
subject to the review of the Park & Recreation Director for refunds or letters of credit.
Resident and Non-resident groups up to twelve (12) persons maximum ............................$400.00
Subd. 4. DOG PARK FEES.
a. Daily ............................................................................................................................. $2.00
b. Daily Non Resident .................................................................................................$2.00
c. Annual ................................................ $20.00 first dog and $10.00 each additional dog.
d. Annual Non Resident ........................ $40.00 first dog and $20.00 each additional dog.
e. Replacement Permit ................................................................................................$5.00
Subd. 5. Definitions.
a. “Youth” is a person age 17 or younger.
b. “Adult” is a person age 18 or older.
c. “Senior” is a person age 55 or older.
Subd. 6. Non-resident fees.
A fee of 20% of the activity fee, prior to sales tax, will be charged to Non-Residents Daily Admission will not be subject to
Non-Resident fees.
Subd. 7. Adult League Fees.
a. Softball includes league sanctioning fees and Softballs .........................................$490.00
b. Volleyball (unofficiated)………………………………………………………….$200.00
Subd. 8. Whitney Recreation Center Fees.
a. Open Gym.
1. Adult fee per session .............................................................................................. $3.75
2. Youth fee per session ........................................................................................$2.25
3. Open gym pass (15 punches) ............................................................................... $45.00
4. Adult Yearly Gym Pass .................................................................................$135.00
5. Youth Yearly Gym Pass .................................................................................... $70.00
6. Vendor Fee………………………………………………………...$150.00 per day
b. Tournament Fees .................................................. $1,350.00 per day OR $115.00 per hour
Court Setup……………………………………………………………....$22 per court
c. Walking/Jogging Pass.
Annual Fee Adult…………………………………………………………..…. $56.00
Senior Citizen ...................................................................................... $51.00
Proxy Card Replacement…………………………………………………… $13.00
Daily track pass ........................................................................................................... $3.25
d. Walking Track and Fitness Room membership.
Annual fee Adult…………………………………………………………..…..$110.00
Senior Citizen ..................................................................................... $85.00
Daily Track and Fitness Pass ..................................................................................$5.00
e. Fitness Room pass.
Annual fee Adult .................................................................................... $ 100.00
Senior Citizen ........................................................................ $ 75.00
Daily Fitness Pass ............................................................................................. $3.25
f. Basketball/Volleyball Court Rental.
Recreation Center Group Court Hour Basketball Rental ............................ $40.00
Recreation Center Youth Court Hour Basketball Rental………………….$29.00
Recreation Center Group Court Hour Volleyball Rental ............................ $29.00
Recreation Center Youth Court Hour Volleyball Rental ................................. $21.50
Park and Recreation League Court Hour Basketball Practice ......................... $28.00
Park and Recreation League Court Hour Volleyball Practice ..................... $21.50
g. Late Fee. A $25.00 late fee is applied to a youth or adult fee if the fee is not paid by the deadline.
Subd. 9. Wading Pools Rental and Climbing Wall Fees.
Seberger Pool per hour…………………………………………………………….. $54.00
All other wading pools per hour………………………………………………….... $37.00
All pool rentals require a lifeguard on duty……………………………………….. $12.00 per hour
Seberger Yearly Pool Pass
Family (2 or more in same family structure) .............................................................. $65.00
Individual Youth Annual Pass ......................................................................................... $38.00
Daily swimmer admission .................................................................................................. $2.25
Tadpole Swim Lessons ............................................................................................. $15.00
Subd. 10. Programs, Events and Activities:
PreSchool Enrichment…………………………………………………...$5.00 per session
Arts & Crafts………………………………………………………….... $4.00 per class
Youth & Teen Activities ......................................................................... $7.00 per session
Subd. 11. Youth Sports:
Baseball
BamBam .......................................................................................................................... $30.00
T-Ball ................................................................................................................................ $33.00
Cub Ball ............................................................................................................................ $37.00
Lou Gehrig........................................................................................................................ $43.00
Sluggers ............................................................................................................................ $47.00
Sports Inc .......................................................................................................................... $57.00
Girls Softball
Dottie Green ..................................................................................................................... $43.00
Babe Didrikson……………........................................................................................ $47.00
Dot Richardson……………………………………………………………………..$57.00
Clinics (baseball and softball)
Grades K – 6………………………………………………………..$29.00
Youth Volleyball……………………………………………………………………$34.00
High School Hoops (Per Team) .....................................................................................$135.00
Subd. 12 Whitney Fields
a. Elementary, Junior High and High School Softball Programs
Bagged Field - no field prep, bases installed ......................................................... /field $25.00
Bagged and Dragged Field - practice condition ............................................... fields $37.00
Prepped Field - game condition ............................................................................. /field $50.00
Field maint. after initial prep (dragged, lined) ....................................................... /field $50.00
b. Elementary, Junior High and High School Baseball Programs
Bagged Field- no field prep, bases installed……………………………….. …..field $35.00
Bagged and Dragged Field – practice condition………………………………..field $57.00
Prepped Field – game condition (dragged, bagged, lined)……………………...field $65.00
Field maint. after initial prep (dragged, lined)………………………………….field $50.00
c. Local High School Softball Tournaments
Prepped Field - game condition .............................................................................. field $50.00
Field maint. after initial prep (dragged, lined) ...................................................... field $50.00
(scheduled at the request of the tournament director)
d. Minnesota State High School League Tournaments
Facility Fee (game condition) ................................................................... per day/field $50.00
Field maint. after initial prep (dragged, lined) ....................................................... field $50.00
(Scheduled at the request of the tournament director)
Gate Share. In cases where the event organizer charges an admission fee for spectators, the Park
and Recreation Department will receive gate revenue to equal field rental and preparation charges.
In cases of gate receipts in excess of the rental and prep charges the Park and Recreation
Department will receive 40% of the gate receipts.
e. Adult Softball Tournaments for Local St. Cloud Organizations
Facility Fee (game condition) .................................................................... per day/field $50.00
Maintenance charge................................................................................... $20.00 per staff hour
f. Adult Softball Tournaments for Non-local Organizations
Facility Fee (includes game condition) ...................................................... $50.00 per day/field
Field maint. after initial prep (dragged, lined) ........................................................ $50.00/field
(Scheduled at the request of the tournament director)
g. Community Baseball and Softball Program Use
All games must be scheduled through the Park and Recreation Office.
Youth Leagues Game condition (dragged, bagged, lined ………………………..$50.00 field
Adult Amateur Baseball Game condition (dragged, bagged, lined)
Gate admission collected ........................................................... $200.00/game
No gate admission collected ....................................................... $120.00/game
Games requiring field lighting -- the above charge plus: .......................................... $15.00/hr.
Field maint. after initial prep (dragged, lined) ........................................................ $50.00/field
Subsequent games not requiring grooming…………………………..………..$25.00/game
Park and Recreation Dept. Supervisor (when required) ........................................ $25.00/hour
h. Soccer Field Charges
Elementary and Junior High Programs
Practice Field ......................................................................................................... /game $33.00
Game Field ........................................................................................................... /game $81.00
High School Programs
Practice Field ........................................................................................................ /game $40.00
Game Field ......................................................................................................... /game $120.00
i. Concessions
Vendor Fee ........................................................................................................ /event $150.00
Subd. 13. Park Shelter Rental and Permit Fees.
PARK SHELTER RENTALS ARE ALL SIX HOUR TIME SLOTS
WILSON AND RIVERSIDE PARK
Key and Cleaning Deposit ....................................................... $100.00
Keg Permit .................................................................................. $42.00
Rental Fee includes non-refundable administrative fee of ....... $16.00
Half Shelter (75 people or under) ............................................ $125.00
Full Shelter ............................................................................... $250.00
Full Shelter (Over 500 People) ................................................ $350.00
Full Shelter with Special Event (i.e. Wedding, festival, tents, extra
items, food, vendors, live music, etc. Larger Special Event Fees and
other permits/approvals may also apply .................................. $500.00
KNIGHTS OF COLOMBUS-UNDER 50………………………………………………...$72.00
LIONS PARK-Under 50 Entire Shelter (requires $100.00 key and cleaning deposit)…...$90.00
WARMING HOUSES AT HOCKEY RINKS ……….………………………..……$25.00 per/hr
Walks/relays and runs for charitable causes (excluding Riverside, Wilson and Lions Parks)…$125.00
Any special events, gatherings or charitable event at Riverside, Wilson or Lions Park requires the full
rental of shelter
Nordic ski meets and nordic ski tournaments require full shelter rental for Riverside Park
SPECIAL EVENTS (exclusive of Munsinger Gardens)
Special Events, private ceremonies, rituals acts or actions:
Regional Parks …………..$250.00
All other Parks………… $80.00
Larger Special Events that are greater than 500 persons in size or charge admission/registration fees are
subject to City Council Authorization and additional event fees or a gate share.
Cancellation Policy
If a reservation is cancelled 30 or more calendar days before the event, the total fee will be refunded, minus
the $16.00 Administrative Fee. If a reservation is cancelled and fewer than 30 calendar days remain before
the event, only 50% of the total fee will be refunded, minus the $16.00 Administrative fee. Day of the
event cancellations due to severe weather only are subject to review by the Park and Recreation Director for
any refunds or letters of credit.
Patron is required to have available the shelter rental agreement, keg permit and any other permits issued
from the City for inspection purposes.
Subd. 14. Lake George Municipal Complex
Room Rates
Monday – Friday requires a two hour minimum; Saturday-Sunday requires a four hour minimum rental
A. Multipurpose Room …………………………………….... $15 per hour
B. Sunroom ............. …………………………………. …. …… $20 per hour
C. Kitchen …………………………………………………….. $20 per reservation
History: Ord. 2373 9-10-07; Ord. 2403 8-18-08; Ord. 2407 9-22-08; Ord. 2009-17 10-26-09; Ord. 2488 12-20-10; Ord. 2606 12-8-14;
Refuse, Recycling, and Yard Waste Collection
and Disposal Charges
Section 570:00. Refuse, Recycling and Yard Waste Collection and Disposal.
Charges for City refuse, recycling and yard waste collection and disposal services will be
as follows:
Subd. 1. Monthly Refuse and Recycling Service:
(a) $7.30 passby fee per dwelling unit per month for bag and recycle system service
plus $2.25 per each City refuse bag. The passby fee shall be automatically added
to each residential utility account. The passby fee shall not be waived for those
residents who do not wish to recycle.
(b) $33.80 per month for each refuse cart. This fee includes the monthly passby fee.
(c) Replacement refuse or recycling carts will be provided at the actual cart purchase
price, including taxes, plus a $10.00 administrative and delivery fee.
Subd. 2. Yard Waste Service:
(a) Yard waste rubbish fee: $1.25 per each City yard waste bag.
(b) Tree branches and brush rubbish fee: Minimum $10.00 per collection of a
maximum of five bundles. $1.00 for each additional bundle.
Subd. 3. Special Pickups:
(a) Household rubbish fee: $20.00 for collection of up to 2 cubic yards of
household rubbish. $10.00 collection fee for each additional cubic yard of
rubbish.
Subd. 4. Compost Site Permits:
(a) R1 Permit: $25.00 per parcel per year (use of this permit is limited to
residents/parcels that are currently customers of the City Sanitation Division.)
(b) R2 Permit: $35.00 per parcel per year (this permit is for the use of City
residents/parcels that are not currently customers of the City Sanitation
Division).
(c) NR Permit: $45.00 per parcel per year (this permit is for the use of
residents/parcels in neighboring cities).
(d) Replacement Permits: $5.00
History: Ord. 2373 9-10-07; Ord. 2403 8-18-08, Ord. 2458 4-5-10; Ord. 2462 8-26-13; Ord. 2691 1-9-17
Section 575 – Public Utilities Department Fees
Section 575:00. Purpose and Policy. The purpose of this ordinance is to set and recover fees from
users of the St. Cloud Public Utilities System, on an equitable basis to provide funds for the
operation and maintenance, debt service, replacement and improvements to the St Cloud Public
Utilities System.
Section 575:01. Accounts. All accounts shall be carried in the name of the owner who
personally, or by his or her authorized agent, applied for such service. The owner shall be liable
for water and sewer services supplied to the property, whether he or she is occupying the
property or not, and any unpaid charges shall be a lien upon the property.
Section 575:05. Due Date. All bills shall be due and payable by due date stated on the bill.
Section 575:10. Billing. Customers of the Water, Wastewater and Stormwater Utility may be
billed annually or, on a monthly, bimonthly, or quarterly basis.
Section 575:15. Penalty for Late Payment. A penalty in the amount of Twenty Dollars ($20.00)
or 7.5% of the balance, whichever is greater, shall be added to all Public Utilities accounts not
paid in full by the due date. The penalty for late payment shall be added to the balance for which
the account remains unpaid.
Section 575:20. Certification Fee. A Fifty Dollar ($50.00) charge will be added to all accounts
certified to the County Auditor’s office for collection. This fee is to be considered separate and
distinct from any penalty or interest that may be charged by the County as a result of the
certification.
Section 575:25. Water and Sewer Availability Charges. The WAC and SAC fees for all
structures/properties to be connected to the municipal water and sanitary sewer systems will be
determined by multiplying the base rate (as shown in Table 1) by the applicable Meter-and-
Service Ratio (as shown in Table 2):
Table 1
Base Rate Schedule, Water and Sewer Availability Charges
YEAR WAC SAC
2019 $ 2,500 $ 2,500
2020 $ 2,650 $ 2,650
2021 $ 2,800 $ 2,800
2022 $ 2,950 $ 2,950
2023 $ 3,100 $ 3,100
Table 2
Equivalent Meter-and-Service Ratio
Meter Size Meter-and-Service Ratio
¾ inch 1.0
1 inch 1.4
1 ½ inch 1.8
2 inch 2.9
3 inch 11.0
4 inch 14.0
6 inch 21.0
8 inch 29.0
Other sizes to be determined by the Public Utilities Director based on
the flow capacity of the water meter(s) to be installed.
In situations where a premise will be connected to the municipal sanitary sewer system, but will
not be connected to the municipal water system, the Public Utilities Director will determine the
applicable SAC fee based on the anticipated sewer usage.
Section 575:30. General Municipal Wastewater Users Unit Cost.
Subd. 1. Unmetered Municipal Users. Unmetered Residential Accounts will be charged
$25.63 per month per dwelling unit where water is not measured by a City meter.
Subd. 2. General Municipal Users. Sewer volume will be set annually in March/April.
Rate per 100 Cubic Feet is $3.00.
Section 575.31. Minimum Sewer Charges; Billing Minimum. The minimum sewer charges as
set forth in the table below shall supersede any lesser sewer changes for any given billing period.
Meter Size in Inches Minimum Charge (per month)
5/8” & 3/4” meter $ 6.00
1” meter $ 6.61
1 ½” meter $ 13.31
2” meter $ 16.21
3” meter $ 32.78
4” meter $ 73.48
6” meter $147.09
Section 575:35. IndustrialWastewater Users-Unit Costs.
Subd. 1. Industrial Volume Charges.
Monthly Volume (in cubic feet) Rate per 100 Cubic Feet
Rate per 100 Cubic Feet is $3.00.
Subd. 2. Industrial Strength Charges.
Parameter Rate per Pound
BOD greater than 218 mg/L $0.54
TSS greater than 240 mg/L $0.44
See City Ordinance Section 360.52 Industrial Unit Cost Categories for a description of costs and
Section 360.53 for the formula used to calculate Industrial Wastewater Service Costs.
Section 575:40. Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Fees. The Industrial Discharge Permit fee,
paid to the City, for total wastewater discharged into the St. Cloud Wastewater Treatment System
(million gallons per year) for both initial and reissuance shall be paid when the permit is issued
based on the following:
Permit Application and Reissuance Application fee of $100
< 1.0 MG/year $200
1.0 - 10 MG/year $300
> 10 MG/year $400
Section 575:45. Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Violation Fees. Permittees shall pay
violation fees as follows by forty-five (45) days of the original report due date:
(a) Discharge Violation Fee $100
(b) Permit Violation Fee $100
(c) Late Industrial Discharge Monitoring Report Fee $100
(d) Minimum Significant Noncompliance Status Fee $1,000
Section 575:50. Liquid Waste Hauler Permit. An annual permit fee of $100 is due at the time
of issuance and reissuance of the industrial discharge agreement. Load charge fees are
determined by the Director and are dependent on volume, frequency, organic loading, and
available treatment capacity.
Section 575:55. Stormwater Utility Rates and Charges.
Subd. 1. Fixed Charge and Unit Rate.
(a) Fixed Charge
YEAR FIXED CHARGE
2019 $ 3.80
2020 $ 4.55
2021 $ 5.30
2022 $ 6.05
2023 $ 6.80
(b) Unit Charge = $1.00
Section 575:60. Land Disturbance Permit Fees. All Land Disturbance Permit fees shall be
submitted to the Building Safety Department upon permit approval.
Single Family Homes $25
Less than 1 acre $100
1-5 acres $200
Over 5 acres $300
Section 575.65. Stormwater Impact Fee. The fee is charged when the post construction
stormwater standard cannot be met as required in the Land Development Code Article 19.12.
Subd. 1 Fixed Charge and Multiplier
(a) Fixed Charge= $25.00
(b) Multiplier = 1.50
Section 575:70. That the following rates shall be and hereby are established for charges made to
the consumers who shall purchase water from the City of St. Cloud, Minnesota.
Unit = 100 Cubic Feet = 750 gallons 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Units 1-4 $ 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
Units 5-8 $ 3.00 3.25 3.50 3.75 4.00
Units >8 $ 3.50 3.75 4.00 4.25 4.50
Section 575:75. Fixed Charge. A fixed charge shall be billed bi-monthly.
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
$15.00 $15.50 $16.00 $16.50 $17.00
Section 575:80. Water Permit Fees. The following fees shall be charged for the establishment of
new accounts, which fees include the cost of tapping the main water line, providing the water
meter, and administrative expenses in setting up the account. The permit fee shall be determined
by adding the appropriate tapping fee to the appropriate meter fee.
Tap Size
Existing
Main 1 1.5 2 4 6 8 10 12
4 $287 $523 $603
6 $287 $413 $500 $1,683 $1,735
8 $230 $387 $528 $1,565 $1,720 $2,238
10 $230 $395 $562 $1,614 $1,771 $2,375 $3,173
12 $1,659 $1,768 $2,442 $3,271 $3,918
14 $1,757 $1,861 $2,510 $3,426 $4,194
16 $1,757 $1,919 $2,576 $3,317 $4,281
18 $1,699 $1,961 $2,683 $3,573 $4,392
20 $1,997 $2,167 $2,736 $3,393 $4,622
24 $1,981 $2,230 $2,826 $3,524 $4,716
New Water Meter Fees
3/4-inch meter $257
1-inch meter $363
1.5-inch meter $1,373
2-inch meter $1,651
3-inch meter $2,060
4-inch meter $3,543
6-inch meter $5,696
Section 575:85. Meter Rental Fees. The following will be charged for meter rental in addition to
the water volume charge.
3/4-inch $25
3-inch $50
A hydrant meter not returned to the City will be charged for the replacement cost of the meter,
estimated water use and a $50.00 service charge.
Section 575:90. Water-Turn On/Off. An additional charge of Seventy-Five Dollars ($75.00)
shall be collected for turning on or off any water service between the hours of 8:00 AM and 4:30
PM. A charge of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) will be made for any service after hours and
weekends. Delinquent accounts will only be turned on during the hours: 8:00 AM to 8:00 PM.
History: Ord. 2333 1-8-07; Ord. 2386 1-7-08; Ord. 2485 12-20-10; Ord. 2521 12-19-11; Ord. 2544 12-17-12; Ord. 2580 1-6-14;
Ord. 2613 2-9-15; Ord. 2640 12-21-15; Ord 2692 1-9-17; Ord. 2767 12-3-18
Note: Section 575 consolidates all previous public utility fees into this one ordinance, Ord. No. 2441, October 26, 2009
sections 571, 572, 573 and 574 were repealed.
Section 576 – Street Light Utility
Section 576:00. Authority and Purpose. Minnesota Statutes, Section 429.021 authorizes cities to install,
replace, extend and maintain street lights and street lighting systems and special lighting systems. The
City Council has determined that in order to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the City, it is in the best interest of the citizens that the City operate and maintain a City street
lighting system utility and has further determined that the operation and maintenance of such utility
benefits each and every property within the City. The City Council has therefore determined that it is
fair, appropriate and reasonable that the costs of such operation and maintenance be paid on a fair and
reasonable basis by all of the property in the City so benefitted and the cost should be charged and
collected from all such benefitted property, except for those exempted in Section 576:15.
Section 576:05. Street Light Utility Established. The City of St. Cloud hereby establishes a Street Light
Utility. The system consists of all street lighting facilities owned by the City and all street lighting
facilities for which the City purchases and supplies electrical energy. The operation of such utility shall
be under the supervision of the Public Services Director.
Section 576:10. Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms as
used in this ordinance shall have the meanings designated.
Subd. 1. Areas Served by Standard Street Lighting Systems. This includes portions of the City
where street lights are installed at intersections only or are spaced more than 400 feet apart.
Subd 2. Areas Served by Enhanced Street Lighting Systems. This includes portions of the City
where the standard street lighting system has been upgraded or enhanced to include any of the
following:
(1) Mid-block street lights spaced less than 400 feet apart
(2) Ornamental street lights
(3) Whiteway street lights (in commercial and industrial areas only)
Subd. 3. Alley Security Lighting. This includes portions of the City where alley security
lighting is installed.
Subd 4. Unit Area. Unit Area shall be determined by the following formula:
(1) Divide the area of a parcel (expressed in square feet) by 20,000.
(2) Round-down the quotient to one decimal place. The minimum Unit Area (UA) for any
parcel shall be 1.0. The maximum Unit Area for any parcel shall be 50.0.
Section 576:15. Rates and Collection of Fees.
Subd. 1. Rates and Charges: Every property within the City shall be charged for a fair and
equitable share of the cost to provide, operate and maintain the City-wide street lighting system.
Charges shall be apportioned according to property use and service level as follows:
(1) Areas Served by Standard Street Lighting Systems:
Land Use Monthly Charge
Single-family, patio homes, townhouse, duplex
residential, detached townhouse and twin-home
residential.
$2.90 per parcel
Multi-family residential containing three or more
attached dwelling units including Dormitories and
Nursing Homes, Manufactured Home Parks.
Developed parcels:
$1.70 per unit
Undeveloped parcels:
UA x $2.90 per parcel
Schools, Daycare Facilities serving 16 or more
persons and Religious Institutions, Other Institutional,
Commercial Industrial, Hospital, Medical District and
Other Uses.
UA x $2.90 per parcel
(2) Areas Served by Enhanced Street Lighting Systems:
Land Use
Single-family, patio homes, townhouse, duplex
residential, detached townhouse and twin-home
residential.
Monthly Charge
$4.10 per parcel
Multi-family residential containing three or more
attached dwelling units including Dormitories and
Nursing Homes, Manufactured Home Parks.
Developed parcels:
$2.30 per unit
Undeveloped parcels:
UA x $4.10 per parcel
Schools, Daycare Facilities serving 16 or more
persons and Religious Institutions, Other Institutional,
Commercial Industrial, Hospital, Medical District and
Other Uses.
(3) All properties served by Alley Security Lighting shall
be charged at their applicable standard or enhanced rate with
a surcharge of $1.00 per month per parcel and/or unit.
UA x $4.10 per parcel
(4) All Other Areas:
Land Use
All types
Monthly Charge
$1.70 per parcel
Subd. 2. Collection of Fees. Street Light Utility charges may be billed and collected on an
annual, quarterly, bi-monthly or monthly basis as determined by the Director of Public Services.
Subd. 3. Exemptions. The following land uses are exempt from the established Street Light
Utility Charges:
(1) Public street right-of-way
(2) City-owned land
(3) Railroad right-of-way
(4) Cemeteries
Subd. 4. Penalty for Late Payment. A penalty in the amount of Ten Dollars ($10.00) or 5% of
the balance, whichever is greater, shall be added to all Public Utilities accounts not paid in full
by the due date. The penalty for late payment shall be added to the balance for which the
account remains unpaid.
Subd. 5. Certification of Past Due Surcharges on Taxes. Any past due Street Light Utility
charges in excess of ninety (90) days past due on October 1 of any year may be certified to the
applicable County Records Office for collection with real estate taxes in the following year
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Section 444.075, Subdivision 3. In addition, the City shall also
have the right to bring a civil action or take other legal remedies to collect the unpaid surcharges.
Subd. 6. Rate Adjustments. At the request of the property owner or manager, the Public Services
Director may review the Street Light Utility rate applied to a premises and may adjust that rate if
in his/her opinion it is appropriate to do so. It is the responsibility of the owner or manager of
the premises to provide the City with any requested information related to the use, occupancy or
development of the premises to facilitate the rate review and determination. Failure to provide or
falsification of such information shall constitute a violation of this ordinance.
Section 576:20. Effective Date. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect 30 days after adoption.
History: Ord. 2435 7/27/09 (new), Ord. 2459 4-5-10. Ord. 2600 11-24-14; Ord. 2617 5-4-15
Section 580 - Parking Fees
Section 580:00. Parking Fees.
Subd. 1. Parking Meter Hoods. $10.00 per day per parking space utilized.
Subd. 2. 15-Minute Meter Installation. $200.00 per meter installation.
Subd. 3. Parking Permit Fees – Quarterly Payments plus all applicable Sales Taxes:
“Reserved” permit - $195.58
“A” permit - $122.00
“C” permit - $ 71.71
“D” permit (Disability) - $ 61.00
Motorcycle/Scooter permit - $ 61.00
Subd. 4. Parking Ramp Fees-Quarterly Payments plus all applicable Sales Taxes:
Grand Central $171.36
Paramount $171.36
East River’s Edge $171.36
Centre Square $171.36
West River’s Edge $171.36
Stearns County-Paramount $160.19
Motorcycle/Scooter $ 85.68
Subd. 4A. Dedicated Contracted Parking Ramp Fees – Quarterly Payments plus all
applicable Sales Taxes:
West River’s Edge $558.79
Subd. 5. Loading Zone Fees - Annual Payments:
$720.00 per stall per year within parking meter zone $24.00 for each supplemental
“customer parking” sign or similar message sign within the parking meter zone.
$41.00 per year per 24-foot parking stall or fraction thereof outside of parking meter
zone.
$50.00 per year per valet loading zone plus the cost of any signs to be installed by the
City.
Subd. 6. Parking Meter Zone Fees.
All on-street meters (except 15-minute meters) will be 50 cents per hour with a 2 hour
maximum.
All 15-minute meters will be 25 cents per 15 minutes. Parking lot meter rates will be as
follows:
• Plaza Lot 1 hour meters 50 cents per hour
• Convention Center
Surface Lot 10 hour meters 50 cents per hour
• Mississippi Lot 2 hour meters 50 cents per hour
• River Boat Lot 2 hour meters 50 cents per hour
• Lady Slipper Lot 2 hour meters 50 cents per hour
• Canoe Lot 4 hour meters 50 cents per hour
• Judicial Lot 4 hour meters 50 cents per hour
• Railway Lot 4 hour meters 50 cents per hour
• River’s Edge Lot 4 hour meters 50 cents per hour
• Cloverleaf Lot 10 hour meters 25 cents per hour
• Swan Lot 10 hour multi-space meters 25 cents per hour
• Library Lot Parking in the Library Lot is free to library patrons.
The general public is prohibited from parking in Library Lot.
Subd. 7. Parking Ramps –Event Parking. An entry fee of $5.00 will be charged for event
parking at the St. Cloud East River’s Edge, West River’s Edge and Grand Central
Parking Ramps. An entry fee of $2.00 may be implemented at municipal parking
facilities as determined by the Public Services Director or their designee. An entry fee of
$1.00 will be paid to the pay station for non-event day parking at the East River’s Edge
Parking Ramp, with a maximum time of 24 hours.
Subd. 8. Attendant Parking Facilities.
• Centre Square Parking Ramp – 40 cents per 1/2 hour or fraction thereof.
• Paramount Ramp – 40 cents per ½ hour or fraction thereof.
• Grand Central Ramp – 40 cents per ½ hour or fraction thereof.
• West River’s Edge Ramp – 40 cents per ½ hour or fraction thereof.
• Pre-Programmed Paramount Ramp Access Card – 45 cents per hour.
• Maximum Daily Charge: The maximum daily charge (MDC) for parking in an attendant
parking facility during the normal/posted hours of operation shall be $8.00. Parking
patrons who lose their parking ticket shall be charged at the MDC rate. The MDC shall
not apply during Event Parking or other parking operations when an entry fee is
charged.
• The Public Services Director or their designee may implement a maximum charge of
$2.00 for parking in any attendant parking facility after 6:00 p.m. When implemented,
this fee shall be valid between 6:00 p.m. and the time that the ramp is scheduled to open
the following morning.
Subd. 9. Permit Lot Locations.
Reserved Permits:
• Judicial Lot
“A” Permits:
• Canoe Lot
• Lady Slipper Lot
• Library Lot
• Judicial Lot
• Railway Lot
• Plaza Lot
• Cloverleaf Lot
• Swan Lot
“C” Permits:
• River’s Edge Lot
• Mathew Hall Lot
Subd. 10. Resident Parking Permits – Annual Payment plus all applicable Sales Taxes.
All resident parking permits will be $11.96 per permit issued per year.
Subd. 11. Day Pass Permits. All Day Pass Permits will be $2.00 per day plus all
applicable Sales Taxes.
Subd. 12. SCSU Area Parking District – Annual Payments plus all applicable Sales
Taxes. Parking permits within the St. Cloud State University Parking District will be
valid for the period of time commencing on July 1st and running through June 30th of the
following year. Permit fees for parking within the SCSU Parking District will be as
follows:
“E” Permit $329.69
“G” Permit $329.69
Residential Permit $11.96
Subd. 13. Traffic Parking Violations.
Expired Meter $10.00 per violation for up to five
violations. $15.00 per violation thereafter.
Improper Position $10.00 per violation for up to five
violations. $15.00 per violation thereafter.
Fire Hydrant $25.00.
Handicapped $200.00.
All Other Parking Violations $20.00
Subd. 14. Late Fee Penalties. A $5.00 penalty in addition to the initial fee will be
assessed to all parking violations which remain unpaid after seven calendar days.
History: Ord. 2373 9-10-07; Ord. 2403 & 2404 8-18-08; Ord. 2418 12-29-08; Ord. 2009-17 10-26-09; Ord.
2687 11-14-16; Ord. 2739 2-12-18
Section 589 – Public Works Fees
Subd. 1. SNOW, ICE AND DEBRIS REMOVAL. The fees for the removal of snow and ice,
dirt, debris or weeks from the public sidewalk pursuant to Section 680 will be as follows:
Administrative/inspection fee ...............................................................................$75.00
Removal charge ..................................................................................... $85.00 per hour
Minimum fee: one hour removal cost plus administrative/inspection fee.
Contractor fee: In the case that a contractor is hired for the removal, the fee that is
charged by the Contractor plus Administrative/inspection fee and all applicable taxes will
be passed on the property owner.
Certification fee: A $50.00 charge will be added to all accounts certified to the County
Auditor’s office for collection. This fee is to be considered separate and distinct from
any penalty or interest that may be charged by the County as a result of the certification.
History: Ord. 2407 9-22-08.
CHAPTER VI.
Section 600 - Streets, Sidewalks and Alleys
Section 600:00. Definitions.
Subd. 1. Roadway. The roadway is that portion of a street improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular traffic.
Subd. 2. Sidewalk. The sidewalk is that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
Subd. 3. Boulevard. Boulevard is that portion of a street normally lying between the
sidewalk and the curb, if there be a curb, and, if there be no curb, then the nearest lateral
line of a roadway.
Subd. 4. Street. A street is the entire width between property lines of every way or place
of whatever nature whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway,
throughway, road, avenue, alley, boulevard, land, place, or however designated, which
has been dedicated for pedestrian or vehicular travel.
Subd. 5. Vehicle. A vehicle is a device in, upon, or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a street, except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
Section 600:05. Unlawful Acts. It will be unlawful for any person to do, perform, or cause to be
performed any of the following acts or cause any of the following conditions:
Subd. 1. To drive, lead or leave any animal other than a dog, cat or other house animal;
to drive or leave any vehicle or machinery; to throw or leave any junk material or any
objects likely to cause injury or damage to persons or property, upon any boulevard;
Subd. 2. Molesting Unfinished Street Improvements. To walk upon, drive on, ride over
or across or otherwise molest any pavement, sidewalk, or other work improvement in any
street that is in the course of construction and before the same is open for public travel;
Subd. 3. Bill Posting. To place or cause to be placed any bills, advertisements, posters,
signs, notices or advertising matter of any kind on any tree, telephone, or light pole, post
or fixture in the streets or public ways of the City, or to place or post any such bills,
advertisements, or posters on any building, fence, or property adjacent to such streets or
public places, without the consent of the owner or person in control of such buildings or
property; provided that such bills or advertisements may be removed by any officer of the
City or the owner of such property without notice to the person posting or placing such
bills or advertisements.
Subd. 4. Barb Wire Fences; Iron Points. To place or maintain any barbed wire or other
sharp metal points on any railing, fence, pole or posts in any street, alley, or sidewalk in
the City; provided that each day's refusal or neglect to remove any such wire or metal
points after written notice will constitute a separate offense and be punishable as a
violation of this ordinance;
Subd. 5. Burning in Street. To accumulate or burn leaves, trash, or other combustibles in
or upon any street in the City;
Subd. 6. Petroleum Products in Streets. To deposit or throw any waste, oil, fuel oil,
kerosene, gasoline or other petroleum products or acids into or upon any street of the
City, or willfully permit the same to be spilled, dripped, or otherwise to come into contact
with the surface of any street of the City;
Subd. 7. Hauling Building Materials. To haul or transport any sand, dirt, rock, or other
like building materials in any vehicle so loaded that such materials may escape or spill
onto the streets of the City;
Subd. 8. Injury to Street Property or Fixtures. To willfully cut, break, or remove, or in
any manner to displace any curbing, guttering, street crossing marking, or interfere or
change the grade or drainage thereof or to tear down or remove any street, parking or
informational sign or fixture maintained by lawful authority, or to deface or remove any
grade mark, stake, or other grade point or location in the City;
Subd. 9. Placing Snow and Ice Upon Streets. To place, push, haul, or plow any snow or
ice from any private property upon any street in the City;
Subd. 10. Advertising, Washing, Greasing, Etc. To park upon any street any vehicle
displayed for the primary purpose of sale, or to wash, grease, or repair such vehicle,
except for making temporary repairs necessitated by an emergency;
Subd. 11. Advertising, Primary Purpose. To operate or to park on any street any vehicle
for the primary purpose of displaying advertising;
Subd. 12. Intoxicating Beverages. No persons on a street, sidewalk, or municipal
parking area will consume or dispense any alcoholic beverage including 3.2 beer or
possess open containers of any alcoholic beverage including 3.2 beer. The area of a
seasonal sidewalk cafe licensed under the provisions of Section 810:05, Subd. 8 is
exempt from the application of this Subd. 15.
Section 600:15. Illegal Obstructions. No person will encumber or obstruct any sidewalk, lane,
alley, street, public ground, or other public place by any means.
Section 600:25. Remove Earth, etc. from City Streets. No person will dig, remove carry away
or cause the same to be done, any stone, earth, sand or gravel from any street, lane, alley or
public ground within the City of St. Cloud.
Section 600:30. Parking Limitations for Repairs. No person will allow a vehicle, for the
purpose of repairs, to remain or stand in any street, lane, or alley for more than three hours.
Section 600:35. Ditching in Streets. No person will make any drain ditch or bridge across any
street, lane, alley or public ground in said City.
Section 600:40. Building on Public Grounds. No person will build or place any building or
other structure in whole or in part upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public grounds within
the City except as specifically allowed herein.
(a) When any person is the owner of real property on both sides of an alley in the City
upon which there are buildings, the person may be permitted to connect the buildings
by an underground passage or an overhead structure under or across said alley.
(b) Installation of bus shelters by and for the St. Cloud Metropolitan Transit Commission
on the public right of ways may be permitted.
(c) No such permit, will be granted except upon application in writing to the Council
describing the property affected and accompanied with plans and specifications for
the structure which the applicant proposes to construct. If such plans and
specifications provide for a structure which will not interfere with the use of any
public street, alley, sidewalk or other public ground by the public and which will fully
protect the public when using said public grounds against accident or injury, a permit
to build said structure may be granted by the Council. All permits granted will be
upon the express conditions that the structure will not be used until it is approved
and accepted in writing by the City Engineer and upon the further express conditions
that the structure will be maintained at all times so as to fully protect the public when
using the public grounds against accident or injury. In the case of accident or injury
to any user of the public grounds, the applicant will indemnify and hold harmless the
City in all respects.
Section 600:45. Obstructions on Sidewalks.
Subd. 1. No person will at any time place or cause to be placed any goods, wares, or
merchandise so the same will lie or project over or upon any sidewalk within said
City.
Subd. 2. No person will pile, deposit or place or cause to be or permit to be deposited,
piled, or placed any rubbish, wood, coal, dirt, impediment, or obstruction of any kind
upon or over any sidewalk or crossing or otherwise occupy or obstruct any sidewalk or
crossing.
Subd. 3. No person or persons receiving or delivering goods, wares or merchandise will
place or keep upon or cause or permit to be placed or kept upon any sidewalk any of the
merchandise or goods being received or delivered, without leaving a passageway clear
upon such sidewalk of at least four feet in width for the use of foot passengers and none
of such goods, or merchandise or the containers in which they were received will in any
event remain upon the sidewalk more than four hours; and none of the same will remain
thereon during any of the time between six o'clock in the afternoon of any day and seven
o'clock in the morning of the following day.
Subd. 4. No person will sell or attempt to sell or cry for sale at public auction any goods
or property whatever to any person or persons upon the sidewalk or streets within said
City so as to collect a crowd upon the sidewalks or streets whereby the free passage to
any person is prevented or hindered.
Subd.5. Obstructing Sidewalk with Personal Property. To place or store or to allow to
be placed or stored on any sidewalk of the City any implements, tools, merchandise,
goods, crates, vending machines, newspaper racks, showcases, or other articles
obstructing such sidewalks any longer than is reasonably necessary for the loading or
unloading of the same by the occupants of the buildings adjacent thereto or their
employees or agents. Any obstruction may be summarily removed by any officer of the
City without notice;
Section 600:60. Filling Dams, Ditches or Sewers. No person will fill up, dam, or obstruct any
ditch, drain, or sewer within the City of St. Cloud and will not in any manner obstruct or hinder
the full course of water.
Section 600:65. Injury to Streets and Appurtenances Thereto. No person will in any manner
willfully injure or deface any sidewalk, curb, gutter, pavement, crosswalk, street surface, street
sign, street lamp, street lamp hose or house number in the City, or any pole or post erected or
being in any of the streets of the City pursuant to any of the ordinances of the City, or any of the
poles, wires or boxes or apparatus of the fire alarm system of the City, or any property of any
kind whatsoever belonging to the City.
Section 601 - Restrictions upon Street Construction
Residential Zones
601:00 Definitions
Subd. 1. Bicycle Lane. "Bicycle Lane" means that portion of a roadway set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles or other appropriate signs and markings.
Subd. 2. Motor Vehicle. "Motor Vehicle" means every vehicle which is self-propelled
and not moved solely by human power; and includes motorized bicycles as
defined by Minnesota Statutes Section 169.01, subd. 4(a).
601.05 Street Construction
Subd.1. Restriction. No street will be constructed or physically developed to carry more
than two lanes of motorized vehicle traffic along those portions of said street within a
residential neighborhood.
Subd.2. Exceptions. The citizens of the City of St. Cloud may, by a majority of those
voting at a regular or special election, authorize the City Council to construct a specific
street or streets to permit more than two lanes of motorized traffic.
Section 601.10. Bicycle Lanes; Motor Vehicles Prohibited.
Subd.1. Designation of Bicycle Lanes. The following portions of roadway within the
City limits of the City of St Cloud are hereby designated as bicycle lanes.
(a) Veterans Drive/8th Street North from 44th Avenue North to 54th Avenue
North, adjacent to both northernmost westbound and the southernmost
eastbound traffic lanes.
(b) 2nd Street South from 33rd Avenue South to 25th Avenue South, adjacent to
both the northernmost westbound and the southernmost eastbound traffic
lanes.
(c) Clearwater Road from 11th Street South to 33rd Street South, adjacent to
both the northbound and southbound traffic lanes.
(d) That portion of 10th Street South, the University Bridge and Michigan
Avenue Southeast lying between 5th Avenue South and Kilian Boulevard
and adjacent to both the northernmost westbound and the southernmost
eastbound traffic lanes.
(e) Cooper Avenue South from Traverse Road to 33rd Street South, adjacent
to both the northbound and southbound traffic lanes.
(f) Traverse Road from Cooper Avenue South to Roosevelt Road, adjacent to
the both the eastbound and westbound traffic lanes.
(g) Main Prairie Road from 25th Avenue South to Quarry Road, adjacent to
both the northbound and southbound traffic lanes.
(h) Oak Grove Road from Main Prairie Road to 22nd Street South, adjacent to
both the eastbound and westbound traffic lanes.
Subd. 2. Prohibition. No person will drive, park, or operate a motor vehicle on a bicycle
lane within the City of St. Cloud.
Subd. 3. Exceptions. The prohibition contained in this section will not apply to drivers
of the following:
(a) Authorized emergency vehicles as defined by Minnesota Statutes, Section
169.01, subd. 5.
(b) Motor vehicles making right-hand turns pursuant to Minnesota Statutes,
Section 169.19, subd. 1(7).
(c) Motor vehicles used by the United States Postal Service in the delivery of
mail.
(d) City of St. Cloud street maintenance vehicles.
(e) City of St. Cloud refuse collection vehicles.
(f) Motor vehicles owned by any public utility while being used for business of
that utility.
(g) Motor vehicles operated solely for public mass transportation.
(h) Self-propelled wheelchair
(i) Scooters as defined in M.S. §169.225
(j) Electric Assisted Bicycle as defined in M.S. §169.223
Section 602-5th Avenue Development
Section 602:00. 5th Avenue Development. 5th Avenue may not be constructed or physically
developed to carry more than three lanes of motorized vehicle traffic along those portions of
said street from 1st Street North to 1st Street South and from TH 23 to the southernmost extent
of the C4 zoning district boundary. Criminal penalties will not be imposed for violations(s) of
this provision.
Section 605 - Right-of-Way Management
Section 605:00. Findings, Purpose, and Intent.
To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, and to ensure the integrity of its
streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a
state of good repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances.
The city hereby enacts this section of this code relating to right-of-way permits and
administration. This section imposes reasonable regulation on the placement and maintenance of
facilities and equipment currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future
time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies. Under this
section, persons excavating and obstructing the rights-of-way will bear financial responsibility
for their work. Finally, this section provides for recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs
from persons using the public rights-of-way.
Section 605:02. Election to Manage the Public Rights-of-Way
Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal statutory,
administrative and common law, the city elects pursuant Minn. Stat. 237.163 subd. 2(b),
to manage rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.
Section 605:03. Definitions.
Subd. 1. “Abandoned Facility” means a facility no longer in service or physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other facility,
that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not abandoned unless declared so
by the right-of-way user.
Subd. 2. “Annual Right-of-Way Obstruction Permit” means the permit which,
pursuant to this section, must be obtained annually allowing the holder to maintain
overhead facilities in the right-of-way. No excavation or hand digging will be
allowed under this permit.
Subd. 3. “Applicant” means any person requesting permission to excavate or
obstruct a right-of-way.
Subd. 4. “Business District” means that portion of the City lying within and bounded by
the following: Bounded on the south by State Highway 23, bounded on the west by 11th
Avenue, bounded on the north by the BNSF railway and bounded on the east by the
Mississippi.
Subd. 5. “Commission” means the State Public Utilities Commission.
Subd. 6. “Congested Right-of-Way” means a crowded condition in the subsurface
of the public right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between
existing underground facilities does not allow for construction of new underground
facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing lateral facilities in
conformance with Minnesota Statutes, section 216D.04., over a continuous length
in excess of 500 feet.
Subd. 7. “Construction Performance Bond” means any of the following forms of
security provided at permit holder’s option:
a. Individual project bond;
b. Cash deposit;
c. Security of a form listed or approved under Minn. Stat. Sec. 15.73, subd.
3;
d. Letter of Credit, in a form acceptable to the city
e. Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city
f. A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other form of construction
bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to the city.
Subd. 8. “Culvert” means a structure that allows water to continually flow under a
road, trail, driveway or similar obstruction from one side to the other. A right-ofway
permit is required to construct a culvert in the right-of-way.
Subd. 9. “Degradation” means a decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way
caused by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation or
disturbance did not occur.
Subd. 10. “Degradation Cost” subject to Minnesota Rules 7819.1100 means the
cost to achieve a level of restoration as determined by the city at the time the
permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to 13,
set forth in Minnesota Rules parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.
Subd. 11. “Degradation Fee” means the estimated fee established at the time of
permitting by the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful
life of the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation
cost.
Subd. 12. “Department” means the Engineering Department of the city.
Subd. 13. “Department Inspector” means any person authorized by the city to carry
out inspections related to the provisions of this section.
Subd. 14. “Director” means the City Engineer of the city, or her or his designee
Subd. 15. “Delay Penalty” is the penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable
delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as
established by permit.
Subd. 16. “Emergency” means a condition that (1) poses a danger to life or health
or of a significant loss of property; or (2) requires immediate repair or replacement
of facilities in order to restore service to a customer.
Subd. 17. “Equipment” means any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain
facilities in any right-of-way.
Subd. 18. “Excavate” means to dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb
or penetrate any part of a right-of-way.
Subd. 19. “Excavation permit,” means the permit which, pursuant to this section,
must be obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An Excavation
permit allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such
permit.
Subd. 20. “Excavation permit fee” means money paid to the city by an applicant to
cover the costs as provided in Section 605:11.
Subd. 21. “Facility or Facilities” means any tangible asset in the right-of-way
required to provide Utility Service.
Subd. 22. “Five-year project plan” shows projects adopted by the city for
construction within the next five years.
Subd. 23. “High Density Corridor” means a designated portion of the public rightof-
way within which telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and
competing facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a common
conduit system or other common structure.
Subd. 24. “Hole” means an excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having
a length less than the width of the pavement.
Subd. 25. “Local Representative” means a local person or persons, or designee of
such person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make
decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this section.
Subd. 26. “Management Costs” means the actual costs the city incurs in managing
its rights-of-Way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with
registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way permit
applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects; maintaining, supporting,
protecting, or moving user facilities during right-of-way work; determining the
adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work inadequately performed after
providing notice and the opportunity to correct the work; and revoking right-ofway
permits. Management costs do not include payment by a telecommunications
right-of-way User for the use of the right-of-way, the fees and cost of litigation
relating to the interpretation of Minnesota Statutes Sections 237.162 or 237.163 or
any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the city fees and costs related to
appeals taken pursuant to subsection 605:29 of this section.
Subd. 27. “Obstruct” means to place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to
hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
Subd. 28. “Obstruction Permit” means the permit which, pursuant to this section,
must be obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder
to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that right-of-way, for
the duration specified therein.
Subd. 29. “Obstruction Permit Fee” means money paid to the city by a permit
holder to cover the costs as provided in Section 605:11.
Subd. 30. “Patch or Patching” means a method of pavement replacement that is
temporary in nature. A patch consists of (1) the compaction of the subbase and
aggregate base, and (2) the replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a
minimum of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions. A patch
is considered full restoration only when the pavement is included in the city’s fiveyear
project plan.
Subd. 31. “Pavement” means any type of improved surface that is within the public
right-of-way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete,
aggregate, or gravel.
Subd. 32. “Permit” has the meaning given “right-of-way permit” in Minnesota
Statutes, section 237.162.
Subd. 33. “Permit holder” means any person to whom a permit to excavate or
obstruct a right-of-way has been granted by the city under this section.
Subd. 34. “Registrant” means any person who (1) has or seeks to have its
equipment or facilities located in any right-of-way, or (2) in any way occupies or
uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or place its facilities or equipment
in the right-of-way. Water pipes, sanitary sewer pipes and appurtenances thereto
installed for the purpose of connection to the City water or sewer services are not
required to be registered pursuant to this Section.
Subd. 35. “Restore or Restoration” means the process by which an excavated rightof-
way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the
same condition that existed before excavation.
Subd. 36. “Restoration Cost” means the amount of money paid to the city by a
permit holder to achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of
Minnesota public Utilities Commission rules.
Subd. 37. “Public Right-of-Way “means the area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, cart way, bicycle lane and public sidewalk in which the
city has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and
utility easements of the city. A right-of-way does not include the airwaves above a
right-of-way with regard to cellular or other nonwire telecommunications or
broadcast service
Subd. 38. “Right-of-Way Permit” means either the excavation permit or the
obstruction permit, the annual obstruction permit, or all three, depending on the
context, required by this section.
Subd. 39. “Right-of-Way User” means (1) a telecommunications right-of-way user
as defined by Minnesota Statutes, section 237.162, subd. 4; or (2) a person owning
or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that is used or intended to be used for
providing utility service, and who has a right under law, franchise, or ordinance to
use the public right-of-way.
Subd. 40. “Service or Utility Service” includes (1) those services provided by a
public utility as defined in Minn. Stat. 216B.02, subds. 4 and 6; (2) services of a
telecommunications right-of-way user, including transporting of voice or data
information; (3) services of a cable communications systems as defined in Minn.
Stat. Chapter. 238; (4) natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications
services provided by the city; (5) services provided by a cooperative electric
association organized under Minn. Stat., Chapter 308A; and (6) water, sewer,
steam, cooling or heating services.
Subd. 41. “Supplementary Application” means an application made to excavate or
obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had
already been issued.
Subd. 42. “Temporary Surface” means the compaction of subbase and aggregate
base and replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of pavement
included in the city’s two-year plan, in which case it is considered full restoration.
Subd. 43. “Trench” means an excavation in the right-of-way, with the excavation
having a length equal to or greater than the width of the pavement, includes all
various forms of trenchless methods.
Subd. 44. “Telecommunication right-of-way User” means a person owning or
controlling a facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a Facility in
the right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be used for transporting
telecommunication or other voice or data information. For purposes of this section,
a cable communication system defined and regulated under Minn. Stat. Chap. 238,
and telecommunication activities related to providing natural gas or electric energy
services whether provided by a public utility as defined in Minn. Stat. Sec.
216B.02, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency organized under Minn.
Stat. Chaps. 453A, or a cooperative electric association organized under Minn.
Stat. Chap. 308A, are not telecommunications right-of-way users for purposes of
this section.
Subd. 45. “Two Year project Plan” shows projects adopted by the city for
construction within the next two years.
Subsection 605:04. Administration.
The director is the principal city official responsible for the administration of the rightsof-
way and right-of-way permits. The director may delegate any or all of the duties under
this section.
Section 605:05. Registration and Right-of-Way Occupancy.
Subd. 1. Registration. Each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the
right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in or on the right-of-way, including
persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by lease, sublease or
assignment, must register with the city. Registration will consist of providing application
information and paying a registration fee.
Subd. 2. Registration Prior to Work. No person may construct, install, repair, remove,
relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any facilities in any right-of-way without
first being registered with the city.
Subd. 3. Exceptions. Nothing in this section will be construed to repeal or amend the
provisions of a city ordinance permitting persons to plant or maintain boulevard plantings
or gardens in the area of the right-of-way between their property and the street curb.
Persons planting or maintaining boulevard plantings or gardens will not be deemed to use
or occupy the right-of-way, and will not be required to obtain any permits or satisfy any
other requirements for planting or maintaining such boulevard plantings or gardens under
this section. However, nothing relieves a person from complying with the provisions of
the Minn. Stat. Chap. 216D, Gopher One Call Law. Any service or utility service
provided by a person under franchise with the city will register pursuant to this section,
but need not provide the registration information required by Section 605:06 if such
information has been received by the city in the administration of the franchise
agreement.
Section 605:06. Registration Information.
Subd. 1. Information Required. The information provided to the city at the time of
registration will include, but not be limited to:
(a) Each registrant's name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate number, address
and e-mail address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers.
(b) The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers of a local representative. The local representative or designee will be
available at all times. Current information regarding how to contact the local
representative in an emergency will be provided at the time of registration.
(c) A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
(1) Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the registrant by an
insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Minnesota, or a
form of self insurance acceptable to the city;
(2) Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for personal injury,
including death, as well as claims for property damage arising out of the (i)
use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents,
employees and permit holders, and (ii) placement and use of facilities and
equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents,
employees and permit holders, including, but not limited to, protection
against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground
facilities and collapse of property;
(3) Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the coverages
required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be
provided as to all such coverages;
(4) Requiring that the city be notified 30 days in advance of cancellation of
the policy or material modification of a coverage term;
(5) Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability
coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage established by the
city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to carry out
the purposes and policies of this section.
(d) The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies.
(e) If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate required to be filed under
Minn. Stat. 300.06 as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State.
(f) A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority from the
Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or federal agency,
where the person is lawfully required to have such certificate from the permission or
other state or federal agency.
Subd. 2. Notice of Changes. The registrant will keep all of the information listed above
current at all times by providing to the city information as to changes within fifteen (15)
days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge of any change.
Section 605:07. Reporting Obligations.
Subd. 1. Operations. Each registrant will, at the time of registration and by December 1
of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan for underground facilities
with the city. Such plan will be submitted using a format designated by the city and will
contain the information determined by the city to be necessary to facilitate the
coordination and reduction in the frequency of excavations and obstructions of rights-ofway.
The plan will includes, but not be limited to, the following information:
(a) The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of all projects to be
commenced during the next calendar year (in this section, a “next-year project”);
and
(b) To the extent known, the tentative locations and estimated beginning and ending
dates for all projects contemplated for the five years following the next calendar
year (in this section, a “five-year project”).
Subd. 2. Project Lists. The term “project” in this section will include both next-year
projects and five-year projects.
(a) By January 1 of each year the city will have available for inspection in the city’s
office a list of all projects of which the city has been informed of the annual plans.
All registrants are responsible for keeping themselves informed of the current status
of this list.
(b) Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change any project in its list of
next-year projects, and must notify the city and all other registrants of all such
changes in said list. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a registrant may at any time join
in a Next-year project of another registrant listed by the other registrant.
Subd 3. Additional Next-Year Projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city will not
deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure to include a project in a plan
submitted to the city if the registrant has used commercially reasonable efforts to
anticipate and plan for the project.
Section 605:08. Permit Requirement.
Subd. 1. Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person may obstruct or
excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained the appropriate right-of-way permit
from the city to do so.
(a) Excavation Permit. An excavation permit is required by a registrant to excavate any part
of a right-of-way and to hinder free and open passage of the right-of-way. The permit will
describe the right-of-way affected, the facilities used and expected duration of the
excavation.
(b) Obstruction Permit. An obstruction permit is required by a registrant to hinder the free
and open passage of a right-of-way. The permit will described the right-of-way. The
equipment used and the extent and duration of the obstruction. An obstruction permit is not
required if a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project.
(c) Annual Obstruction Permit. An annual obstruction permit is required to allow the holder
to maintain overhead facilities in the right-of-way. No excavating or hand digging will be
allowed under this permit.
Subd. 2. Permit Extensions. No person may excavate obstruct the right-of-way beyond the date
or dates specified in the permit unless (i) the person makes a supplementary application for
another right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit, and (ii) a new permit or
permit extension is granted.
Subd. 3. Delay Penalty. In accordance with Minnesota Rule 7819.1000 subd. 3 and
notwithstanding subd. 2 of this Section, the city will establish and impose a delay penalty for
unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration. The delay
penalty will be established from time to time by city council resolution.
Subd. 4. Permit Display. Permits issued under this section will be conspicuously displayed or
otherwise available at all times at the work site and will be available for inspection by the city.
Section 605:09. Permit Applications.
Application for a permit is made to the city. Right-of-way permit applications will contain, and
will be considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the following
provisions:
Subd. 1. Registration with the city pursuant to this section;
Subd. 2. Submission of a completed permit application form, including all required
attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project and
the location of all known existing and proposed facilities.
Subd. 3. Payment of money due the city for:
(a) permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management costs;
(b) prior obstructions or excavations;
(c) any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city because of
applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way or any emergency
actions taken by the city;
(d) franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.
Subd.4. Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for additional
facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to install additional facilities and
the city deems the existing construction performance bond inadequate under applicable
standards.
Subd. 5. Submitting a Gas Safety Plan with all permit applications that contemplate
excavations within the right-of-way in areas designated as containing critical facilities on
the City’s critical facilities map. A critical facilities map will be established from time to
time by the Director.
(a) The development of a Gas Safety Plan will be initiated by a Right-of-Way
Application request to excavate in a critical area, designated as such on the Critical
Natural Gas Facilities Map. The applicant will contact the Natural Gas Facilities
operator to schedule a Gas Safety Plan development meeting. At this meeting the
following safety factors will be considered when developing a Gas Safety Plan for a
specific excavation project.
(1) Size, diameter, and material type of natural gas pipeline.
(2) Pressure of natural gas pipeline.
(3) Distance from pipeline to buildings or hard surfaces.
(4) Type of equipment used for excavation.
(5) Length and duration of project.
(6) Impact of pipeline shutdown.
(7) Proximity of proposed construction, horizontally and vertically
(8) Running line of proposed construction, parallel or perpendicular to pipeline.
(9) Surface conditions over pipeline, i.e. hard surface, soft surface.
(10) Pipeline locatability.
(11) Consideration of frost cap and other weather conditions as they relate to
migrating gas.
(b) The Gas Safety Plan will include the following elements:
(1) Excavator locating the area of construction in accordance with Minnesota
Statutes Section 216D.
(2) Exposing of gas lines as required by Minnesota Statutes Section 216D.
(3) Pothole by hand, vacuum excavation or other approved method, all
pipeline crossing locations for directional drilling or boring.
(4) Pothole by hand, vacuum excavation or other approved method, every 50
feet or less to expose the gas pipeline for parallel directional boring, 2 feet on
each side of the pipe.
(5) Directional drilling or pneumatic boring away from gas pipelines instead
of toward them unless prohibited by site conditions.
(6) Hand digging 2 feet on each side of a gas mains and services when
crossing or paralleling it.
(7) Notification of utility operator when as-found location of the gas pipeline
is different then originally indicated.
(8) Excavators providing competent inspection of their work by an employee
qualified and trained under an Excavator Safety Training program approved
by the City. The employee must be identified and be on site during all times
when excavation work is being performed.
(9) Determination of the most effective method to isolate the system and
minimize hazard in the event of an emergency together with the means to
implement that method.
(10) Completion of a Gas Safety Plan check off sheet which will be submitted
with the permit application.
(c) In consideration of the safety factors listed above and in light of the scope of the
project and proximity to gas facilities, the Gas Safety Plan may also be required to
include any of the following:
(1) Job site meets involving all parties involved in the project, including utilities,
to plan the work.
(2) Engineering a safety zone for system shutdown in the event of a gas line hit,
to include if necessary excavations for system squeeze offs, or valve installation.
(3) Redundant locates by excavators prior to the work commencing.
(4) Inspection by qualified gas safety inspectors as needed.
(5) Gas personnel standing by with squeeze off tools or at valve locations.
(d) An Excavator Safety Training Program will include the following elements:
(1) State, federal and local laws and ordinances, policies and procedures as they
relate to excavation.
(2) Policies and procedures of the local natural gas utility provider as they relate
to excavation, safety, and emergency response.
(3) The properties and principles of natural gas.
(4) State “One Call” requirements.
(5) Gas system shutdown procedures.
(6) Verification of attendance and successful completion.
(7) Annual certification of trainees.
An Excavator Safety Training Program submitted to the City for approval will be
reviewed by the Director. The Director will maintain a list of approved programs.
Section 605:10. Issuance of Permit; Conditions.
Subd. 1. Permit Issuance. If the Applicant has satisfied the requirements of this section, the
city will issue a permit.
Subd. 2. Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the
permit and upon the applicants performance under the permit to protect the health, safety and
welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use.
Section 605:11. Permit Fees.
Subd. 1. Excavation Permit Fee. The city will establish an Excavation permit fee in an amount
sufficient to recover the following costs:
(a) the city management costs;
(b) degradation costs, if applicable.
Subd. 2. Obstruction Permit Fee. The city will establish the obstruction permit fee which will
be in an amount sufficient to recover the city management costs.
Subd. 3. Payment of Permit Fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit will be issued
without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The city may allow Applicant to pay
such fees within thirty (30) days of billing.
Subd. 4. Non Refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city has revoked for a
breach as stated in subsection 605:21 are not refundable.
Subd. 5. Application to Franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise, management
costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the franchise fees imposed on a rightof-
way user in the franchise.
Subd. 6. Rates for Permit Fees. The rates for all right-of-way permit fees will be set forth in
section 565:00 of this code.
Section 605:12. Right-of-Way Patching and Restoration.
Subd. 1. Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the patching and
restoration of the right-of-way as required by this section, must be completed within the dates
specified in the permit, increased by as many days as work could not be done because of
circumstances beyond the control of the permit holder or when work was prohibited as
unseasonal or unreasonable under Section 605:15.
Subd. 2. Patch and Restoration. Permit holder will patch its own work. The city may choose
either to have the permit holder restore the right-of-way or to restore the right-of-way itself.
(a) City Restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way, the permit holder will pay the
costs of restoration within 30days of billing. If, following the Restoration, the pavement
settles due to the permit holder's improper backfilling, the permit holder will pay to the
city, all costs associated with correcting the defective work, within thirty (30) days of
billing.
(b) Permit holder Restoration. If the permit holder restores the right-of-way itself, it will
at the time of application for an Excavation permit post a construction performance bond
in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7819.3000.
(c) Degradation fee in Lieu of Restoration. In lieu of right-of-way restoration, a right-ofway
user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However, the right-of-way user will remain
responsible for patching and the degradation fee will not include the cost to accomplish
these responsibilities.
Subd. 3. Standards. The permit holder will perform excavation, backfilling, patching and
restoration according to the standards and with the materials specified by the city and will
comply with Minnesota Rule 7819.1100.
Subd. 4. Duty to Correct Defects. The permit holder will correct defects in patching, or
restoration performed by permit holder or its agents. The permit holder upon notification from
the city, will correct all restoration work to the extent necessary, the methods required by the
city. The work will be completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the
city, not including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances
constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable
under Section 1.16.
Subd. 5. Failure to Restore. If the permit holder has elected to restore the right-of-way and
fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails
to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the city, the city at its option
may do the restoration work. In that event the permit holder will pay to the city the cost of
restoring the right-of-way within 30 days of billing, If permit holder fails to pay as required, the
city may exercise its rights under the construction performance bond.
Section 605:13. Joint Applications.
Subd. 1. Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to excavate or obstruct the
right-of-way at the same place and time.
Subd. 2. Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same obstruction or excavation,
which the city does not perform, may share in the payment of the obstruction or excavation
permit fee. In order to obtain a joint permit, registrants must agree among themselves as to the
portion each will pay and indicate the same on their applications.
Subd. 3. With city projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction or excavation
performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint application by two or more registrants or a
single application, are not required to pay the excavation or obstruction and degradation
portions of the permit fee, but a permit would still be required.
Section 605:14. Supplementary Applications.
Subd. 1. Limitation on Area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the right-ofway
specified in the permit. No permit holder may do any work outside the area specified in
the permit, except as provided in this section. Any permit holder who determines that an area
greater than that specified in the permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in
that greater area (i) make application for a permit extension, and (ii) pay any additional fees
required, and (iii) be granted a new permit or permit extension.
Subd. 2. Limitation on Dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates specified in the
permit. No permit holder may begin its work before the permit start date or, except as provided
by this section continue working after the end date. If a permit holder does not finish the work
by the permit end date, it must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and
receive the new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the
previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before the permit end date.
Section 605:15. Other Obligations.
Subd. 1. Compliance with Other Laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not relieve permit
holder of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and to pay all fees
required by the city or other applicable rule, law or regulation. A permit holder will comply
with all requirements of local, state and federal laws, including Minn. Stat. Chapter 216D.
(Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System). A permit holder will perform all work in
conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible
for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work.
Subd. 2. Prohibited Work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the city, no rightof-
way Obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally prohibited or when conditions
are unreasonable for such work.
Subd. 3. Interference with Right-of-Way. A permit holder will not so obstruct a right-of-way
that the natural, free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways are
interfered with. The private vehicles of those doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked
within or next to the permit area, unless parked in conformance with city parking regulations.
The loading or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area unless
specifically authorized by the permit.
Section 605:16. Denial of Permit.
The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and conditions of this section or
if the city determines that the denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or
when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use.
Section 605:17. Inspection.
Subd. 1. Notice of Completion. When the work under a permit is completed, the permit holder
will furnish a Completion Certificate in accordance Minnesota Rule 7819.1300.
Subd. 2. Site Inspection. The permit holder will make the work-site available to the city and to
all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and
upon completion of the work.
Subd 3. Authority of Director.
(a) At the time of inspection the director may order the immediate cessation of any work
which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety or well being of the public.
(b) The director may issue an order to the permit holder for any work that does not
conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards, conditions, or codes.
The order will state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the
permit. Within ten (10) days after issuance of the order, the permit holder will present
proof to the director that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been
presented within the required time, the director may revoke the permit pursuant to Sec.
1.22.
Section 605:18. Work Done Without a Permit.
Subd. 1. Emergency Situations. Each registrant will immediately notify the director of any
event regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency. The registrant may proceed to
take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. Within two business days
after the occurrence of the emergency the registrant will apply for the necessary permits, pay the
associated fees and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance
with this section for the actions it took in response to the Emergency.
If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's facilities, the city will
attempt to contact the local representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by
the emergency. In any event, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond
to the emergency, the cost of which will be borne by the registrant whose facilities occasioned
the emergency.
Subd. 2. Non-Emergency Situations. Except in an emergency, any person who, without first
having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a right-of-way must subsequently
obtain a permit, and as a penalty pay double the normal fee for the permit, pay double all the
other fees required by the city code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any
damage to the right-of-way and comply with all of the requirements of this section.
Subsection 605:19. Supplementary Notification.
If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the date
given on the permit, permit holder will notify the city of the accurate information as soon as this
information is known.
Subsection 605:20. Revocation of Permits.
Subd. 1. Substantial Breach. The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke any
right-of-way permit, without a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach of the terms and
conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit.
A substantial breach by permit holder include, but will not be limited to, the following:
(a) The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
(b) An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-of-way permit, or
the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;
(c) Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right-of-way permit;
(d) The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; unless a permit extension is
obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons beyond the permit
holder’s control; or
(e) The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not conform to a condition
indicated on an order issued pursuant to Section 605.17.
Subd. 2. Written Notice of Breach. If the city determines that the permit holder has committed
a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or any
condition of the permit the city will make a written demand upon the permit holder to remedy
such violation. The will state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the
permit. A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city to place additional or revised
conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the breach.
Subd. 3. Response to Notice of Breach. Within a time period established within a written
notification of breach received from the city, the permit holder will provide the city with a plan
acceptable to the director that will cure the breach. The permit holder's failure to contact the
city, the permit holder's failure to timely submit an acceptable plan, or permit holder’s failure to
reasonably implement the approved plan, will be cause for immediate revocation of the permit.
Subd. 4. Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permit holder will reimburse the city
for the city's reasonable costs, including restoration costs, the costs of collection and reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred in connection with the revocation.
Section 605:21. Mapping Data.
Subd. 1. Information Required. Each registrant and permit holder will provide mapping
information required by the city in accordance with Minnesota Rules 7819.4000 and 7819.4100.
Section 605:22. Location and Relocation of Facilities.
Subd. 1. Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must comply with the Act, with other
applicable law, and with Minnesota Rules 7819.3100, 7819.5000 and 7819.5100, to the extent
the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities
Subd. 2. Corridors. The city may assign a specific area within the right-of-way, or any
particular segment of the right-of-way as may be necessary, for each type of facilities that is or,
the city expects will someday be located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction,
or other permits issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of facilities will
designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in a position at variance with the corridors
established by the city will, no later than the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the
area where the facilities are located, move the facilities to the assigned position within the rightof-
way, unless this requirement is waived by the city for good cause shown, upon consideration
of such factors as the remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety, customer service
needs and hardship to the registrant.
Subd. 3. Limitation of Space. To protect health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use, the city has the power to prohibit or limit the
placement of new or additional facilities within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the
city will strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the
right-of-way, but will be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest, the public's
needs for the particular Utility Service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with
respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future
city plans for public improvements and development projects which have been determined to be
in the public interest.
Section 605:23. Pre-excavation Facilities Location.
In addition to complying with the requirements of Minn. Stat. 216D.01-.09 (“One Call
Excavation Notice System”) before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each registrant
who has facilities or equipment in the area to be excavated will mark the horizontal and vertical
placement of all said facilities. Any registrant whose facilities are less than 20 inches below a
concrete or asphalt surface will notify and work closely with the excavation contractor to
establish the exact location of its facilities and the best procedure for excavation.
Section 605:24. Damage to Other facilities.
When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to maintain, support, or
move a registrant's facilities to protect it, the city will notify the local representative as early as
is reasonably possible. Associated costs will be billed to that registrant and must be paid within
30 days from the date of billing. Each registrant is responsible for the cost of repairing any
facilities in the right-of-way which it or its facilities damages. Each registrant is responsible for
the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another registrant caused during the city's
response to an Emergency occasioned by that registrant's facilities.
Section 605:25. Right-of-Way Vacation.
Reservation of right. If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains the facilities of a registrant,
the registrant’s rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by Minnesota Rules 7819.3200.
Section 605:26. Indemnification and Liability
By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this section, a registrant or permit
holder agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota
Rule 7819.1250.
Section 605:27. Abandoned and Unusable Facilities.
Subd. 1. Discontinued Operations. A registrant who has determined to discontinue all or a
portion of its operations in the city must provide information satisfactory to the city that the
registrant's obligations for its facilities in the right-of-way under this section have been lawfully
assumed by another registrant.
Subd. 2. Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way will
remove it from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with other right-of-way repair,
excavation, or construction, unless this requirement is waived by the city.
Section 605:28. Appeal.
A right-of-way user that: (1) has been denied registration; (2) has been denied a permit; (3) has
had a permit revoked; or (4) believes that the fees imposed are invalid, may have the denial,
revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon written request, by the city council. The city
council will act on a timely written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting. A decision
by the city Council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and
supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
Section 605:29. Severability.
If any portion of this section is for any reason held invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion will be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and
such holding will not affect the validity of the remaining portions. Nothing in this section
precludes the city from requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in
addition to requirements set forth in this section.
History: Ord. 2672 8-22-2016.
Section 610 - Excavations In Streets And Alleys
Section 610:05. Licenses For Excavating Contractors.
Subd. 1. License Required. No person will make any excavation within any street, alley
or other public grounds for the purpose of installing water, sewer, steam or gas pipes,
electric or telephone conduits, or for any other purpose without first obtaining an
"Excavating Contractor" License from the City Engineer. However, that a license will not
be required for any person for the purpose of completing a contract awarded by the City,
nor will a license be required of any public utility corporation when the excavation and
all associated work is to be accomplished by the corporation with its own staff.
Subd. 2. Excavations Authorized. An Excavating Contractor's License will entitle the
licensee to engage in the business of making excavations in the streets, alleys and other
public grounds within the City, and to place and install steam or gas pipes, electric or
telephone conduits, water and sewer pipes, including house service connections, and other
facilities legally permitted, within the rights of way of the public streets and alleys subject
to the provisions of this ordinance and subject to the provisions of other applicable
ordinances and laws.
Subd. 3. Application. Any person desiring to obtain an Excavating Contractor's License
will make written application to the City Engineer for a license stating therein the name of
the person desiring a license and their place of business.
Subd. 4. Procedure. Upon presentation to the City Engineer of an application for an
Excavating Contractor's License, the City Engineer will issue the license to the applicant
upon the applicant (a) filing the bond and insurance policies, and (b) paying the required
license fee.
Subd. 5. Bond Required. With each application for license, the applicant will furnish a
surety bond, approved by the City Attorney. The bond will be signed by the applicant as
principal and by a corporate surety authorized to do business in the State of Minnesota,
conditioned that the principal in all materials, equipment and appliances furnished, and in
all work done or performed which is subject to the provisions of this ordinance will fully
conform to the provisions of this ordinance and for the use and benefit of the City. The
bond will be in the amount of $10,000.00.
Subd. 6. Insurance Required. In addition to the surety bond, the applicant will furnish a
general policy of liability and property damage insurance, including products and
complete operation coverage, which has minimum limits of coverage of $100,000.00 for
injuries to or the death of one person and not less than $500,000.00 on account of one
accident and not less than $250,000.00 for property damage.
Subd. 7. Requirements of Bond and Insurance. The bonds required by this ordinance will
be effective for the period from January 1 through December 31 of the license year. The
bonds and insurance policies will provide that no cancellation of the bond or insurance
policy will be made by the principal, the insured or the surety or insurance company, for
any cause, without first giving ten days notice to the City, in writing, of the intention to
cancel. The notice will be addressed to the City Engineer by registered mail, or will be
delivered to the City Engineer personally.
Subd. 8. License Fee. The license fee for Excavating Contractor will be the amount set
by the City Council for the calendar year. License fees will not be pro-rated for fractions
of a year.
Subd. 9. Expiration of Licenses. Licenses expire on the 31st day of December of the year
for which it was issued.
Subd. 10. Use of Licenses, Subletting. No person licensed under this ordinance who
holds a permit for a particular job, will sublet or assign any work contemplated by the
permit to any person not licensed under this ordinance and any attempted subletting or
assignment is void. In the event the person holding a permit sublets any portion of the
work to be done under the permit to any other person holding an Excavating Contractor's
License, the person holding the permit remains responsible for the completion of all work
under the permit in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, and the licensee on
permittee and the person so doing the work will both be subject to prosecution for the
violation of any provision of this ordinance.
Subd. 11. Maintenance of Bond and Insurance Required. A license becomes invalid at
any time when the licensee ceases to maintain, in full force and effect, the bond and
insurance required by this ordinance.
Subd. 12. Fraud or Error in Issuance. Any license issued becomes invalid if the license
was obtained through fraud or error.
Section 610: 10. Regulations Regarding Installation of Water and Sewer Services.
Subd. 1. Plumbing Code Applicable. All installations of water and/or sanitary sewer
service connections will be accomplished in accordance with the applicable provisions
of the Plumbing Code Ordinance regarding size, alignment, depth, grade, etc. of such
service connections.
Subd. 2. Taps by City Forces, Fees. All taps to water mains will be made by City forces.
A schedule of charges for the making of such taps will be established by resolution of the
City Council. Payment for the making of such taps will be made by the Excavating
Contractor at the time he secures a permit unless payment therefore has already been made
by the plumbing contractor.
Subd. 3. Sanitary Sewer Service Connections. All sanitary sewer service connections
will be made to existing wyes, tee or risers where such connection points are available at a
reasonably convenient location. Where no such connection points exist at a reasonably
convenient location, the Contractor will make the necessary tap utilizing a mechanical
tapping machine which saws the required opening in the main sewer pipe in such a
manner as to accomplish a smooth cut without cracking the pipe, and he will then make
the service connection utilizing a pipe saddle. The pipe saddle will be designed for use
with the size of main sewer pipe which is being tapped and will be of a design which will
prohibit any protrusion beyond the inside wall of the main sewer. Pipe saddles used on
vitrified clay pipe or polyvinyl chloride pipe sewers will be cemented to the main sewers
utilizing an epoxy cement or other water tight cementing agent approved by the Plumbing
Inspector. Pipe saddles on other types of sewer pipe will be attached in a manner which
accomplishes a rigid and water tight connection meeting the approval of the Plumbing
Inspector. The pipe saddle used on any particular installation will be designed specifically
for use with the same type of gaskets as are used on the balance of the sewer service pipe.
Subd. 4. Depth of Water and Sewer Connections. All water and sewer service
connections will be installed with a minimum of eight (8) feet of earth cover unless the
depth of the existing main lines make it impossible to install the service connections at
such depth. Where it is impossible to provide at least seven (7) feet of cover at any point,
said service connections will be protected by insulation in a manner approved by the
Plumbing Inspector.
Section 610:20. Connection to Water and Sewer Services.
Subd. 1. Certificate Required. In addition to all other charges for tapping into or
connecting with the municipal sanitary sewer system, or the municipal water system,
including inspection of connection, street opening fees and permit fees, no connection
permit will be issued, nor will any tap or other connection be installed, or made, with or
into any municipal sanitary sewer or water system of the City, either directly or indirectly,
from any lot or tract of land unless the City Engineer will have certified as follows:
(a) That such lot or tract of land to be thus served by such connection or tap
has been assessed for the cost of construction of the sewer and water main
with which the connection is made.
(b) If no assessment has been levied for such construction cost that
proceedings for the levying of such assessment, or assessments, have been
or will be commenced in due course.
(c) That the cost of construction for said sewer or water main has been paid by
the developer, or builder platting said lot or tract of land. This will not
include lots or tracts served by the municipal sewer system, and which
were not a part of the plat or tract development.
Subd. 2. Additional Connection Charges. If none of the above conditions can be
certified by the City Engineer, no permit to tap or connect to any sanitary sewer or water
main will be issued unless the applicant will pay an additional connection fee, or fees,
which will be equal to the portion of the cost of the construction and installation of water
and sewer mains, which would be assessable against said lot, tract or parcel to be served
by such tapping or connection pursuant to such permit. Such assessible cost will be
determined by the City Engineer upon comparable basis per front foot as similar
assessments for such public improvements were determined and levied in such district or
area, then such calculation will be made upon the basis of a uniform charge per front foot,
which may have or will be estimated or levied for similar public improvement most
recently constructed, such determination having regard for construction costs current on
the date of such determination.
Subd. 3. Procedure for Additional Connection Charges.
(a) Written application will be made upon forms to be provided therefore by the
City and will require information including but not limited to the following:
(1) Exact legal description of premises for which water and/or sewer
connection is applied, including plat and parcel number.
(2) Address of premises.
(3) Name and address of plumber or other contractor.
(4) Name and address of owner of premises.
(5) Date of opening and installation of connection.
(6) General description of type and method of connection to be used or
made.
(7) Such other pertinent information as the Engineer may require from
time to time.
(b) The appropriate additional connection fee, or fees will be determined by the
City Engineer within ten (10) days of the application.
(c) The applicant will enter into a contractual agreement with the City of St.
Cloud whereby for payment of the additional connection fee, or fees the premises
for which water and/or sewer connection is applied will be permitted to tap or
connect to said water and/or sewer system.
Any person, firm or corporation being aggrieved by any such additional
connection charges pursuant to this ordinance, may appeal said charges to the City
Council by giving written notice to the City Administrator within ten (10) days of
the date upon which determination of said charges was made known to said
applicant. In the event a hearing is requested by the applicant, the City
Administrator will set the matter for hearing before the City Council not less than
ten (10) days and not more than thirty (30) days after request. The City Council
will review the determination of the fee, or fees and make its final order
sustaining or modifying said fee, or fees
Subd. 4. Future Assessment. In the future should sanitary sewer or water improvements
be made, the abutting property would be subject to assessment for those improvements,
but would receive full credit (without interest) for any connection fee or fees previously
paid or levied.
Subd. 5. Special Fund. Any sums thus received by the City will be deposited or paid into
a special assessment fund or account and may be credited to the special assessments
which may have been theretofore levied, or may thereafter levied, for water or sanitary
sewer improvements involving the premises for which such special connection fee has
been collected.
Section 610:30. Penalties for Violations.
Subd. 1. Violations. Any violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance will
constitute a penal offense and will be subject to the penalties provided for penal offenses
in this code.
Subd. 2. Continued Violations. After a conviction for violation of any provision of this
ordinance becomes final, the continued violation of such provision will constitute a
separate offense for each day such violation continues to exist, and if such
non-compliance by a person holding an Excavating Contractor's License is not corrected
within 20 days after such conviction becomes final, the Contractor will not qualify to
receive any additional permits.
Subd. 3. Suspension and Revocation of Licenses. Upon notice to the City Council that a
person holding a license has been convicted of a violation of this ordinance, and that such
conviction has become final, the City Council may suspend such person's license for such
period of time as the Council may deem proper under the circumstances, or the Council
may revoke said license and order that no new license be granted to such person for a
period not to exceed six months from the date that such action is ordered by the Council.
Subd. 4. Notice of Hearing upon Revocation. Before the City Council will revoke any
license, the licensee will be entitled to a hearing by the City Council upon ten days written
notice to the licensee by regular mail addressed to the licensee's place of business or by
serving notice upon the licensee in the manner prescribed by statute for serving summons
in the district court.
History: Ord. 2673 8-22-2016
1
Section 615 – Small Wireless Facilities
Section 615:00. Purpose and Policy. The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the health,
safety, and welfare of its citizens and to ensure the integrity of the city rights-of-way. The city
strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances.
The city hereby enacts this section of the code relating to small wireless facilities permits. This
section imposes requirements on telecommunication right-of-way users that place and maintain
small wireless facilities in the public right-of-way. The city hereby elects to set forth terms and
conditions of the collocation in a standard small wireless facility collocation agreement.
This section shall be interpreted consistently with 2017 Minnesota Session Law, ch. 94, Art. 9,
codified in Minn. Stat. §§ 237.162 and 237.163. This section shall not be interpreted to limit the
regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
Section 615:01. Election to Manage Small Wireless Facilities in the Public Rights of Way.
In accordance with the authority granted to the city under state and federal statutory,
administrative, and common law, the city hereby elects, pursuant to this section to manage
small wireless facilities within its rights-of-way and elect to use a collocation agreement.
Section 615.02. Definitions.
Subd. 1. “Abandoned Facility” means a facility no longer in service or physically disconnected
from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other facility, that is in use or still carries
service. A facility is not abandoned unless declared so by the telecommunications right-of-way
user.
Subd. 2. “Applicant” means any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way.
Subd. 3. “Collocate or Collocation” means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an existing wireless support
structure or utility pole that is owned privately, or by the city or other governmental unit.
Subd. 4. “Department” means the Engineering Department of the City.
Subd. 5. “Department Inspector” means any person authorized by the city to carry out
inspections related to provisions of this section.
Subd. 6. “Director” means the City Engineer of the city or designee.
Subd. 7. “Management Costs” means the actual costs the city incurs in managing its rights of
way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with registering applicants; issuing,
processing, and verifying right-of-way or small wireless facility permit applications; inspecting
job sites and restoration projects; maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities
during right-of-way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work
inadequately performed after providing notice and the opportunity to correct the work; and
revoking right-of-way or small wireless facility permits. Management costs do not include
payment by a telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the right-of-way,
2
unreasonable fees of a third-party contractor used by the city including fees tied to or based on
customer counts, access lines, or revenues generated by the right-of-way or for the city, the fees
and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation of Minnesota Session Laws 1997, Chapter 123;
Minn. Stat. § 237.162 or § 237.163; or any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the city
fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to Section 615.19.
Subd. 8. “Obstruct” means to place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free and
open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
Subd. 9. “Public Right-of-Way or Right-of-Way” means the area on, below, or above a
public roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, or public sidewalk in which the city
has an interest, including other dedicated rights of way for travel purposes and utility
easements of the city. A right-of-way does not include the airwaves above a right-of-way
with regard to cellular or other non-wire telecommunications or broadcast service.
Subd. 10. “Small Wireless Facility” means a wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications:
a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume
or could fit within such an enclosure; and
b) all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility provided such
equipment is, in aggregate, no more than 28 cubic feet in volume, not including
electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes,
battery backup power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff
switches, cable, conduit, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other
services, and any equipment concealed from public view within or behind an existing
structure or concealment.
Subd. 11. “Telecommunications Right-of-Way User” means a person owning or controlling a
facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the right-of-way that is
used or is intended to be used for providing wireless service, or transporting telecommunication
or other voice or data information. For purposes of this section, a cable communication system
defined and regulated under Minn. Stat. ch. 238, and telecommunication activities related to
providing natural gas or electric energy services, a public utility as defined in Minn. Stat. §
216B.02, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency organized under Minn. Stat. ch. 453
and 453A, or a cooperative electric association organized under Minn. Stat. ch. 308A, are not
telecommunications right-of-way users for purposes of this section except to the extent such
entity is offering wireless service.
Subd. 12. “Utility Pole” means a pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate
telecommunications or electric service.
Subd. 13. “Wireless Facility” means equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision of
wireless services between user equipment and a wireless service network, including equipment
associated with wireless service, a radio transceiver, antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable,
regular and backup power supplies, and a small wireless facility, but not including wireless
support structures, wireline backhaul facilities, or cables between utility poles or wireless
support structures, or not otherwise immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a
specific antenna.
3
Subd. 14. “Wireless Service” means any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless
spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or by means of a mobile
device, that is provided using wireless facilities. Wireless service does not include services
regulated under Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including cable
service.
Subd. 15. “Wireless Support Structure” means a new or existing structure in a right-of-way
designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities, as reasonably determined
by the city.
Subd. 16. “Wireline Backhaul Facility” means a facility used to transport communications data
by wire from a wireless facility to a communications network.
Section 615:03. Administration.
The director is the principal city official responsible for the administration of the rights-of-way
and the small wireless facility permits. The director may delegate any or all of the duties under
this section
Section 615.04. Permit Requirement.
Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person may install or place small wireless
facilities in the right-of-way without first having obtained the appropriate permit from the city.
a) Small Wireless Facility Permit. A small wireless facility permit is required by a registrant
to erect or install a wireless support structure, to collocate a small wireless facility, or to
otherwise install a small wireless facility in the specified portion or the right-of-way, to
the extent specified therein, provided that such permit shall remain in effect for the length
of time the facility is in use, unless lawfully revoked.
b) Heritage Preservation Property Certificate of Appropriateness/Alteration Permit. A
Heritage Preservation Property Certificate of Appropriateness/Alteration Permit is
required to install a new wireless support structure in a right-of-way where the underlying
district or area is in a local historic district established by federal or state law or the Land
Development Code.
Section 615.05. Permit Applications.
Subd. 1. General application requirements. Application for a permit is made to the Director.
Permit applications will be considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements of
the following provisions:
a) Submission of a completed permit application form, including all required attachments,
and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project and the
location of all known existing and proposed facilities, and the following information:
1. Each permittee’s name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate number, address and
email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers.
4
2. The name, address and email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers of a local representative. The local representative or designee shall be
available at all times. Current information regarding how to contact the local
representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time of Application.
3. A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
i. Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the permittee by an
insurance company licensed to do business in the state of Minnesota, or a
form of self-insurance acceptable to the city.
ii. Verifying that the permittee is insured against claims for personal injury,
including death, as well as claims for property damage arising out of the:
a. Use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the permittee, its officers,
agents, employees, and permittees, and
b. Placement and use of facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the
permittee, its officers, agents, employees, and permittees, including, but
not limited to, protection against liability arising from completed
operations, damage of underground facilities, and collapse of property;
iii. Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the coverages required
herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be provided as to
all such coverages;
iv. Requiring that the city be notified thirty (30) days in advance of cancelation of
the policy or material modification of a coverage term; and
v. Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability coverage,
workers’ compensation and umbrella coverage established by the city in
amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to carry out the
purposes and policies of this section.
4. A copy of the actual insurance policies.
5. If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate required to be filed under
Minn. Stat. § 300.06 as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State.
6. A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority from the Minnesota
Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or federal agency, where the
person is lawfully required to have such certificate from said commission or other
state or federal agency.
b) Payment of fees and other charges:
1. Permit fees, estimated restoration costs, and other management costs.
2. Any disputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city due to applicant’s prior
excavation or obstructions of the rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the
city.
3. Franchise fees, or other charges, if applicable.
4. Inspection fees, if applicable, and if not included in the permit fee.
5
Subd. 2. Consolidated application.
a) A Small Wireless Facility Permit applicant may file a consolidated Small Wireless Permit
Application to collocate up to 15 small wireless facilities provided that all the small
wireless facilities in the application:
1. are located within a two-mile radius;
2. consist of substantially similar equipment; and
3. are to be placed on similar types of wireless support structures.
b) All consolidated Small Wireless Facility Permit Applications shall acknowledge that the
city may approve a permit for some small wireless facilities and deny a permit for others,
but the city may not use denial of one or more permits as a basis to deny all the small
wireless facilities in the application.
c) For Small Wireless Permit applications, an applicant need not provide information
previously provided in a different application to the city for a Small Wireless Facility
Permit if the information has not changed and the applicant shall provide a specific
reference to the previous submittal.
Section 615.06. Issuance of Permit; Conditions.
Subd. 1. Permit Issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this section, the city
shall issue a permit.
Subd. 2. Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit
and the performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the health, safety, and welfare or
when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use. In addition, a permittee shall
comply with all requirements of local, state, and federal laws, including but not limited to
Minnesota Statutes Section 216D.01 - .09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System) and
Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7560.
Subd. 3. Additional Conditions. In addition to Subdivision 2 in this section, the erection or
installation of a wireless support structure, or the collocation of a small wireless facility, shall be
subject to the following conditions:
a) A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the particular wireless support
structure, under those attachment specifications, and at the height indicated in the
applicable permit application.
b) No new wireless support structure installed within the right-of-way shall exceed 50 feet
in height without the city’s written authorization, and further provided that an applicant
may replace an existing wireless support structure exceeding 50 feet in height with a
structure of the same height subject to such conditions or requirements as may be
imposed in the applicable permit.
c) No wireless facility may extend more than 10 feet above its wireless support structure.
d) Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support structure in the right-ofway,
the city may impose separation requirements between such support structures and
any existing wireless support structure or other facilities in and around the right-of-way.
6
e) Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative wireless support structure, sign
or other structure not intended to support small wireless facilities, the city may impose
reasonable requirements to accommodate the particular design, appearance or intended
purpose of such structure.
f) Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support structure, the city may impose
reasonable restocking, replacement, or relocation requirements on the replacement of
such structure.
Subd. 4. Small Wireless Facility Agreement. A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on
a small wireless support structure owned or controlled by the city, or any other city asset in the
right-of-way, after the applicant has executed a standard small wireless facility collocation
agreement with the city. The standard collocation agreement may require payment of the
following:
a) Up to $150 per year for rent to collocate on the city structure.
b) $25 per year for maintenance associated with the collocation.
c) A monthly fee for electrical service as follows:
1. $73 per radio node less than or equal to 100 maximum watts;
2. $182 per radio node over 100 maximum watts; or
3. The actual costs of electricity, if the actual cost exceed the foregoing.
The standard collocation agreement shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the required small
wireless facility permit, provided, however, that the applicant shall not be additionally required
to obtain a license or franchise in order to collocate. Issuance of a small wireless facility permit
does not supersede, alter or affect any then-existing agreement between the city and applicant.
Section 615.07 Action on Small Wireless Facility Permit Applications.
Subd. 1. Deadline for Action. The city shall approve or deny a small wireless facility permit
application within 90 days after filing of such application. The small wireless facility permit,
and any associated building permit application, shall be deemed approved if the city fails to
approve or deny the application within the review periods established in this section.
Subd. 2. Consolidated Applications. An applicant may file a consolidated small wireless facility
permit application addressing the proposed collocation of up to 15 small wireless facilities, or a
greater number if agreed to by a local government unit, provided that all small wireless facilities
in the application:
a) are located within a two-mile radius;
b) consist of substantially similar equipment; and
c) are to be placed on similar types of wireless support structures.
In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the city may approve some small
wireless facilities and deny others, but may not use denial of one or more permits as a basis to
deny all small wireless facilities in the application.
7
Subd. 3. Tolling of Deadline. The 90-day deadline for action on a small wireless facility permit
application may be tolled if:
a) The city receives applications from one or more applicants seeking approval of permits
for more than 30 small wireless facilities within a seven-day period. In such case, the
city may extend the deadline for all such applications by 30 days by informing the
affected applicants in writing of such extension.
b) The applicant fails to submit all required documents or information and the city provides
written notice of incompleteness to the applicant within 30 days of receipt the
application. Upon submission of additional documents or information, the city shall have
ten days to notify the applicant in writing of any still-missing information.
c) The city and a small wireless facility applicant agree in writing to toll the review period.
Section 615.08. Permit Fees
Subd 1. Small Wireless Facility Permit Fee. The city shall impose a small wireless facility
permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover:
a) management costs, and;
b) city engineering, make-ready, and construction costs associated with collocation of small
wireless facilities.
The city will not impose a small wireless facility permit fee for any of the following activities:
a) routine maintenance of a small wireless facility;
b) replacement of a small wireless facility with a new facility that is substantially similar or
smaller in size, weight, height, and wind or structural loading than the small wireless
facility being replaced; or
c) installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro wireless
facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing utility poles in compliance
with national safety codes
Subd. 2. Non-Refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city has revoked for a
breach as stated in Section 615.13 are not refundable.
Section 615.09. Permit Limitations.
Subd. 1. Limitation. An approval of a Small Wireless Facility Permit under this section
authorizes the installation, placement, maintenance, or operation of a small wireless facility to
provide wireless service and shall not be construed to confer authorization to (1) provide any
service other than a wireless service, or (2) install, place, maintain, or operate a wireline
backhaul facility in the right-of-way.
8
Subd. 2. Obstruction from Small Wireless Facility Work. City will not require an additional small
wireless facility permit fee or require a new collocation agreement for routine maintenance of a
small wireless facility, for replacement of a small wireless facility with a new facility that is
substantially similar or smaller in size, weight, height, and wind or structural loading than the
small wireless facility being replaced; or for installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or
replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing
utility poles in compliance with national safety codes. The city may require advance notification,
however, of these activities if the work will obstruct the public right-of-way.
Subd. 3. Permit Duration. For a Small Wireless Facility Permit, the term of the permit is equal to
the length of time that the small wireless facility is in use, unless the permit is revoked under this
section.
Section 615.10. Inspection
Subd. 1. Notice of Completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is completed, the
permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance Minnesota Rules 7819.1300.
Subd. 2. Site Inspection. Permittee shall make the work-site available to city personnel and to all
others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and
upon completion of the work.
Subd. 3. Authority of City.
a) At the time of inspection, the city may order the immediate cessation of any work, which
poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety, or well-being of the public.
b) The city may issue an order to the permittee for any work that does not conform to the
terms of the permit or other applicable standards, conditions, or codes. The order shall
state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within
ten (10) days after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the city that
the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required
time, the city may revoke the permit pursuant to Sec. 615.13.
Section 615.11. Work Done Without a permit.
Subd. 1. Emergency Situations. Each person with facilities in the right-of-way shall immediately
notify the city of any event regarding its facilities that it considers being an emergency. The
owner of the facilities may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the
emergency. Within two business days after the occurrence of the emergency the owner shall
apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the
requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this section for the actions it took in
response to the emergency.
If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding facilities, the city will attempt to contact
the local representative of each facility owner affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency.
In any event, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency,
the cost of which shall be borne by the person whose facilities occasioned the emergency.
9
Subd. 2. Non-Emergency Situations. Except in an emergency, any person who, without first
having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a right-of-way must subsequently
obtain a permit, and as a penalty pay double the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the
other fees required by this code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to
the right-of-way and comply with all the requirements of this chapter.
Section 615.12. Supplementary Notification.
If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the date
given on the permit, permittee shall notify the city of the accurate information as soon as this
information is known.
Section 615.13. Revocation of Permit
Subd. 1. Substantial Breach. The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke any rightof-
way permit, without a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of
any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial
breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
a) The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
b) An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-of-way permit, or the
perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;
c) Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right-of-way permit;
d) The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; unless a permit extension is
obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons beyond the permittees
control; or
e) The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not conform to a condition of
the permit
Subd. 2. Written Notice of Breach. If the city determines that the permittee has committed a
substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or any
condition of the permit the city shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such
violation. The demand shall state that continued violations might be cause for revocation of the
permit.
Subd. 3. Procedural Requirements. If the city decides to revoke the permit, the revocation must
be made in writing and must document the basis for the revocation. The city must notify the
telecommunications right-of-way user in writing within three business days of the decision to
revoke a permit.
Subd. 4. Reimbursement of City Costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse
the city for the city's reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of collection and
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in connection with such revocation.
10
Section 615.14. Damage to Other Facilities.
When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to maintain, support, or move
facilities to protect it, the city shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably
possible and placed as required. The costs associated therewith will be billed to that facility
owner and must be paid within thirty (30) days from the date of billing. Each facility owner shall
be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way which it or its facilities
damages. Each facility owner shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the
facilities of another caused during the city's response to an emergency occasioned by that
owner’s facilities.
Section 615.15. Right-of-Way Vacation.
If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains facilities, the facility owner’s rights in the vacated
right-of-way are governed by Minnesota Rules 7819.3200.
Section 615.16. Indemnification and Liability.
By applying for and accepting a permit under this section, a permittee agrees to defend and
indemnify the city in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7819.1250.
Section 615.17. Abandoned Facilities.
Any person who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall remove them from that rightof-
way if required in conjunction with other right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction,
unless the city waives this requirement.
Section 615.18. Appeal.
A telecommunications right-of-way user that: (1) has been denied a permit; (2) has had permit
revoked; or (3) believes that the fees imposed are invalid may have the denial, revocation, or fee
imposition reviewed, upon written request, by the City council. The city council shall act on a
timely written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by the city council
affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be writing and supported by written
findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
Section 615.19. Reservation of Regulatory and Police Powers.
A permittee’s rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and
enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
11
Section 615.20. Severability.
If any portion of this section is for any reason held invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion will be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such
holding will not affect the validity of the remaining portions.
History: Ord. 2745 2-26-2018
Section 630 - House and Lot Numbering
Section 630:00. House Numbers Required. The houses and lots along the streets and avenues of the
City of St. Cloud will be numbered. The number of every house and lot will be determined by
adding together its block number as determined by Section 630:05 of this ordinance, and the tract
number, as determined by Section 630:10 of this ordinance, of the tract upon which the house or lot,
or the major part thereof is situated.
Section 630:05. For each and every block, the block number used along streets will be determined
by multiplying one hundred by the number of the avenue on the easterly side of the block, or, if there
is no avenue, or no avenue named by number in the easterly side of said block, then by one less than
the number of the avenue on the westerly side of the block.
For each and every block, the block number used along the avenue between 21st Avenue and the
Mississippi River will be determined by multiplying one hundred by the number of the street along
the side of the block nearest St. Germain Street, or, if there be is no street, or no street named by
number along the side of the block, then by a number one less than the number of the street on the
side of block farthest from St. Germain Street.
For each and every block, the block numbered along all avenues, between 2nd Avenue and the
Mississippi River will be determined by multiplying one hundred by the number of the street along
the side of the block nearest the quarter section line extending east and west through the center of
section fifteen in township 124, north of range 28, west of the 5th principal meridian and said line
extended west, or if there be is no street or no street named by number, along the side of said block,
then by a number one less than the number of the street on the side of said block farthest from said
line. But for the purposes of this ordinance all of 8th Street South west of the point where it
intersects said line will be considered as a street not named by number.
Section 630:10. Along every street and avenue adjoining any block there will be a tract number for
every 22 feet of frontage or major fraction thereof, which number will be determined as follows:
On the southerly side of streets and easterly side of avenues only even numbers will be used as tract
numbers; on the northerly side of streets and westerly side of avenues only odd numbers will be used
as tract numbers, along streets the most easterly tract numbers in each block will be one and two
respectively; along avenues one to twenty inclusive, the tract numbers nearest St. Germain Street in
each block and along all other avenues, the tract numbers nearest the line mentioned in Section
630:05 will be one and two respectively. All tract numbers on the same side of the same block will
be consecutive odd numbers if the first number on such side is one and consecutive even numbers if
the first number on such side is 2.
Section 630:15. Numbers to be Maintained. Every owner or occupant of any building in the City of
St. Cloud used as a dwelling house or as a place of business will cause the correct house or lot
number as determined by this ordinance to be placed and maintained thereon in such manner that it
may be easily read from the adjacent street. The numbers will be placed on all buildings heretofore
erected or that may be hereafter erected, at or before the time the same are occupied.
Section 630:20. Numbers Requirements. All figures used in such numbers will be perfectly formed,
neat, legible and permanent, and in quality, neatness, legibility and durability will be, at least, equal
to a nickel plated iron figure two inches long and properly proportioned as to width and size of lines
forming the figure.
Section 630:25. Violations. Any person convicted of the violation of any of the provisions of this
ordinance will be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar nor more than twenty-five dollars
and may be imprisoned for a period not exceeding thirty days. Each day that any building will be
without a number will be considered a separate offense within the provisions of this ordinance.
Section 635 - Central Business District Regulations
Section 635:00. Definitions.
For purposes of this section, Central Business District will be defined as follows:
Commencing at the east right-of-way of 5th Avenue North and the south right-of-way of the
Burlington Northern Railroad (BNRR); thence westerly along the south right-of-way line of
the BNRR to the east right-of-way line of 6th Avenue North; thence north along the east
right-of-way line of 6th Avenue North to the south right-of-way line of 3rd Street North;
thence west along the south right-of-way line of 3rd Street North to the west right-of-way
line of 7th Avenue North; thence south along the west right-of-way line of 7th Avenue
North to the north right-of-way line of 2nd Street North; thence west along the north rightof-
way line of 2nd Street North to the east right-of-way line of 9th Avenue North; thence
south along the east right-of-way line of 9th Avenue North to the south right-of-way line of
2nd Street North; thence westerly along the south right-of-way line of 2nd Street North to
the east right-of-way of 12th Avenue North; thence southerly along the east right-of-way of
12th Avenue North to the north right-of-way of T.H. 23-52; thence easterly along the north
right-of-way line of T.H. 23-52 to the east right-of-way of 4th Avenue South; thence
northerly along the east right-of-way line of 4th Avenue South to the south right-of-way of
St. Germain Street; thence northerly and westerly along the easterly and northerly right-ofway
line of 4th Avenue North to the east right-of-way of 5th Avenue North; thence
northerly along the east right-of-way line of 5th Avenue North to the south right-of-way of
the BNRR and there terminating.
Section 635:05. Traffic Uses.
Except as otherwise provided, the sidewalk (as defined in Section 600:00 of this code) and
landscaping (as defined by the St. Cloud Zoning Ordinance Article III, Section 2) of the
Central Business District is at all times limited to pedestrians. Police bicycles, while being
used for official police business, may be ridden or parked on the sidewalk of the Central
Business District. Bicycles may be walked on the sidewalk and landscaping areas of the
Central Business District.
Section 635:30. Uses in the Central Business District.
Subd. 1. Private Facilities and Uses Allowed. The City Engineer may allow the placement
of the following public or private facilities and uses in the Central Business District: bike
racks, seating, telephones, post office kiosks, transit stops and shelters, plantings,
ornaments, display of merchandise, protection from the elements, furniture, sculpture,
pedestrian and vehicular traffic control devices, trees, flowers, shrubs, lighting or heating
facilities, fountains, trash receptacles, signs, exhibit art, walls, barriers, or other fixtures,
and equipment, facilities and appurtenances as will in the City’s judgment enhance the
free movement, safety, convenience and enjoyment of pedestrians and benefit the
adjoining properties and the central business district and the City. Said facility or use may
not impede or block the free movement or use of right-of-way by other people in the
Central Business District, hinder the ability to maintain or compromise public and private
infrastructure, or otherwise create a nuisance as defined by the city code.
Subd. 2. Permanent Facilities and Uses. Placement of permanent, non-portable facilities
and uses within the public right-of-way of the Central Business District are allowed by
permit issued by the City of St. Cloud. Requests will be submitted in writing to
Engineering Department who will grant or deny the request and will advise the City
Council of its decision. Engineering office will obtain a recommendation of the planning
and health inspections office prior to issuance of if the permit. A recommendation from
the city’s heritage preservation commission is required for permits within the downtown
historic district. The city engineer may place conditions on said permit to ensure
compliance with Subd.1 of this section. In the event that the applicant objects to
provisions required by the City Engineer or the permit is denied the applicant may appeal
the decision to the City Council.
Subd. 3. Portable Facilities and Uses. Placement of portable facilities and uses within
the public right of way of the Central Business District is allowed subject to the following
terms and conditions:
1. Private facilities and uses are limited to the public sidewalk immediately adjacent to
the business establishment.
2. A minimum of 4 feet of clear space must be maintained free of tables, chairs, and
other obstructions to maintain access across the public sidewalk the full width of the
contiguous property. Access corridors must be aligned with adjoining parcels to
provide a continuous and uninterrupted route.
3. A minimum of 2 feet of clear space must be maintained from adjacent curb lines to
allow sufficient access to parking spaces and parking meters and to avoid conflicts
with on-street parking. Said clear space is in addition to the required 4 foot access
aisle if contiguous.
4. A direct, unimpeded and unobstructed path a minimum of 4 feet in width shall be
maintained from the building exit door to the street.
5. Portable outdoor heating appliances shall not be located beneath, or closer than 5 feet
to buildings, combustible decorations and combustible overhangs, tents, canopies,
awnings, sunshades or similar combustible attachments to buildings.
6. Private facilities must not exceed a total of 4 feet in height with the exception of
limited appurtenances such as umbrellas, lighting, and heating fixtures for the
convenience of patrons, but not including signage. Appurtenances may not encroach
into the required access aisle and curb line buffer at a height of less than 6.5 feet.
7. One A-frame sign is permitted for each 50 feet of frontage upon the public sidewalk.
Signage may not exceed 12 square feet in area and 4 feet in height.
8. Businesses offering food or liquor service within the public right of way must provide
covered garbage receptacles within the allowed service area. No waste liquids,
garbage, litter or refuse will be dumped or drained into sidewalks, streets, gutters,
drains, trash receptacles or any other place except those receptacles provided in the
allowed service area or within the adjacent restaurant. When leaving the allowed
service area, the business’ employees will pick up all litter resulting from their
business and will deposit the litter in trash receptacles within the adjacent restaurant.
Trash receptacles shall not be placed or stored within 5 feet of combustible walls,
building openings or combustible roof eave lines unless the receptacle is noncombustible
or fire retardant.
9. The public sidewalk must be swept daily and otherwise maintained by the adjacent
business and/or property owner placing the portable facilities.
10. The City of St. Cloud bears no responsibility for any loss or damage of private
furniture or fixtures incurred by businesses and/or property owners.
Subd. 4. Failure to maintain private facilities and uses in compliance with applicable
standards of local, State, or Federal law can result in the owner and/or business’ forfeiture
of rights to utilize the sidewalk for placement of private facilities and uses. Private
facilities must be removed at the sole expense of the owner upon order of the City of St.
Cloud.
Section 635:35. Nuisances and Penalties.
Subd. 1. The prohibitions set forth in the subdivisions which follow are declared to be
nuisances affecting the peace and safety of users of the Central Business District and
violations will constitute a petty misdemeanor.
Subd. 2. To impede or block the free movement of other persons in the Central Business
District.
Subd. 3. To ride a bicycle on the sidewalk or landscaping areas of the Central Business
District or to lock or chain a bicycle to any object other than a bike rack.
Subd. 4. To drive a snowmobile on the sidewalk or landscaping areas or in the Central
Business District at any time.
Subd. 5. To ride or propel roller-skates, in-line skates or skateboards anywhere on the
sidewalk or landscaping areas in the Central Business District.
Section 635:40. Limitations and Applicable Regulations. Nothing in this ordinance will be
interpreted or construed to be a vacation, in whole or in part, of any City street, or part of any street.
The City of St. Cloud and the City Council retain all police powers and other rights and powers in
the Central Business District. All uses and activities in the Central Business District are subject to
applicable ordinances and police regulations of the City of St. Cloud. The City Council, through
the Downtown Public Facilities Commission, may in its discretion grant or deny the application and
limit the duration of all permits and licenses, designate the hours and days to which they will apply,
and specify such reasonable conditions and requirements in connection therewith as it will deem
necessary or desirable and as will be in conformity with the City Charter, and City ordinances
generally applicable.
Section 635:50. Public Protection: Effective Date. This ordinance is necessary to protect the public
welfare and the interests of the public in the safe and effective movement of persons and to preserve
and enhance the function and appearance of that part of the central business district located in the
Central Business District.
Section 640 – Sidewalk, Curb and Gutter, Driveway Approach and Curb Cut
Construction Permit
Section 640:00 City Engineer Supervision. The city engineer has direct control and
supervision over the construction and repair of all sidewalks, curb, curb and gutter,
driveway approaches and curb cuts within the public right-of-way.
Section 640:05 Permit Required. No person will be allowed or permitted to lay or
construct any sidewalks, curb, curb and gutter, driveway approach or curd cut within the
public right-of-way without first obtaining an appropriate permit from the City Engineer.
Applications for permits under this Section will be made on forms provided by the City
Engineer.
Section 640:10 License and Insurance Required. No person, firm or corporation will
engage in the business of constructing or repairing sidewalk, curb, curb and gutter,
driveway approaches or curb cuts within the public right-of-way without first securing
one of the following licenses:
(a) A license from the State of Minnesota as a residential building contractor or
specialty contractor as defined by Minnesota Statute, Chapter 326.B
(b) A Commercial Contractors license from the City as defined in Section 300:00
of this code
Section 640:12 Penalties for Violations. Any violation of the provisions of this ordinance
will constitute a misdemeanor and is punishable under the provisions set forth in Section
1100 of this Code.
Section 640:15 Sidewalk and Curb Standards. All sidewalk, curb, and curb and gutter,
within the public right-of-way will be constructed in accordance with the standards
established by the City Engineer.
Section 640:20 Driveway Standards. All driveway approaches/aprons, and curb cuts
within the public right-of-way will be constructed in accordance with the standards
established by the city Engineer and the following:
Subd. 1. Width of Driveway Approaches
(a) Residential driveway approaches will not exceed 24 feet in width except
where determined necessary by the City Engineer, not narrower than a width
of 12 feet. Three-foot flares will be constructed at the street/curb line on all
residential driveway approaches.
(b) Non-residential driveway approaches will not exceed 30 feet in width except
where determined necessary by the City Engineer, nor be narrower than a
width of 16 feet. Five-foot flares will be constructed at the street/curb line on
all non-residential driveway approaches.
Subd. 2. Driveway Setbacks. Except as allowed below, the minimum setbacks of
driveway approaches from property lines will be as follows:
(a) Side or rear property lines: 5 feet
(b) Side or rear property lines abutting a local public street: 20 feet
(c) Side or rear property lines abutting a collector or arterial street: 75 feet*
* The City Engineer may reduce this setback requirement if, in his/her
opinion, a 75 foot setback is not practical due to small parcel size or other
existing site constraints.
(d) Setbacks from side or rear property lines may be zero feet where a driveway
common to abutting properties has been required by the city or has been
approved by the City Engineer, and a common driveway easement is of
record.
Subd. 3. Number and Location of Curb Cuts.
(a) The consolidation of curb cuts will be encouraged, and new curb cuts will be
discourage whenever appropriate, considering safe traffic flow, and access
points needed for the proper functioning of the use.
(b) All properties are entitled to one driveway approach/curb cut unless otherwise
specified in this Section.
(c) Where frontage of a parcel is 150 feet or less, only one driveway
appraoch/curb cut is permitted.
(d) Where the frontage of parcel exceeds 150 feet but is less than 300 feet, two
curb cuts may be permitted provided that a minimum separation of 24 feet is
maintained between curb cuts.
(e) Where the frontage of a parcel is 300 feet or greater, one curb cut may be
permitted for each 100 feet of lot frontage, or major fraction thereof.
(f) Where residential use is served by an alley direct access to the street through a
curb cut will not be permitted except where determined necessary by the City
Engineer.
(g) Unless there is no reasonable alternative, as determined by the City Engineer,
residential properties will not be permitted direct access through a curb cu to
an existing or proposed collector or arterial street as identified by the St.
Cloud Comprehensive Plan.
(h) Where the proposed driveway approach/curb cut would open to a State or
County highway, then the additional specifications of the appropriate State or
County highway department will apply.
(i) Unless otherwise approves by the City Engineer, driveway approaches within
the public right-of-way must be constructed perpendicular to the
roadway/curb line.
Subd. 4. Maintenance and Use.
(a) Every driveway approach/curb cut within the public right-of-way will be
maintained and kept in safe condition by the owner of the abutting property.
The City Engineer may order the repair or the removal of any such driveway
approach which is not so maintained, or which interferes with or obstructs
drainage carried by adjoining street or the use of such street for public travel.
Upon removal of any such driveway approach, that portion of the public street
and boulevard occupied by the same will be restored as nearly as practical to
its former condition and all curbing replaced. The expense of such work will
be paid by the owner of the abutting property.
(b) Whenever existing driveway approach/curb cut is no longer in use for
vehicular access to the abutting property, then the City Engineer may order
the removal of such driveway approach and restoration of the public street,
boulevard, and curb, all at the expenses of the owner of the abutting property.
(c) If any such repair or removal is not made by the owner of the abutting
property within the time specified by the City Engineer, then the City may
proceed to cause such repair or removal under the direction of the City
Engineer. The cost of repair or removal will be leveled against the abutting
property as a special assessment and collected in the manner of other special
assessments.
Subd. 5. Exceptions. The City Engineer is authorized to grant exceptions in writing from
the strict application of the Section based upon a determination that the following
conditions are met:
(a) The exception desired arises from a peculiar physical condition or unique
nature of the business or operation on the abutting property.
(b) The exception desired is not contrary to the public interest, particularly safety.
(c) The granting of the exception will not adversely affect the rights of adjacent
property owners or tenants.
(d) The strict application of the terms of the Section will create an unnecessary
hardship on the property owner or tenant.
History: Ord. 2674 8-22-2016
Section 650 - Sidewalk Repair, Special Assessments
Section 650:00. Maintenance by Owner. Property owners have the primary responsibility for
keeping and maintaining the public sidewalk of the City in front of each parcel of land in such state
of repair as not to be dangerous to public travel.
Section 650:05. Inspection. The City Engineer will inspect the public sidewalks within the City, at
least once each year, and will, from time to time, report in writing to the City Council any sidewalks
deemed to be in such disrepair as to be dangerous for public travel.
Section 650:10. Notice of Hearing. Upon receipt of the City Engineer’s report, the Council will, by
resolution, set a date for a public hearing on the report, giving at least two weeks written notice of
the hearing to be given by mail, addressed to the owner of each parcel of land abutting upon the
portion of any sidewalk alleged in the report to be in such disrepair as to be dangerous to public
travel. Notice is to be addressed to such owner at the address shown on the last general assessment
roll of City real estate.
Section 650:15. Notice to Repair. If the Council finds, that the sidewalks are in such disrepair as to
be dangerous to public travel, it will direct the City Engineer to send, a written notice of the defect to
the owner of each parcel of land abutting upon any such defective sidewalk, directing him to cause
the sidewalk in front of his parcel of land to be repaired, at his own cost and expense, in the manner
recommended by the City Engineer, within 30 days from the date of the notice. The notice will
further state that, if the sidewalk is not repaired, the City will proceed to make such repairs and
assess the cost against the abutting parcels of land. For good reason shown, the City Engineer is
authorized to extend the time given to any owner with which to make the repairs.
Section 650:20 Assess Cost. After repairs made by the City have been completed, the engineer will
certify to the Council the total cost of the repairs. The Council will then determine by resolution, the
amount of the total cost the City will pay, if any, and the amount to be assessed. The resolution will
then be filed with the City Clerk. The clerk, with the assistance of the City Engineer or other
qualified person selected by the Council, will calculate the proper amount to be assessed against
each abutting parcel of land in front of which any of such repairs have been made by the City on the
basis of the cost thereof, and will prepare a proposed assessment roll and deliver it to the Council.
Section 650:25. Hearing on Assessment. Upon receipt by the Council of the proposed assessment
roll, it will, by resolution, set a date for a public hearing on the proposed assessment, and file the
proposed assessment roll with the City Clerk, where it will be open to public inspection. The City
Clerk, will then cause to be published once in the legal newspaper of the City, a notice of the public
hearing, giving the date, time, and place proposed, stating the general nature of the improvement and
that written or oral objections to the assessments will be considered at the hearing. The notice will be
published at least one week before the date of the hearing.
Section 650:30. Assessment Roll. At the hearing, the Council will consider objections to the
proposed assessments, and may amend the proposed assessment roll with respect to a particular
parcel of land. The Council may then adopt by resolution, the proposed assessment roll as made or
as amended. Upon such adoption, the assessment roll will be filed with the City Clerk, and upon
such filing the amount against the respective parcels of land, together with accrued interest, at such
rate per annum as the Council may from time to time fix by resolution, will become a lien upon the
property and continue until the assessment is fully paid.
Section 650:35. Certification to County Auditor. On or before the 1st day of November each year,
the City Clerk will transmit a certified duplicate of the assessment roll so adopted to the County
Auditor of the county in which any parcel of land subject to such lien is situated, setting forth the
amount of the assessment, together with interest computed to the first Monday in January of the
succeeding calendar year.
Section 660 - Snow and Ice Removal Emergency Regulations
Section 660:00. Definitions. As used herein the term
Subd. 1. "Vehicle" means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and
Subd. 2. "Street" or "Highway" means the entire width between boundary lines of any way
or place where any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for
purposes of vehicular traffic.
Section 660:10. Emergency Declared. Whenever, in the opinion of the City Engineer or the Chief
of Police or their designees that an emergency exists in the City, or in a section or sections of the
City because of snow, freezing rain, sleet, ice, snowdrifts or other natural phenomena which create,
or are likely to create hazardous road conditions impeding, or likely to impede, the free movement of
fire, health, police, emergency, or other vehicular traffic, or the safety and welfare of the community,
the City Engineer or Chief of Police or their designee may declare an emergency to exist for a period
of seventy-two (72) hours, but such emergency may be sooner terminated if conditions permit.
Notice of such emergency, and the effective time of the declaration shall immediately be given to
each daily newspaper published in St. Cloud, and to each radio station having a transmitter within
the City limits of St. Cloud. The City Engineer or Chief of Police shall give notice of the removal of
the snow emergency regulations to the news media sources specified herein in the event that the
snow emergency is terminated prior to the expiration of seventy-two (72) hours from the time of the
declaration of the snow emergency.
Section 660:15. Prohibitions. During a period when an emergency has been declared pursuant to
this section it is unlawful to park or leave a vehicle parked on any street within the City of St. Cloud
in violation of any of the provisions of Section 700 entitled "Traffic and Parking Regulations." All
provisions of Section 700 will be immediately enforced, and all vehicles found in violation of the
provisions of Section 700 will be immediately cited and towed, pursuant to the provisions of
Minnesota Statutes Section 169.041. The cost and expense of towing and impounding are the
responsibility of the vehicle owner.
Section 660:25. Permission to Remove. Any person removing or tampering with an impounded
vehicle without the permission of the City or of an employee of the City in charge of the impounded
vehicle, will be guilty of a penal offense.
Section 660:30. Evidence of Ownership. Any person desiring to claim and release any impounded
vehicle must produce evidence of ownership.
Section 660:35. Procedure. Upon the impounding of any vehicle the person in charge of the vehicle
will immediately notify the St. Cloud Police Department of the impoundage. The police department
will make every reasonable effort to ascertain the name and address of the person owning the
vehicle, and, if ascertained, the Chief will immediately advise the owner by letter, duly addressed to
the owner, and deposited in the U.S. Post Office of St. Cloud. The letter will:
(1) Give the general description of the vehicle and the license number if there be one.
(2) Give the approximate time of its removal, and the reason for removal and the place where it
is stored.
(3) State the towing charges and the daily storage charge in those instances where the vehicle
has been towed and impounded by the City or its employees.
(4) Advise the owner that to release the vehicle, evidence of ownership must be produced.
Section 660:45. Violations; Penalties. Any motor vehicle parked contrary to the provisions of this
ordinance is the act of the registered owner as well as the act of the person parking the vehicle. For
purposes of this section, the registered owner is defined to include motor vehicle or leasing agencies
and corporate owners.
It will be a defense to any violation if the registered owner shows that on the date of the offense, title
has been transferred to another.
Section 670 - Trees in Streets, Parkways and Public Grounds
Section 670:00. Definitions.
Subd. 1. Street means the entire width between boundary lines of every way or place of
whatever nature whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway,
throughway, road, avenue, alley, boulevard, land, place, or however designated when any
part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right, for the purposes of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
Subd. 2. Boulevard. Boulevard is that portion of a street normally lying between the
sidewalk, if there be a sidewalk, and, if there be no sidewalk, then the nearest boundary
line of the way or place and the curb, if there be a curb, and, if their be no curb, then the
nearest lateral line of a roadway.
Subd. 3. Rain Gardens. Rain Garden is a vegetated swale designed to reduce stormwater
runoff volume through infiltration and improve water quality through vegetative and soil
filtration.
Section 670:05. Permit Required. No person will plant or cause to be planted or change the
location of any tree, shrubs, evergreens, flowers or plants of any kind other than grass or
establish a rain garden within the limits of any street in the City of St. Cloud without first having
obtained a permit from the Parks Director.
Subd. 1. Exceptions. No permit is required to plant:
a. Grass in the boulevard
b. Ornamental flowers and plants placed in a planting bed that does not utilized
more than 30 square feet within the boulevard. Flowers and plants placed in
planting beds for which no permit is required shall be subject to all of the
provisions of Section 670:15 Subdivision 1(b) below.
Section 670:10. Removal Prohibited. No person will remove or cause to be removed any tree or
trees or rain gardens that have been and at present are located within the limits of any street in
the City of St. Cloud.
Section 670:15. Application and Issuance.
Subd. 1. Application to Parks Director Any person desiring a permit required by Section
670:05 above will make application in writing to the Parks Director for that permit.
Permits will only be issued to an owner of the contiguous property. Permit applications
and permits will be subject to the following requirements
a. Tree Permits.
i.) The permit application and the permit will state the variety and diameter
one foot above the groundline of tree or trees to be planted and the
precise location for each tree.
ii.) On streets and avenues designated by the Engineering Department of the
City of St. Cloud as collector streets, minor arterial and principal
arterials all permit applications for tree planting are subject to the
approval of the City Engineer.
iii.) No tree will be planted except in accordance with the terms of the
permit and the provisions of this ordinance. The permit will be good
only for the season stated.
iv.) No trees will be planted within the limits of any street, parkway, or
boulevard except for the shade tree varieties or cultivars of the
varieties as follows: Norway Maple (Acer platanoides), Cleveland
Norway Maple (Acer platanoides “Cleveland”) Emerald Queen
Norway Maple (Acer platanoides “Schwedleri”), Summer Shade
Norway Maple (Acer platanoides “Summer Shade”), Red Maple (Acer
rubbrum), Sugar Maple (Acer saccharum), Autumn Blaze maple (Acer
freemanii “Jeffersred”), Celebration Maple (Acer freemanii
“Celzam”), Marmo Maple (Acer fremannii “Marmo”), Sienna Glen
Maple (Acer fremannii “Siena”), Northwood Maple (Acer rubrum
“Northwood”), Fall Fiesta Maple (Acer saccharum “Fall Fiesta”),
Green Mountain Maple (Acer saccarum “Green Mountain”), Legacy
Maple (Acer saccharum “Legacy”), White Oak (Quercus alba),
Swamp White Oak (Quercus bicolor), Northern Pin Oak (Quecus
ellipsoidalis), Pin Oak (Quercus palustris), Northern Red Oak
(Quercus rubra), Hackberry (Celitis occidentials), Imperial
Honeylocust (Gledtsia triacanthus, Imperial), Skyline (Gledtsia
triacanthus “Skyline”), Ironwood (Ostraya virginiana), Amur Corktree
(Phellodendron amurense), American Linden (Tilla americana),
Littleleaf Linden (Tillia cordata), Greenspire Linden (Tilla cordata
“Greenspire”), Redmond Linden (Tilla x euchiora “Redmond”); or
ornamental tree varieties as follows: Amur Maple (Acer ginnala),
Autumn Brilliance Serviceberry (Amelanchier x grandiflora), PeeGee
Hydrangea Tree (Hydrengea paniculata “Grandiflora”), Adams Crab
(Malus “Adams”), Coralburst Crab “Malus “Coralcole”), Donald
Wyman Crab (Malus “Donald Wyman”), Harvest Gold Crab (Malus
“Hargozam”), Indain Magic Crab (Malus “Indian magic”), Indian
Summer Crab (Malus “Indian Summer”), Pink Spires Crab (Malus
“Pink Spires”), Prairiefire Crab (Malus “Prairie Fire”), Profusion Crab
(Malus “Profusion”), Radiant Crab (Malus “Radiant”), Red Barron
Crab (Malus “Red Barron”), Red Splendor Crab (Malus “Red
Splendor”), Royalty Crab (Malus “Royalty”), Snowdrift Crab (Malus
“Snowdrift”), Spring Snow Crab (Malus “Spring Snow”),
Thunderchild Crab (Malus “Thunderchild”), Amur Chokecherry
(Prunus maackii), Canada Red Cherry (Prunus virginiana “Shurbert”),
Purple Sand Cherry (Prunus x cistena), Dward Korean Lilac (Syringa
meyeri “Palibin”), Miss Kim (Syringa patula “Miss Kim”), Ivory Silk
Lilac-Tree Form (Syringa reticulata), Ivory Silk Lilac (Syringa
reticulata).
v.) No trees will be planted which measures less than 1 ¼ inches in
diameter of trunk one foot above the ground.
vi.) The trunk of each tree will be without branches for a height of six feet
above the ground and the lowest branch will not be more than eight
feet above the ground.
vii.) There will be a distance of not less than 27 feet and not more than 33
feet between trees.
viii.) Where curb and sidewalks exist, all trees will be planted on the center
line between the curb and sidewalk edge line.
ix.) No permit will be granted for tree planting within the limits of any
street until sidewalk and curbing have been constructed.
x.) No person will trim any tree or trees growing upon any street except
under the supervision of the Parks Director.
xi.) The Parks Director will have authority to direct and require the
trimming us such trees and may cause the same to be trimmed by
employees of the City without cost to the abutting property owners.
xii.) If trees are in need of being raised to allow proper clearance the tree
will be raised by the employees of the City without cost to the abutting
property owners.
xiii.) Species not listed above will be considered if the Parks Director
determines that the planting would enhance the beauty of the area in
question and all adjacent property owners agree to conditions of
planting as set forth by the Parks Director.
b. Plants and Flower Permits
i.) Plants and flowers will only be placed in planting beds established at
ground level. Raised planting beds are not permitted.
ii.) Only low-growing plant and flower species that grow and die or die
back annually will be permitted.
iii.) Plants and flowers must be maintained at a height not to exceed 24
inches.
iv.) To prevent soil erosion, the exposed earth in planting beds must be
protected with organic or rubber mulch. The mulch must be of a dense
and interlocking type that will not float/wash or blow in the street or
gutter. Rock mulch is not permitted.
v.) A maximum of thirty percent (30%) of the contiguous boulevard area
and fifty percent (50%) of the linear width or street frontage of a
boulevard may be developed as a planting bed.
vi.) For boulevards where curb is in place planting beds that are larger than
ten (10) square feet in size must be set back a minimum of two feet
from the curb. The setback area must be planted in grass.
vii.) For boulevards where curb is not in place planting beds must be set
back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the edge of the street pavement.
The setback area must be planted in grass.
c. Rain Gardens
i.) Application must include a dimensioned site plan, construction
specifications and planting details fro the proposed rain garden
installation.
ii.) The species of the plants to be used in the rain garden are subject to
the approval of the Parks Director.
iii.) Rain garden permits will not be issued in situations where, in the
opinion of the Parks Director or the City Engineer, the rain garden is
not designed in accordance with best management practices, will
create a nuisance, will have the potential to damage the environment,
or has the potential to cause damage to public or private property.
Subd. 2. The Parks Director will investigate each permit site to assure compliance with
the provisions of this ordinance.
Section 670:25. Prohibited Location.
Subd. 1. No tree will be planted or rain garden established within the limits of any street,
parkway, or boulevard where the space available between the sidewalk and the curb is
less than six feet. Permits may be granted for replacing trees lost within the limits of
any street, parkway or boulevard less than six feet wide but more than four and one-half
feet wide.
Subd. 2. No permit will be granted for tree planting; or establishment of rain gardens
within the limits of any street, parkway, or boulevard which has a right-of-way less than
60 feet in width.
Section 670:50. Prohibiting Planting in Streets.
Subd. 2. The Parks Director has the authority to require owners of contiguous property
to remove any tree, shrubs, evergreens, flowers, or plants of any kind, planting bed or
rain garden planted or established without a permit or that, in the opinion of the Parks
Director are poorly maintained. Notice in writing of such removal will be served by
regular mail upon the owners of the contiguous property. If the plantings are not
removed within ten days after the mailing of such notice, the Parks Director may cause
them to be removed and destroyed at the expense of the contiguous property owner. The
expense of removal will be levied against the property as a special assessment and
collected as in the case of other special assessments.
Section 670:52. Plantings Which Obstruct Public Right-of-Way. The Parks Director has the
authority to require owners of abutting property to trim or remove any shrubs, evergreens, trees,
hedges or other vegetation which overhang or otherwise obstruct a public street, alley or rightof-
way, and where such overhang or obstruction may interfere with vehicular or pedestrian
traffic and/or visibility. Notice in writing of the required removal will be served by regular mail
upon the owners of the contiguous property. If the plantings are not removed from the street
within ten days after the mailing of the notice, the plantings will be removed under the direction
of the Parks Director, and the cost of removal will be levied against the contiguous property as a
special assessment and collected as in the case of other special assessments.
Section 670:55. Diseased Trees. The Parks Director has the authority to require the destruction
or cause to be destroyed any tree or trees within the limits of any street, parkway, or boulevard or
private real property that have been found to be infected by disease or infested by injurious
insects when destruction is necessary for the protection of other trees. No action to remove
diseased or infested trees will be taken until positive diagnosis of the disease or identification of
the injurious insect has been made. Notice in writing of the required removal will be served by
regular mail upon the owners of the contiguous property. If trees which are located on private
real property are not removed within ten days after the mailing of the notice, the tree will be
removed under the direction of the Park Director, and the cost of removal will be levied against
the contiguous property as a special assessment and collected as in the case of other special
assessments.
Section 670:60. Damaged Trees. The Parks Director has the authority to require the destruction or
cause to be destroyed any tree or trees within the limits of any street, parkway, boulevard or private
real property that have been found to be damaged to such an extent that such tree is considered
dangerous to people or property. Notice is writing of the required removal will be served by
regular mail upon the owners of the contiguous property. If trees which are located on private
real property are not removed within ten days after the mailing of the notice, the tree will be
removed under the direction of the Parks Director, and the cost or removal will be levied against
the contiguous property as a special assessment and collected as in the case of other special
assessments.
Section 670:65. New Planting by City.
Subd. 1. The City Council may order and require the Parks Director to plant trees within the
limits of any street, parkway or boulevard.
Subd. 2. The cost of such trees and plantings may be assessed upon the property fronting on
such improvements as a special assessment.
Section 670:75. Material in Street. No building material or materials of any kind will be piled upon
any street, parkway, or boulevard which may interfere with or injure any tree, until the tree or trees
have been sufficiently protected by a proper guard to prevent injury. All instructions issued for that
purpose by the Parks Director will promptly be complied with by the person or persons placing or
causing to be placed such material.
Section 670:80. Attachments. No person will attach any materials to a tree within the limits of any
street, parkway, or boulevard by nailing or any other methods detrimental to the tree. The person or
persons responsible for such acts, whether or not intentional, will be responsible for the repair or
replacement of the effected tree or trees.
Section 670:85. Sprinkler Systems Installed within the Boulevard. Sprinkler systems owned by
the contiguous property owner may be installed within the boulevard subject to the following
conditions:
Subd. 1. A plumbing permit must be obtained in accordance with the requirements of
Section 300:00 Subd. 5 of the Code. Any special conditions or instructions set forth on the
permit must be followed.
Subd. 2. Gopher State One Call procedures will be used to locate existing utilities.
Section 670:90. Sprinkler Systems Installed without a Permit. The City Engineer has the
authority to require the destruction or cause the removal of any sprinkler system installed in the
street without a permit. Notice in writing of the required removal will be served by regular mail
upon the owners of the contiguous property. If the sprinkler system is not removed from the
street within ten days after the mailing of the notice, the sprinkler system will be removed under
the direction of the City Engineer and the cost of removal will be levied against the contiguous
property as a special assessment and collected as in the case of other special assessments.
Section 670:95. Owners Risk. The owners of contiguous property for which permits for the
establishment of a planting bed or rain garden; or the installation of a sprinkler system within
any street have been issued will be solely responsible and at risk for such plantings,
establishment or installation. The owners of contiguous property who establish a planting bed for
which a permit is not required by this ordinance will similarly be solely responsible and at risk
for such establishment. Neither the City nor any utility who is authorized to locate their facilities
in the street will be responsible for damage to any tree, planting bed, rain garden or sprinkler
system that may be damaged by any of their activities including without limitation snow plowing
operations, street or utility installations, maintenance or repair. When necessary for the
installation, operation, repair or maintenance of street, sidewalk or utility improvements, the
contiguous property owners will, at their sole cost, locate, relocate, protect and or remove
planting beds, rain gardens or sprinkler systems from the street. In the event that he contiguous
property owners fail to take such action within the time specified by the City or utility company,
then the City or utility company may remove planting beds, rain gardens or sprinkler systems as
necessary for the conduct of their operations. Any permit issued for planting beds, rain gardens
or sprinkler systems in the streets will contain a clause providing for the recognition and
acceptance of responsibility and risk by the contiguous property owners.
Section 670:100. Notice. Any notice required by this ordinance will be deemed sufficient when
deposited in the regular mail and directed to the last known address of the contiguous property
owners as indicated by the City Assessors real property records.
History: Ord. 2433 7-27-09; Ord. 2443 10-26-09.
Section 680 - Weed, Rubbish, Snow and Ice Removal
Section 680:00. Owner and Occupant, Duties. The owner or occupant of each and every
building or tract of land within the City, abutting any street or alley, will remove all ashes, dirt,
rubbish and weeds from the sidewalks, streets, boulevards and alleys abutting the building or
tract of land and keep the sidewalks, streets, boulevards and alleys clean and free from all
ashes, dirt, rubbish and weeds at all times.
Section 680:05. Time of Removal, Ice and Snow. The owner or occupant of every building or
tract of land within the City fronting upon any street, having a sidewalk abutting upon the
premises, will clear the sidewalk of snow and ice within 24 hours following the termination of
any snowstorm or the formation of ice from any cause and will keep the same clear and free
from snow and ice. If such snow and ice are not removed by the owner or occupant within 24
hours the same will be removed under the direction of the Director of Public Works and the
expense of such removal will be levied against the property as a special assessment and
collected as in the case of other special assessments.
Section 680:10. City Removal. In case any owner or occupant of any building or tract of land
within the City will fail to remove all ashes, dirt, rubbish, and weeds as required the same will
be removed under the direction of the Director of Public Works and the expense of removal
will be levied against the property as a special assessment and collected as in the case of other
special assessments.
Section 680:15. Any person who will fails to remove ashes, dirt, rubbish, weeds, snow and ice
as required will be guilty of a penal offense.
Section 680:25. Weed Growth in the City.
a. Weeds as used in this ordinance, will be construed to mean and include all noxious
weeds as defined in Minnesota Statutes Sections 18.171 and 21.47 and all such useless and
troublesome plants as are commonly known as weeds to the general public.
b. Weeds Prohibited. It is unlawful for any owner, lessee, occupant, or any other person,
having control of property in the City, to permit or maintain on such property, or on or along
any sidewalk adjacent to the property, or along any street adjacent to the said property between
the property line and the curb, or on or along any alley adjacent to the said property between
the property line and the middle of the alley:
(1) Any growth of weeds, grasses, or rank vegetation to a height of greater than ten
inches, on the average, or
(2) Any accumulation of dead weeds or grasses (except compost piles).
(3) It is unlawful for any persons to cause, permit or allow poison ivy, ragweed, or
other poisonous plant(s), or plant(s) detrimental to health, to grow on any such
lot or any such land in such manner that any part of the weed(s) or plant(s) will
extend upon, overhang or border any public place, or in such manner that the
weed(s) or plant(s) are allowed to seed or to emit pollen or other poisonous
particles into the atmosphere in such a manner that the particles are carried
through the air into a public place(s).
b. Exemption. This Section of the Code and the sections that follow, all relating to weed
removal in the City, do not apply to properties in the City that are zoned Rural Residential or
Agricultural by the St. Cloud Zoning Ordinance.
Section 680:30. Duty of Land Owner. It is the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of any
lot or land to cut and remove, or to cause to be cut and removed, all weeds, grass or other rank,
poisonous or harmful vegetation as often as is necessary to comply with the provisions of
Section 680:25. This section does not apply to lands where hay is harvested, or where other
young trees or other crops or growth have been planted for improvement or public nature
purposes, although the owners, lessees, or occupants of such lands may not flagrantly violate
the provisions of this ordinance. The Director of Parks will serve written notice of violations
of this ordinance upon the owner, lessee, occupant, or other person having control of the
property. A property owner who receives a notice of a violation of this ordinance must, within
the time specified in the notice, either bring the property into compliance or inform the Director
of Parks that the property is exempt from the ordinance’s weed restrictions. If the property is
not brought into compliance and the weeds, grass, or other vegetation on the property to be
removed by a contractor and/or City staff. The cost of cutting and removal, as set forth in
Section 560 of this code, will be passed on to the property owner. The expense of removal will
be levied against the property as a special assessment and collected as in the course of other
special assessments.
History: Ord. 2407 9-22-08.
Section 690 - Transit Amenities
Section 690:00. Purpose. It is the intent of this Section to provide procedures and standards for
the installation, operation, and maintenance of transit amenities within the public right-of-way of
the City of St. Cloud.
Section 690:05. Definition of Transit Amenity A transit amenity for purposes of this ordinance is
defined as "a bus shelter or bench, with or without advertising, constructed and maintained at a
designated bus stop along a public street, located on a public boulevard or privately owned
property, for the convenience and comfort of persons waiting for buses or other vehicles
operated by or for the St. Cloud Metropolitan Transit Commission (MTC)”.
Section 690:10. Transit Amenity Permit. A transit amenity permit will be required for the
installation, maintenance, and operation of a transit amenity within the public right-of-way of
any street in the City. Transit amenity permits will be issued by the MTC in accordance with the
following procedures:
a. Application. Every person desiring a transit amenity permit under this ordinance
will apply to the MTC giving the location and specifications for each bench or shelter, the
name and address of the applicant, and such other information as may be required by the
MTC.
b. Permit Term. All transit amenity permits issued by the MTC under this ordinance
will automatically expire on December 31 of each year.
c. Permit Renewal. If the plans and specifications of the bench or advertising matter
or location of the transit amenity are not to be changed, the application for renewal will
be sufficient if the applicant gives their name and address and the location and number of
the transit amenity for which a renewal permit is desired.
d. Separate Permit Required for Each Transit Amenity. A separate transit amenity
permit will be required for each transit amenity at each location and will be valid for the
transit amenity for which it is issued.
e. Permit Fee. The MTC may determine an appropriate permit fee structure. The
fee may be collected by contractual or other agreement as approved by the MTC Board of
Commissioners.
f. Transfer of Title or Control. Whenever a transit amenity for which a permit has
been issued is sold or title or control transferred or assigned, a new permit will be
required and obtained for its maintenance.
g. Insurance Required. Before a permit will be issued, the applicant will file with
the MTC a policy, or certificate of public liability insurance issued by an insurance
company authorized to do business in the State of Minnesota, insuring such applicant
against loss in the minimum sum of $1,000,000 because of liability imposed by law on
account of bodily injury or death of any one person and any one accident. The City of St.
Cloud will be named as an additional insured on the policy. The policy will be
maintained in the original amount by the permitee at their expense at all times during the
period for which the permit is in effect.
Section 690.20 Notice to Adjacent Property Owners. Prior to issuing a permit for the installation
of a transit amenity, the MTC will notify all property owners within 150 feet of the location and
provide an opportunity for hearing comments. Upon receipt of any complaint, the MTC will
hold a public hearing at its next available meeting following ten days of receipt of the complaint
to consider the issuance of the transit amenity permit for that location.
Section 690:45. Transit Amenity Standards. Transit amenities permitted under this Section must
comply with the following standards, unless otherwise approved by resolution of the City
Council. An administrative review by the City Engineer is required prior to the installation of
any proposed transit amenity to determine compliance with the following location, design, and
advertising standards.
Subd. 1. Location. Transit amenities are prohibited in the following locations:
a. At any location where the distance from the face of the curb to the inside
sidewalk line is less than six feet.
b. At any location more 50 feet from the nearest point of the intersection
with street, unless the designated bus stop is in such other location.
c. Bus shelters may not be located within the AG, RR, R1, AR1, R2, or AR2
zoning districts unless located along a collector or arterial street or at a
public facility.
d. At any location within 500 feet of another transit amenity in the same
direction of travel, unless multiple amenities are permitted at a single
location. Multiple amenity locations must be approved by resolution of the
City Council. For the purposes of this section, multiple amenity locations
are defined as locations with more than one bus bench or bus shelter; bus
shelters with interior benches will constitute a single amenity site.
e. At any location that is in conflict with public or private infrastructure or
poses a health or safety concern to the public, as solely determined by the
City Engineer.
Subd. 2. Design. Transit Amenities must meet the following design standards:
a. Bus benches must be no longer than eight feet, no higher than 42 inches,
no wider than 30 inches, and weigh no less than 300 pounds.
b. Bus shelters are limited to a maximum dimension of 120square feet and
ten feet in height, unless a specific site as determined by the MTC requires
a larger shelter due to the special nature of the bus stop.
c. Any transit amenity must be located on a concrete surface with an
extension to a sidewalk or curb line in compliance with current Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards as applicable or required.
d. Any transit amenity must comply with uniform design standards for transit
amenities approved by the MTC. The MTC may approve alternative
designs where appropriate to be consistent with the architecture of
adjacent public and/or private properties.
Subd. 3. Advertising. Advertising may be allowed upon a transit amenity in accordance
with the following standards:
a. Advertising panels within a bus shelter must be located on the far end wall
of the shelter away from the direction of travel for the bus route serving
that stop.
b. Advertising panels within a bus shelter may be lighted with backlit
lighting or indirectly with a light located in the interior of the shelter.
c. Advertising panels within a bus shelter are limited to two panels
measuring a maximum of 24 square feet per panel.
d. One advertising panel may be placed on a bus bench and is limited to the
front vertical face of the backrest and may not be lighted. No advertising
is permitted on the backside of the bus bench.
e. Advertising panels on bus benches must be single sided and limited to
twelve square feet in area.
f. Advertising may not be provided on bus shelters or bus benches in the
AG, RR, R1, AR1, R2, or AR2 zoning districts.
g. All advertising messages will be in compliance with generally accepted
standards of good taste and the text of such advertising messages will be
subject to the approval of the MTC and City of St. Cloud, which approval
will not be unreasonably withheld. No liquor, beer, tobacco product, or
sexually explicit or suggestive advertising will appear on any signboard.
h. All advertising upon a transit amenity must be permitted by the MTC.
Any advertising within the public right-of-way that is not authorized by
the MTC may be removed by the City of St. Cloud or the MTC.
Section 690:50. Removal or Repair by City. If at any time, the City of St. Cloud observes a
transit amenity which is in disrepair, poses a health or safety concern to the public, and/or is
otherwise found inappropriate in a given location, the City Council has the right upon written
notice to MTC to have the transit amenity either repaired or removed, depending on the
circumstances and the directions given by the City Council. If the transit amenity is not removed
or repaired according to the written request by the City Council, the City may have the transit
amenity removed at its own expense. and the MTC agrees to pay the reasonable cost of said
removal.
Section 690.55. Maintenance of Transit Amenity Area. The MTC or its licensee will be
responsible for the maintenance of grounds within and surrounding a transit amenity, including:
mowing of grass, weed removal, snow removal, trash removal, cleaning and other customary
maintenance activities. If at any time the City of St. Cloud observes the failure to maintain an
area surrounding a transit amenity, the City Engineer has the right to order the maintenance of
the grounds. If the grounds are not maintained pursuant to the written request of the City
Engineer, the City may resolve the issue at its own expense and the MTC agrees to pay the
reasonable cost of maintenance.
Section 690.60. Reservation of Police Powers. The City Council reserves unto itself any and all
police power it may have with respect to regulation and control of the public rights-of-way. Any
permit issued pursuant to this Section is subject to the future exercise of the police power by the
City Council and the issuance or termination of such the will not entitle the permittee to any
compensation from the city by virtue of the exercise of such police power.
Section 695 - Technical High School Area
Street Access Permit
Section 695:00. Purpose.
The Council finds that streets adjacent to Technical High School are congested because of heavy
motor vehicle traffic and parking. Criminal activity occurring in close proximity to the school is
aided by easy drive by access to individuals and facilities. Heavy concentrations of pedestrian traffic
attempting to mix with motor vehicle traffic creates significant risks for all persons traveling through
the area. Adjacent public park facilities bring large numbers of individuals, including many young
children, into potential conflict with the motor vehicle traffic. Parents and other individuals wishing
to drop-off or pick-up students from school buildings may not do so in an orderly and safe manner.
All of these concerns are heightened by the proximity to State Highway 23 and the desire of nonschool
related traffic to travel through the area. It is the purpose of this section to stem the flow of
traffic in the immediate vicinity of Technical High School during those times when students are
being picked up or dropped off; to provide for safe pick up and drop-off of students; to reduce the
risk of criminal activity in the same locations; to promote efficiency in providing public safety; to
preserve the safety of children and other pedestrians and traffic safety, and to promote the peace,
good order, comfort, convenience, and welfare of the inhabitants of the City. The provisions of this
section, providing access to designated streets by permit only, during certain hours when Technical
High School is in session, are deemed to be in furtherance of such objectives.
Subd. 1. The Council may from time to time, by resolution, designate certain streets in the
vicinity of Technical High School as limited access by permit only, and cause control gates
to be installed and appropriate signs to be posted. The resolution will establish the
designated hours during which access to a specific street, or portion of a street, is limited.
Subd. 2. Permits will be made available to allow access only by vehicles owned or operated
by parents or legal guardians of students attending Technical High School. St. Cloud School
District No. 742, through its Technical High School, is designated by the City to identify
eligible individuals and issue those permits on behalf of the City. Eligibility will be
established by showing proper identification to the designated school officials at the time of
application for the permit.
Subd. 3. Permits will bear an identification number for the motor vehicle(s) of the parent or
guardian obtaining the permit(s). A record of parents and guardians who have permits, and
the vehicles to which they are issued, will be maintained. Technical High School Street
Access Permits will be displayed in the lower corner of the windshield on the driver's side of
the motor vehicle.
Subd. 4. To cover the costs of administering the permit system a fee may be charged for
each permit. The amount of the fee will be set forth in Section 516:00 of this code. Permit
fees will not be prorated.
Subd. 5. Technical High School Street Access Permits cannot be transferred to a motor
vehicle other than the one for which the permit was issued.
Subd. 6. Section 695 will not apply to individuals who perform or vehicles used in the
performance of commercial services, repairs, law enforcement or emergency assistance for
Technical High School, provided that such persons or vehicles are in fact being used in such
services or assistance. Such vehicles will be identified by permanent lettering or by signs
displayed on both sides of the vehicle indicating the name of the business or service. This
exemption will terminate immediately upon completion of the service or assistance.
Section 695:10. Penalty for Access Violations. It is unlawful to operate a motor vehicle upon a
street subject to the provisions of Section 695 of the Code of Ordinances, during those times when
access is controlled, without having a permit properly displayed.
CHAPTER VII
Section 700 - Traffic and Parking Regulations
Section 700:00. Definitions.
Subd. 1. Alley or Alleyway. An alley or alleyway is a travelway that is used primarily for
vehicle service access to the back or the side of properties abutting on a street.
Subd. 2. Bus Stop, Taxi Stand or Passenger Curb Loading Zone. A Bus Stop, Taxi Stand or
Passenger Curb Loading Zone is that space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
Subd. 3. Curb Loading Zone. Curb Loading Zone is a space adjacent to a curb reserved for
the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
Subd. 4. Delivery Vehicle. Delivery Vehicle means a vehicle used by a business enterprise
for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise. A delivery vehicle must be identified
by permanent lettering or by signs displayed on both sides of the vehicle indicating the name
of the business and the words delivery vehicle.
Subd. 5. Fire Lane. A Fire Lane is any roadway and adjacent land, necessarily required to be
kept clear to permit unimpeded access by Fire Department personnel, equipment and vehicles
to exits, entrances, hydrants, stand pipes and other facilities, when duly designated and signs
posted.
Subd. 6. Metered Lot. A Metered Lot is a municipal parking lot on which parking meters
have been placed.
Subd. 7. Municipal Parking Lot. Municipal Parking Lot is an off-street parking lot owned or
operated by the City of St. Cloud as part of the municipal parking system and established for
the parking of vehicles for a fee.
Subd. 8. Municipal Parking Ramp. A Municipal Parking Ramp is an off-street multileveled
parking facility owned or operated by the City of St. Cloud as part of the municipal parking
system and established for the parking of vehicles for a fee.
Subd. 9. Operator. An Operator is an individual who operates a vehicle as the owner, or as
the agent, employee or permittee of the owner.
Subd. 10. Park or Parking. Park or Parking means the standing of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of or while actually engaged in
loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
Subd. 11. Parking Meter. A Parking Meter is any mechanical device installed in locations
authorized by the City Council for the purpose of regulating parking.
Subd. 12. Parking Meter Space. A Parking Meter Space the space for the parking of vehicles
which will be indicated by painted lines, or otherwise, and adjacent to which a parking meter
is installed for the regulation of parking within said space.
Subd. 13. Parking Officer. A Parking Officer is a designated employee of the City whose
duties are to enforce the provisions of this section relating to parking violations.
Subd. 14. Private Parking Lot. A Private Parking Lot is an area that is not dedicated to
municipal or public use which is made available and equipped by the owner for the parking
of motor vehicles by the public or by persons visiting or having business on the owner's
premises.
Subd. 15. Special Parking Zone. A Special Parking Zone means a parking restriction
applying to an on-street parking area for the purpose of accommodating the special needs of
adjacent properties, and which is not in conformance with the parking regulations which are
prevalent in the neighborhood in question. Normally, a special parking zone is for the benefit
of only one property and will occupy an area less than one block in length.
Subd. 16. Street. A Street is any public street, alley, road, boulevard, highway or other
public place located in the City of St. Cloud and established for use of vehicles.
Subd. 17. Unmetered Lot. An Unmetered Lot is a municipal parking lot on which no parking
meters have been placed but which requires payment of a fee before vehicles may leave.
Subd.18. Park-UR-Self; Pay-and-Display Station. Park-UR-Self; Pay-and-Display Station is
any mechanical device installed in locations authorized by the City Council in which money
is deposited for the purchase of a parking receipt.
Subd. 19. Trailer. A Trailer is a vehicle designed for carrying property or passengers on its
own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
Subd. 20. Recreational Equipment” is defined as:
(a) Travel trailers including those that fold down, chassis, campers, tent trailers and
slip in campers.
(b) A non-motorized utility trailer intended and generally used for transporting other
recreational equipment.
(c) Snowmobiles, all terrain vehicles, boats and any type of watercraft. Recreational
equipment placed on a utility trailer is, together with the trailer, considered to be
one vehicle.
Section 700:05. Prohibited Parking and Stopping. No person will stop, stand, or park a vehicle,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with directions of a police
officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
Subd. 1. Sidewalk. No person will park any vehicle on a sidewalk.
Subd. 2. Driveway. No person will park any vehicle in front of a public or private driveway.
Subd. 3. Intersection. No person will park any vehicle within an intersection.
Subd. 4. Fire Hydrant. No person will park any vehicle within ten feet of a fire hydrant.
Subd. 5. Crosswalk. No person will park any vehicle on a crosswalk or within 20 feet of a
crosswalk.
Subd. 6. Signs. No person will park any vehicle within 30 feet upon the approach to any
flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
Subd. 7. Railroad Crossing. No person will park any vehicle within 50 feet of the nearest rail
of a railroad crossing.
Subd. 8. Fire Station. No person will park any vehicle within 20 feet of the driveway
entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within 75 feet of said entrance when properly sign posted.
Subd. 9. Street Obstruction. No person will park any vehicle alongside or opposite any street
excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
Subd. 10. Parked Vehicle. No person will park any vehicle on the roadway side of any
vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
Subd. 11. Bridge. No person will park any vehicle upon any bridge, or other elevated
structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel, except as otherwise provided by
ordinance.
Subd. 12. Stopping Prohibited. No person will park any vehicle at any place where official
signs prohibit stopping.
Subd. 13. Fire Escape. No person will park a vehicle so as to block a fire escape or the exit
from any building, whether on public or private property.
Subd. 14. Police Order. No person will park any vehicle where temporary signs are posted
reading "No Parking - Police Order", as long as such signs are in place.
Subd. 15. Fire Lane. No person will park in any area designated as a fire lane.
Subd. 16. Snow Removal Parking Restrictions. No person will park any vehicle nor leave
any vehicle which was parked at the time of posting, for a period of more than two hours
thereafter, in any block on any street or in a municipal parking lot posted by the
Engineer/Public Works Director in accordance with this subdivision. The Engineer/Public
Works Director is authorized to post no parking signs for snow removal (a) along streets
where snow removal operations will require the use of the entire width of the street by snow
plowing and removing equipment, and (b) on municipal parking lots. Such signs will be
posted at frequent intervals at least four (4) hours prior to the time when snow removal
commences on the street or municipal parking lot so posted and such signs will be removed
promptly after completion of the snow removal operation. Snow removal will be done on
any street or municipal parking lot so posted as soon as possible following a lapse of four (4)
hours after posting the signs.
Subd. 17. Seasonal/Calendar Parking In Effect.
(a) Definitions.
1. Even Side of the Street. That side of all public streets or avenues whose
addresses end with an even number.
2. Odd Side of the Street. That side of all public streets or avenues whose
addresses end with an odd number.
(b) Prohibitions. No person will park any motor vehicle nor leave any motor vehicle
parked upon the even side of the street on even calendar days between the hours
of 1:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. from November 1 of one year to April 1 of the following
year. No person will park any motor vehicle nor leave any motor vehicle parked
upon the odd side of the street on odd calendar days between the hours of 1:00
a.m. to 7:00 a.m. from November 1 of one year to April 1 of the following year.
(c) Exceptions. This subdivision will not apply to any of the streets or avenues
within the areas:
1. The area having boundaries from 4th Street South to 16th Street South
inclusive, and from the east boundary of 9th Avenue South/Clearwater
Road to the Mississippi River, and including 1st and 2nd Avenues South
from 4th Street South north to the end of the cul-de-sacs, and including
3rd Avenue South from 16th Street South south to the end of the cul-desac.
2. The areas listed under the following Subdivision 18. Seasonal Parking
Ban.
3. The area bounded on the south by State Trunk Highway 23, bounded on
the west by 12th Avenue, bounded on the north by BNSF railroad tracks
and 2nd Street North and bounded on the east by the Mississippi River.
4. The area bounded on the south by 4th Street South; bounded on the west
by 9th Avenue South; bounded on the north by 2nd Street South (State
Trunk Highway 23); and bounded on the east by the following described
line: Beginning at the intersection of 2nd Street South and 5th Avenue
South; thence southerly on 5th Avenue South to Ramsey Place; thence
easterly on Ramsey Place to 4th Avenue South; thence southerly on 4th
Avenue South to 4th Street South.
Subd. 18. Seasonal Parking Ban
(a) Effective Area of Parking Ban. The seasonal parking ban described applies to the
following portions of the City:
1. The area situated north and west of the Sauk River.
2. The area situated west of the Mississippi River and south of 22nd Street
South.
3. The area situated east of the Mississippi River and south of Minnesota.
Highway No. 301 and Minnesota Boulevard.
4. The area situated north and east of U.S. Highway No. 10. except the area
described as Oak Street between 14th and 15th Avenue SE and 14th
Avenue SE between Oak Street and 2nd Street SE (CSAH 8).
5. The area situated west of Minnesota Highway No. 15
(b) Parking Ban. A parking ban will go into effect on November 1 of each year and
will remain in effect until April 1 of the following year. The following parking
restrictions will be effective during a parking ban:
1. No vehicle or motor vehicle may be parked on any street between the
hours of 1 a.m. and 7 a.m.
2. Any vehicle or motor vehicle may be parked on any street until and unless
the entire area of such street has been cleared of snow and ice.
3. No vehicle or motor vehicle may be parked on any street that has a paved
surface less than 32 feet in width.
Subd. 19. No person will park or leave parked any trailer or recreational equipment on any
street within the City limits for more than 24 hours that is not connected to, hitched to or
attached to a motor vehicle.
Section 700:10. No Parking and Limited Time Parking Zone. The Council may designate no
parking or limited time parking zones by a resolution setting forth the location of the zone, and in the
case of a limited time parking zone, the time limit imposed. The Engineer/Public Works Director will
post signs at designated locations that will indicate the parking restriction.
Section 700:12. Parking More Than 24 Hours. No person will leave parked any vehicle of any kind
upon any street, municipal parking lot, or municipal parking ramp for a period of more than 24
consecutive hours except during Special Event Parking. There is no 24 hour parking limitation for
the Civic Center Parking Ramp.
Section 700:15. Parking Meter Zone. The City Council is authorized to establish by resolution
zones to be known as "parking meter zones" upon all streets and avenues and the City owned or City
operated off-street parking lots within the following described boundaries.
Commencing at the east right-of-way line of 6th Avenue North and the south right-of-way line
of 3rd Street North; thence westerly along the south right-of-way line of 3rd Street North to the
west right-of-way line of 7th Avenue North; thence southerly along the west right-of-way line of
7th Avenue North to the north right-of-way line of 2nd Street North; thence westerly along the
north right-of-way line of 2nd Street North to the east right-of-way line of 12th Avenue North;
thence southerly along the east right-of-way line of 12th Avenue North to the north right-of-way
line of T.H. 23; thence easterly along the north right-of-way line of T.H. 23to the west bank of
the Mississippi River; thence northerly along the west bank of the Mississippi River to the
extension of the southerly right-of-way line of 2nd Street North; thence westerly along the south
right-of-way line of 2nd Street North to the east right-of-way line of 6th Avenue North; thence
northerly along the east right-of-way line of 6th Avenue North to the south right-of-way line of
3rd Street North and there terminating.
Subd. 1. Meters. In parking meter zones the City Council will install and maintain parking
meters. Parking meter spaces will be designated and time limitations for legal parking in such
zones will be set. The time limitations will be designated on the parking meters or by
appropriate signs posted in proximity to the parking meters. Fees for parking meters are set
forth in Section 580:00 of this Code.
Subd. 2. Meter Location in Streets. Parking meters installed upon the streets in the parking
meter zones will be placed upon or near the curb immediately adjacent to the individual
parking meter spaces. Each parking meter will be placed in such manner as to display by a
signal that the adjacent parking meter space is or is not in use.
Subd. 3. Stall Markings on Streets. Lines or markings will be painted or placed upon the
curb or the street adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of designating the parking
meter space. Each vehicle parking adjacent to any parking meter will park within the lines or
markings. It is unlawful to park any vehicle in a position that is not entirely within the
designated lines or markings.
Subd. 4. Manner of Parking. When a parking meter space is parallel with the adjacent curb,
any vehicle parking in the parking meter space will be parked with the front of the vehicle
nearest to the meter.
Subd. 5. Payment and Time Period. When a vehicle is parked in any parking meter space,
the operator will deposit appropriate coins of the United States into the parking meter. If such
vehicle will remain in such maximum parking meter space beyond the parking time
designated for the space, the vehicle will be considered as parked overtime, and therefore
subject to the Parking Use Fee described by Section 700:50, Subd. 1 of this Code. Each
additional hour a vehicle remains parked overtime will constitute a separate occurrence of
overtime parking. If the parking meter displays a sign showing "expired", the vehicle will be
considered as parked overtime and such parking will be subject to the Parking Use Fee
described by Section 700:50, Subd. 1, of this Code. The parking meter will display the
amount of time remaining on the metered parking. An operator may purchase parking meter
time up to the maximum permitted by the City Council and as indicated on the meter or sign.
Subd. 6. Slugs Prohibited. No person will deposit in any parking meter any slug, device or
substitute for coins of the United States.
Subd. 7. Tampering Prohibited. No person will injure, deface, tamper with, open or willfully
break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter in the City. Designated
employees of the City may open a parking meter for the purpose of repair, maintainance or
collection from the meter.
Subd. 8. Parking Meter Hoods or Bags. Parking meter hoods or bags may be issued by the
Parking Violations Bureau for the purpose of reserving parking spaces for short-term special
use.
(a) Parking meter hoods or bags will be issued only when needed to allow the conduct of
non-regular activities such as utility construction or repair, construction or
reconstruction of adjacent buildings, parades, weddings, funerals, etc.
(b) The fee for the use of parking meter hoods or bags is set forth in Section 580:00 of
this Code. The City Clerk is authorized to waive fees when the user is a charitable
organization or public service agency.
(c) Such hoods or bags will be utilized only on that meter (or meters) for which they were
issued.
(d) The fees for the use of hoods or bags will continue to be imposed on the lessee until
they are returned to the Parking Violations Bureau. In the event the lessee fails to
return hood or bag, or if the lessee returns it in damaged condition, the lessee will be
required to reimburse the City for the cost of replacement or repair, in addition to the
usage fees.
Subd. 9. Fifteen Minute Meter Spaces. Where the City Engineer determines there is a need
for rapid turnover he may order the establishment of up to four 15 minute meters on any
block or street. On a two-way street where parking is allowed on both sides of the street, the
15 minute meter spaces will be established on the first and last stalls on both sides of the
block. Where other traffic and/or parking conditions exist, the City Engineer will determine
an equivalent distribution of the 15 minute meter spaces.
(a) An owner or lessee of a parcel of property abutting a given street who desires to have
additional 15 minute meter spaces established will file a request with the City Clerk,
who will forward the request to the City Council. If the Council approves the request,
the 15 minute meter spaces will be established upon the applicant paying the required
charges. Charges may be pro-rated for the first year. Thereafter, they will be renewed
annually, in advance, with a January 1st renewal date and must be paid for the full
year, and will not be refundable.
(b) The parking meter fee schedule for 15 minute meter spaces will is forth in Section
516:00 of this Code.
Subd. 10. Hours of Operation. A deposit of coins as provided for in Subd. 5 of this section
will be enforced daily between the hours of 8 a.m. and 6 p.m., except that no payment of
parking meter fees will be enforced on any Saturday, Sunday, and except for the following:
(a) Payment of parking meter fees and customary time/use fees at attendant parking lots
and ramps will not be enforced on the following holidays:
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King Day
President's Day
Good Friday
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Veteran's Day
Thanksgiving Day
Friday after Thanksgiving
Christmas Eve Day
Christmas Day
However, the Director of Public Works may implement event parking fees, as
provided under Section 580, Subdivision 7, on any holiday.
Subd. 11 Exceptions. City of St. Cloud employees may be issued permits allowing that
employee to park in a parking meter space within the City of St. Cloud, while performing
City authorized business, without depositing coins in the parking meter. The permit must be
affixed to the glass within 12” of the lower left corner of the rear window of the vehicle, as
viewed from the rear of the vehicle. The entire permit must be visible through the window.
Subd. 12. Parking Prohibited. Parking may be prohibited on any streets or avenues in the
Parking Meter Zone during the days and hours established by resolution of the City Council.
Section 700:18. Permit Parking Zones.
Subd. 1. Council Findings. The Council finds that streets in certain residential areas are
congested because of heavy residential and non-residential traffic and parking. It is the
purpose of this section to stem the flow of commuter traffic from institutional, commercial
and industrial districts into adjoining residential neighborhoods; to reduce air pollution and
other environmental effects of automobile commuting, and to enhance the quality of life in
the residential area by reducing noise, traffic hazards and litter; to protect the residents from
unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their residences; to preserve the character of the
residential district; to promote efficiency in the maintenance of these streets in a clean and
safe condition; to preserve the value of property; to preserve the safety of children and other
pedestrians and traffic safety, and to promote the peace, good order, comfort, convenience
and welfare of the inhabitants of the City. The provisions of this section, providing parking
by permit only in designated areas, are deemed to be in furtherance of such objectives.
The Technical High School neighborhood imposes some unique burdens on the St. Cloud
parking system. There is a desire to retain the high school in its existing location, an
established residential neighborhood with limited options for parking. To accomplish this
objective the parking needs of students and staff must be addressed and accommodated.
There is also a need to recognize the impact of student parking on the residents who live in
the surrounding neighborhoods. To accomplish the objectives of our parking permit
ordinance the needs of the residents and the school must be balanced. The provisions of this
section, providing parking by permit only in the Technical High School neighborhood, are
deemed to be in furtherance of such objectives.
Similarly, the City streets within the St. Cloud State University campus are subject to unusual
and significant parking burdens. Class schedules, a large number of commuters, a shortage of
parking in desirable locations and an ever-increasing number of vehicles all contribute to this
burden. A City park is located within the campus. There is a desire to allow general use of
the park, and therefore the adjacent on street parking, evenings, and weekends and during the
summer. The provisions of this section, providing parking by permit only in the St, Cloud
State University campus area, are deemed to further such objectives.
Subd. 2. General Procedures. The Council may, designate certain streets as permit parking
zones. Permit zones may be combined with limited time parking restrictions. No resolution
establishing a permit parking zone(s) will be adopted until a public hearing has been held
thereon by the City Council. A notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing will be
published in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the day of the hearing. A similar
notice will be mailed at least ten days before the day of the hearing to each owner of affected.
In respect to resolutions for neighborhoods impacted by parking generated by Technical High
School or St. Cloud State University, school administration will also be given a copy of the
notice and a list of the owners and addresses to which the notice was sent will be attested to
by the responsible person and will be made a part of the records of the proceedings. The
failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners, or defects in the notice will not
invalidate the proceedings, provided a good faith attempt to comply with this subdivision has
been made. The resolution will establish the time and designated hours for each permit zone.
Except in the case of neighborhoods impacted by parking generated by Technical High
School or St. Cloud State University, the resolution will establish the number of resident
permits that will be made available for purchase by eligible residents on the basis of one
permit for every established number of square feet of lot area per zoning lot as defined in the
City of St. Cloud Zoning Ordinance. Permit Parking zones will be established only in those
areas meeting the following criteria: (1) the area is residentially zoned under the City of St.
Cloud Zoning Ordinance; (2) the area is utilized for parking by commuter traffic destined for
adjoining institutional, commercial or industrial areas; (3) the area is congested because of
heavy residential and non-residential traffic and parking; (4) the area does not have adequate
off-street parking available; and (5) traditional parking restrictions such as limited time
parking and limited day parking have been utilized in the area but have not successfully
alleviated parking congestion
Subd. 3. Permit Parking Zone Violation. No owner or driver of any motor vehicle will park
or permit the vehicle to be parked on posted streets in parking by permit zones except in
compliance with Section 700:18.
Subd. 4. Tech High School Permit Zone. For neighborhoods impacted by parking generated
by Technical High School, the resolution described in subdivision 2 above will establish a
fixed number of permits for use by Technical High School, its students and staff.
(a) Permits intended for use by Technical High School will be provided to School
District 742 for the exclusive use of Technical High School students and staff.
(b) Permits will be issued to Technical High School students and staff by School District
742 in the form of a card. The permit must be affixed to the glass within 12” of the
lower left corner of the rear window of the vehicle, as viewed from the rear of the
vehicle. The entire permit must be visible through the window.
(c) No duplicate permits will be issued.
(d) The charges for parking permits will be at the residential parking permit rate,
exclusive of taxes, as set forth in Section 580:00 of this Code.
(e) Permits intended for use by Technical High School will be provided to school
administration for the exclusive use of Technical High School students and staff.
(f) Parking permits for Technical High School students and staff in the Technical High
School neighborhood will utilize letter designations that correspond to a specific
street location as follows:
A 6th St. So. between 9th Ave. and East Lake Blvd.
B 5th St. So. between 9th Ave. and East Lake Blvd.
C East Lake Blvd. (west side north of 6th St. So.)
D North Lake George
E 12th Ave. between Division St. and 2nd St. So.
F 13th Ave. between Division St. and 2nd St. So.
G 14th Ave. between Division St. and 2nd St. So.
H 15th Ave. between Division St. and 2nd St. So.
I 2nd St. So. between 14th Ave. and 15th Ave.
J 2nd St. So. between 15th Ave. and 16th Ave.
K 14th Ave. between 2nd St. So. and 7th St. So.
L 15th Ave. between 2nd St. So. and 7th St. So.
M 7th St. So. between 14th and 15th Ave.
N 15th Ave. between 7th St. So. and 8th St. So.
O 14th Ave. between 7th St. So. and 8th St. So.
P 8th St. So. between 14th Ave. and 15th Ave.
Q 8th St. So. between 13th Ave. and 14th Ave.
R 9th St. So. between 13th Ave. and 14th Ave.
S 13th Ave. between 7th St. So. and 8th St. So.
T 8th St. So. between 12th and 13th Ave.
U 13th Ave. between 8th St. So. and 9th St. So.
V 9th St. So. between 12th Ave. and 13th Ave.
W 13th Ave. between 9th St. So. and 10th St. So.
X 12th Ave. between 7th St. So. and 8th St. So.
Y 12th Ave. between 8th St. So. and 9th St. So.
Z 12th Ave. between 9th St. So. and 10th St. So.
AA 8th St. So. between 10th Ave. and 12th Ave.
BB 11th Ave. between 8th St. So. and 9th St. So.
CC 9th St. So. between 11th Ave. and 12th Ave.
DD 9th St. So. between 10 ½ Ave. and 11th Ave.
EE 11th Ave. between 9th St. So. and 10th St. So.
FF 10 ½ Ave. between 9th St. So. and 10th St. So.
GG 10 ½ Ave. between 8th St. So. and 9th St. So. (west side)
HH 10 ½ Ave. between 8th St. So. and 9th St. So. (east side)
II 8th St. So. between 10 ½ Ave. and 9th Ave.
JJ 10 ½ Ave. between 7th St. So. and 8th St. So.
KK 8th St. So. between 10 ½ Ave. and 11th Ave.
LL 8th St. So. between 11th Ave. and 12th Ave.
MM East Lake Blvd (west side between 7th St. So. and 6th St. So.)
NN 9th St. So. between 9th Ave. and 10 ½ Ave.
OO 10th Ave. between 9th St. So. and 10th St. So. (east side)
PP 10th Ave. between 9th St. So. and 10th St. So. (west side)
QQ 14th Ave between 10th St. So. and 8th St. So.
RR 15th Ave. between 10th St. So. and 8th St. So.
SS 16th Ave. between 10th St. So. and 8th St. So.
TT 17th Ave. between 8th St. So. and 10th St. So.
UU 8th St. So. between 15th Ave. and 17th Ave.
VV Garfield Court between 15th Ave. and 17th Ave.
WW 7th St. So. between 15th Ave. and 17th Ave.
XX 16th Ave. between 7th St. So. and Division St.
YY 17th Ave. between 7th St. So. and Division St.
ZZ 17th Ave. between 8th St. and Garfield Court
(g) The City will enforce permit parking and other parking restrictions in the Technical
High School neighborhood.
(h) The number of permits that will be made available for purchase by eligible residents
in the Technical High School neighborhood will be determined on the basis of one permit for
every established number of square feet of lot area per zoning lot as defined in the City of St.
Cloud Zoning Ordinance. Residential Parking Permits will be issued by the City of St.
Cloud. Eligibility will be determined in the same manner used for Resident Permit Zones as
set forth in subdivision 5 below.
Subd. 5. Resident Permit Zone. Residents of zoning lots, as defined in the City of St. Cloud
Zoning Ordinance, located on a street(s) designated by resolution pursuant to subdivision 2
above, will be eligible to purchase one parking permit per motor vehicle they own or lease.
(a) The number of resident permits made available for purchase by eligible residents will
be established by resolution pursuant to subdivision 2 above.
(b) Residency will be established by the showing of proper identification showing
domicile in the resident parking zone at the time of application for the permit. Proper
identification will include current Minnesota driver's license or identification card,
homestead property tax statement, or a signed lease or affidavit from a landlord.
(c) The holding of a permit will not guarantee the availability of a parking space at any
specific location or time, and the unavailability of a parking space will not entitle the
permit holder to any reimbursement, nor to the free use of any other parking space.
(d) Permits will be annual and will be valid from August 1 through July 31 of the
following year.
(e) A record of residents who have permits will be kept by the City. Resident permits
must be affixed to the glass within 12” of the lower left corner of the rear window of
the vehicle, as viewed from the rear of the vehicle. The entire permit must be visible
through the window.
(f) To cover the costs of administering the permit system, a fee may be charged for each
permit. As set forth in Section 580:00 of this Code. Permit fees will not be prorated.
(g) Section 700:18 Subd. 4. will not apply to individuals who perform, or vehicles used
in the performance of commercial services, repairs, or emergency assistance for any
resident, provided that such persons or vehicles are in fact being used in such services
or assistance. Such vehicles will be identified by permanent lettering or by signs
displayed on both sides of the vehicle indicating the name of the business or service.
This exemption will terminate immediately upon completion of the service or
assistance.
Subd. 6. SCSU Parking Permit Zone. SCSU parking permits will permit the holders of valid
parking permits to park their vehicles on designated city streets within the SCSU parking
permit zone. The boundaries of the parking zone will include:
All that area situated between 5th Avenue South and the west bank of the
Mississippi River from 4th Street South to 11th Street South and all that area
situated between 4th Avenue South and the west bank of the Mississippi
from 11th Street South to 16th Street South.
(a) The permit will be required for parking 7 A.M. to 5 P.M. Monday through Friday
from July 1st to June 30th of each year.
(b) Sale of permits will be conducted in the City Clerk’s office only.
(c) Permits will be seasonal and will be valid from July 1st through June 30th of the next
year.
(d) The charges for such permits will be set forth in Section 580:00 of this Code.
(e) The holding of a permit will not guarantee the availability of a parking space at any
specific location or time, and the unavailability of a parking space will not entitle the
permit holder to any reimbursement, nor to the free use of any other parking space.
The permit must be affixed to the glass within 12” of the lower left corner of the rear
window of the vehicle, as viewed from the rear of the vehicle. The entire permit must
be visible through the window.
Subd. 7. Except to the extent otherwise specifically provided in this subdivision, the general
parking regulation of Section 700 will be applicable within areas designated "Parking by
Permit".
Section 700:20. Parking Permit System. Holders of valid parking permits may park their vehicles at
City owned or City operated off-street parking lots whether or not these lots are metered in
accordance with the provisions set forth in this subdivision.
Subd. 1. Parking permits will be sold in the City Clerk's office only.
Subd. 2. Permits will be issued on a quarterly basis.
Subd. 3. Two types of permits will be issued: "A" permits are valid at all City owned or City
operated off-street parking lots or portions of lots within parking meter zones A and C
established pursuant to resolution of the Council in accordance with Section 700:15 of the
Code; "C" permits are valid at all City owned or City operated off-street parking lots or
portions of lots within parking meter zone C established pursuant to resolution of the Council
in accordance with Section 700:15 of the Code; "Reserved" permits are valid at all portions
of City owned or City operated off-street parking lots established pursuant to resolution of the
Council in accordance with Section 700:15 of the Code.
Subd. 4. The holding of a parking permit will not guarantee the availability of a parking
space at any specific location or time, and the unavailability of a parking space will not entitle
the holder of a permit to any reimbursement, nor to the free use of any other parking stall.
Subd. 5. Permits will be issued in the form of a card. The permit must be affixed to the glass
within 12” of the lower left corner of the rear window of the vehicle, as viewed from the rear
of the vehicle. The entire permit must be visible through the window.
Subd. 6. No duplicate permits will be issued.
Subd. 7. The charges for such permits are set forth in Section 580:00 of this Code.
Subd. 8. Persons holding a parking permit under this section must park the vehicle front-end
forward into any parking stall located in all City owned or City operated off-street parking
lots or portions of lots within parking meter zones A, B, and C.
Section 700:21. Complimentary Parking Permit System. Holders of complimentary parking permits
may park their passenger vehicles at City owned or City operated off-street metered parking lots.
Subd. 1. The complimentary parking permits are only for use by visitors to the community,
and are not to be given out to friends, employees, customers, etc.
Subd. 2. Complimentary permits will be sold in the City Clerk's office only.
Subd. 3. Complimentary permits will be used for a specific day.
Subd. 4. The complimentary permit holder must park in one of the meter-only stalls in one of
the off-street parking lots.
Subd. 5. Complimentary permits will be issued in the form of a card. Complimentary
parking permits will be displayed hung from the rear view mirror.
Subd. 6. The charges for complimentary permits will be established from time to time by
resolution of the Council. The permit must be affixed to the glass within 12” of the lower left
corner of the rear window of the vehicle, as viewed from the rear of the vehicle. The entire
permit must be visible through the window.
Section 700:22. Parking Lots.
Subd. 1. Regulation of Metered Lots. The provisions of Section 700:15 et seq. entitled
"Parking Meters" will apply to metered lots. Parking meters in a metered lot will be placed
in front of the parking meter space (rather than alongside the parking meter space as in the
case of parking meters in the streets).
Subd. 2. Rates for Unmetered Lots. Rates for unmetered lots will be set forth in Section
580:00 of this Code.
Subd. 3. Payment. Before removing a vehicle from an unmetered lot, the operator of the
vehicle will make payment of the required fee to the attendant or toll gate. If the attendant is
not on duty, payment will be made by depositing the required fee in the envelope provided
for such purpose and placing the envelope in a deposit box as provided for this purpose at
the parking lot exit.
Subd. 4. Failure to Pay Attendant or Deposit Required Fee. Failure to pay the attendant, or
failure to deposit the fee required in the manner prescribed herein will constitute a violation
of this ordinance and will be punishable pursuant to Section 700:70.
Subd. 5. Swan Lot. Upon parking in the Swan Lot, the operator of a motor vehicle will
deposit coins or dollar bills in a multi-space parking meter. A parking receipt will be issued
by the multi-space parking meter and will display the time the parking receipt will expire.
Subd. 6. Rates for Swan Lot. Rates for Swan Lot are set forth in Section 580:00 of this
code. If a vehicle will remains in the lot beyond the parking time noted on the parking
receipt, the vehicle will be considered as parked overtime. Each additional hour a vehicle
remains parked overtime will constitute a separate occurrence of overtime parking.
Subd. 7. Operation and Parking of Vehicles. No person will operate a motor vehicle in any
municipal parking lot within this municipality at a speed greater than is safe and reasonable
under the conditions of traffic then existing, and in no event at a speed exceeding five miles
per hour. Parking of vehicles in parking lots will be restricted to and will conform to any
stalls or positions for parking designated on the surface of the parking lots. It is unlawful to
park any vehicle in any position so that the vehicle will not be entirely within the area
designated by lines or markings. The City Engineer may post signs at any entrances to a
parking lot from a public street, which will designate one-way traffic for entrance or exit,
and the driver of any vehicle entering or leaving any such lot will comply with any one-way
signs so posted.
Subd. 8. Nuisances and Penalties. The prohibitions set forth in the subdivisions, which
follow, are declared to be nuisances affecting the peace and safety of users of municipal
parking lots:
a. To impede or block the free movement of other persons in parking lots.
b. To ride a bicycle in the landscaping areas of a parking lot or to lock or chain a bicycle
to any object in a parking lot other than a bike rack.
c. To drive a snowmobile in a parking lot or the landscaping areas of a parking lot at any
time.
d. To write or deface or cause damage to the parking lot.
e. To ride or propel roller-skates; in-line skates or skateboards anywhere in a parking lot
and landscaping areas of a parking lot.
f. Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in a parking lot and the landscaping
areas of a parking lot.
g. Occupation or use of a parking lot for purposes other than the operation or parking of
a motor vehicle unless permission is obtained from the City Engineer. Occupation or
use of a parking lot by police officers, firefighters, parking lot operations personnel or
maintenance personnel are specifically permitted.
Subd 9. Parking of oversize vehicles. No person will operate or park in any parking lot any
vehicle that is longer than 22 feet, nor any vehicle and trailer combination that is longer than
22 feet, nor any vehicle that exceeds the size limitations designated at the entrance to the
parking lot.
Section 700:23. Municipal Parking Ramps.
Subd. 1. Hours of Operation. Parking Ramps will be operated and all rules enforced 24
hours each day and seven days per week.
Subd. 2. Rates For Parking Ramps. The rates for parking at all municipal parking ramps are
set forth in Section 580:00 of this Code.
Subd. 3. Payment. The operator of a vehicle will make payment of the required fee to the
attendant prior to removing a vehicle from a municipal parking ramp when the attendant is
on duty. When an attendant is not on duty, or during designated special event parking, the
operator of a vehicle will pay the required fee prior to entry into the municipal parking ramp
by making payment to the toll gate or as otherwise directed by the attendant.
Subd. 4. Failure to Pay Attendant or Deposit Required Fees. Failure to pay the attendant, or
failure to deposit the fee required in the manner prescribed in this section, will constitute a
violation of this ordinance and will be punishable pursuant to Section 700:70.
Subd. 5. Operation and Parking of Vehicles. No person will operate a motor vehicle on any
municipal parking ramp within this municipality at a speed greater than is safe and
reasonable under the conditions of traffic then existing therein, and in no event at a speed
exceeding five miles per hour. Parking of vehicles on ramps will be restricted to and will
conform to any stalls or positions for parking designated on the surface of the ramp area. It
is unlawful to park any vehicle in such a position that the vehicle will not be entirely within
the area designated by lines or markings. The City Engineer may post signs at any entrances
to a ramp from a public street, which will designate one-way traffic for entrance or exit, and
the driver of any vehicle entering or leaving any lot will comply with any one-way signs so
posted.
Subd. 6. Nuisances and Penalties. The prohibitions set forth in the subdivisions, which
follow, are declared to be nuisances affecting the peace and safety of users of municipal
parking ramps.
(a) To impede or block the free movement of other persons in municipal parking
ramps.
(b) To ride a bicycle on a municipal parking ramp and the landscaping areas of a
municipal parking ramp or to lock or chain a bicycle to any object other than a
bike rack. This prohibition does not apply to police use of bicycles.
(c) To drive a snowmobile on a municipal parking ramp and the landscaping areas
of a municipal parking ramp at any time.
(d) To write or deface or cause damage to the municipal parking ramp itself or any
facility located in the municipal parking ramp.
(e) To ride or propel roller-skates; in-line skates or skateboards anywhere on a
municipal parking ramp and landscaping areas of a municipal parking ramp.
(f) Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in a municipal parking ramp
and the landscaping areas of a municipal parking ramp.
(g) Occupation or use of a municipal parking ramp for purposes other than the
operation or parking of a motor vehicle unless permission is obtained from the
City Engineer. Occupation or use of a municipal parking ramp by police
officers, firefighters, ramp operations personnel or ramp maintenance personnel
are specifically permitted.
Subd. 7. Parking of overweight or oversize vehicles. No person will operate or park on a
municipal parking ramp any vehicle, with or without load, which weighs more than six
thousand pounds or is registered for a gross weight of more than 9,000 pounds, nor any
vehicle which is larger than the size limitations designated at the entrance to a municipal
parking ramp.
Subd. 8. Motorcycle and Scooter Permit Parking. The Director of Public Works may
establish spaces for the exclusive parking of motorcycles and/or scooters in any municipal
parking ramp or surface permit lot. Parking of vehicles in such areas will conform to any
stalls or positions for parking designated on the surface of the ramp or lot. The rates for
these parking spaces are set forth in Section 580:00 of this Code.
Subd. 9. Preprogrammed Ramp Access Cards. The Director of Public Works may
authorize the sale and use of pre-programmed parking ramp access cards in any municipal
parking ramp. Users of ramp access cards will be billed monthly based on actual ramp
parking use. Users will be required to park on the top level of the ramp or at other low-use
locations as designated by the Director. The rates for ramp access cards are set forth in
Section 580:00 of this Code. A refundable deposit ($40.00) will be collected with each card.
Section 700:24. Disability Permit-Parking.
Subd. 1 Disability Discount for Permit Parking at Parking Ramps and Surface Lots.
Physically disabled persons, as defined in Minn. Stat. 169.345, subdivision 2, may qualify
for a 50% discount from standard permit parking fees at certain off-street parking lots and
parking ramps. To qualify, the permitted vehicle must prominently display the certificate
authorized by Minn. Stat. 169.345 or license plate issued under Minn. Stat 168.021, and
must be parked by or solely for the benefit of a physically disabled person. This discount
will apply only to standard rate quarterly contracts at the Grand Central, Paramount and
Civic Center parking ramps, and to “A” Permit surface parking lots.
Subd. 2. On-Street Disability Parking Permits. Where there is a demonstrated need for a
person with a valid disability certificate or plate to park at a metered stall on the street for
more than four hours per day, and there is no other reasonable alternative available, that
person may apply to the Director of Public Works for an On-Street Disability Parking Permit
(“D” Permit). The “D” Permit rate will be 50% of the standard “A” Permit rate. “D” Permits
will be available only on a quarterly basis.
Section 700:25. Loading, Restricted and Special Parking Zones.
Subd. 1. Loading Zones. Loading zone signs may be installed in lieu of parking meters
subject to the subdivisions of this section which follow.
(a) Owner or lessee of a parcel of property abutting a given street who desires to have a
loading zone installed will file a request with the City Clerk, who will forward the request
to the City Engineer. The City Engineer will review the request and make a
recommendation to the City Council. If the Council approves the request, the loading
zone sign will be installed upon the applicant paying the fees set forth in Section 580:00
of this Code. The fees may be prorated for the first year, with a January 1 renewal date.
Thereafter, the fees must be paid for the full year, and will not be refundable.
(b) Loading zones will be utilized for loading and/or unloading of merchandise, and will
not be utilized for the purpose of storing vehicles or merchandise. Loading zones may
be used for short-term customer parking, not to exceed 15 minutes in duration, subject
to the following conditions:
(1) A supplemental sign will be installed below the loading zone sign to indicate that
the designated space is available for customer parking for a maximum of 30
minutes. The name of the party/business that holds the loading zone permit also be
displayed on the supplemental sign.
(2) The supplemental sign will be installed upon the applicant paying the fee set forth
in Section 580:00.
(3) The permit holder will share parking enforcement responsibilities with the City for
loading zones designated for customer parking. The permit holder will monitor the
use of the designated customer parking spaces and will notify the City Police
Department/Parking Authority of time-limit violations or of violations involving
use by customers or non-customers.
(c) Unless otherwise recommended by the City Engineer, only one loading zone per premises
will be authorized.
Subd. 2. Restricted Parking Zones. The Council may establish prohibited or restricted
parking zones upon streets, avenues, parkways, parking lots and off-street parking areas of
the City, to prohibit or restrict the parking of any vehicles within designated zones, to provide
for the parking of certain vehicles within such zones and prohibit the parking of other
vehicles and to fix the limit of time during which any vehicle may remain parked within
restricted zones.
Subd. 3. Signs. Whenever any special, prohibited, or restricted parking zone has been
established by the Council the zone will be designated by appropriate signs clearly indicating
the prohibition or restriction within the zone.
Subd. 4. Special Parking Zones. An owner or lessee of a parcel of property abutting a street
in any area of the City of St. Cloud outside of the parking meter zone, who desires to have a
special parking zone established, will file an application for installation with the City Clerk,
who will forward the application to the City Council.
(a) Permit Approval; Fees. If the City Council approves the permit, the appropriate signs
will be installed upon the applicant paying a permit fee as established by resolution of
the Council. For the first year of application, new permit fees may be pro-rated.
Thereafter, they must be paid for the full year.
(b) Refunds. Permit fees are not refundable.
(c) Waiver of Fees. Permit fees may be waived by the City Council for non-profit
organizations or agencies. However, waiver of fees will not constitute waiver of
permit requirements.
(d) Term; Notice. All permits will be granted on a calendar year basis. On or about
November 1 of each year, the City Clerk will notify the holders of all existing permits
for special parking zones that the permits will expire at the end of the calendar year
along with an application form wherein the permit holder certifies the continued need
for the special parking zone and agrees to pay the established permit fees.
(e) Approval of Permit. Each permit application and/or permit renewal will be
considered separately and the City Council reserves the right to approve or disapprove
each application based on its merits.
(f) Termination and Renewal. Any special parking zone for which a valid permit does
not exist will be summarily removed.
Section 700:30. Trucks and Delivery Vehicles.
Subd. 1. Residential Truck Parking. No person will park a bus, truck-tractor, farm tractor,
road tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, truck, commercial or industrial vehicle of any type on a
street, highway, or on public property in an area zoned R1, R2, R3, R3A, R4, R5, R6, and R7.
(a) The provisions of Subdivision 1 of this section will not apply to light trucks classified
as 1/2 ton and 3/4 ton pickups, panels and sedan deliveries, or to vehicles temporarily
parked by the driver, while the driver is engaged in the performance of a trade or
occupation within a residentially zoned area.
Subd. 2. Alley Regulations. No person will drive over any public alley within a parking
meter zone, any truck or other vehicle the total weight of which is more than eight tons
(including pay load), the length of which is greater than 30 feet or the width of which is
greater than eight or any truck or other vehicle to which there is attached a trailer of such
dimensions and weight as to make the combined length of truck and trailer greater than 30
feet or the width of either of which is greater than eight feet or of which the combined total
weight (including pay load), is greater than eight tons. Vehicles other than trucks will not be
parked in public alleys except for pick-up or delivery, and then not to exceed five minutes,
and trucks will not be parked for a longer period of time than is necessary to load or unload
commodities, and then not to exceed 30 minutes.
Subd. 3. Cattle Truck Parking. It is unlawful to leave standing upon any street or public alley
of the City any cattle truck for a period exceeding one hour. Those portions of the City that
are zoned Rural Residential or Agricultural by the St. Cloud Zoning Ordinance are exempt
from this restriction.
Subd. 4. Double Parking. Vehicles will not be double parked on a street or highway, except
trucks when loading or unloading merchandise when access to the curb at or immediately
adjacent to the place of delivery is blocked by other vehicles, and then only for a length of
time as is necessary to load or unload, time in any event and not to exceed 15 minutes. No
truck will be double parked at any time on the left side of a one-way street or on a street
ending in a cul-de-sac.
Subd. 5. Delivery Vehicles, Loading. For the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise,
delivery vehicles may park in any parking meter space except a 15 minute meter space for a
period of not more than 30 minutes without the operator depositing coins.
Section 700:35. Manner of Parking and Stopping.
Subd. 1. Parallel to Curb. Each vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way roadway where
there is an adjacent curb will stop or park with the passenger side wheels of the vehicle
parallel with and within 12 inches of the curb, except where angle parking has been
established.
Subd. 2. Where No Curb. Upon streets and highways not having a curb, each vehicle
stopped or parked will stop or park parallel with and to the right of the paved or improved or
main traveled part of the street or highway.
Subd. 3. One-Way Roadway. Upon one-way roadways, vehicles may be parked with the
driver’s side wheels adjacent to and within 12 inches of the left-hand curb, except where
angle parking has been established.
Subd. 4. Traffic Officer Directions. No person will stop or park a vehicle on a street or
highway when directed or ordered to proceed by any peace officer.
Subd. 5. Through Streets. The City Council may designate any street as a through street and
any intersection as a stop intersection where necessary to preserve the free flow of traffic and
to prevent accident. Appropriate signs will be posted at the entrance to such streets or
intersections. However, trunk highways will not be designated as through streets and
intersections on a trunk highways will not be designated as stop intersections without the
consent of the Commissioner of Transportation.
Subd. 6. Operation and Parking of Vehicles on Public and Private Parking Lots. Motor
vehicle may not be operated on any public or private parking lots at a speed greater than is
safe and reasonable under the conditions of traffic, and in no event at a speed exceeding 15
miles per hour. The parking of vehicles in parking lots will be restricted to and will conform
to any stalls or positions for parking designated on the surface of the parking area. The City
Engineer may post signs at entrances to a parking lot from a public street, which will
designate one-way traffic for entrance or exit, and the driver of any vehicle entering or
leaving any such lot will comply with any one-way signs so posted.
Subd. 7. Display for Sale. Vehicles cannot be parked on any street for the purpose of
displaying it for sale.
Subd. 8. Bus Stops and Cab Stands. "Bus Stop" and "Cab Stand" within the parking meter
zone must be approved by the City Council.
Section 700:50. Parking Violations Bureau. The parking Violations Bureau is responsible for the
collection of the parking use fee, assessed for overtime parking.
Subd. 1. Parking Use Fee. When any person occupies a parking meter space in any street or
publicly owned or operated parking lot beyond the time paid by deposit in the meter be
assessed a parking use fee. All fees will be paid or mailed to the Parking Violations Bureau.
Any failure to pay the parking use fee will constitute a violation for each separate charge
imposed and not timely paid. Parking use fees will be set forth in Section 580:00 of this
Code.
Subd. 2. Enforcement. It will be the duty of the police officers and parking officers of the
City to report to the Parking Violations Bureau the following:
a) The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle occupying the
parking meter space has been parked in violation of a provision of this ordinance.
b) The license number of the vehicle.
c) The date and hour at which the violation was found to exist.
d) The nature of the violation.
e) Any other necessary facts relating to the violation.
Subd. 3. Ticket. The police officer or parking officer will attach to a vehicle referred to in
this subsection a notice to the owner or operator that the vehicle has been parked in violation
of the provisions of this section and directing the owner or operator to make payment as
required by this subsection.
Section 700:55. Fines for Violation. The Parking Violations Bureau will collect fines for violations
of this ordinance. Fines will be paid in accordance with the instructions on the parking ticket.
Section 700:60. Penalty for Parking Violations. It is unlawful to park a motor vehicle contrary to the
provisions of this Chapter. Any parking violation is the act of the registered owner as well as the act
of the person actually parking the vehicle. For the purposes of this section, registered owner is
defined to include motor vehicle renewal or leasing agencies or corporate owners.
It will be a defense to any violation that the registered owner shows that on the date of the offense the
title has been transferred to another.
A violation of this section is a petty misdemeanor.
Section 700:70. Penalty for Non-Parking Violations. A violation of any provision of Chapter VII of
the Code that relates to matters other than the parking of a motor vehicle will be a petty
misdemeanor.
Section 700:75. Impounding Vehicle.
Subd. 1. In accordance with Minn.Stat. §169.041, the City may tow and impound any vehicle
found parked in violation of this ordinance.
Subd. 2. Any impounded vehicle may be redeemed by the owner or by the person parking
the vehicle in violation of this ordinance, by paying to the entity which towed and/or
impounded the vehicle, the applicable towing charge, storage fees, and outstanding penalties
for parking or traffic offenses.
Section 700:80. Use of Proceeds. The specified coin or coins required to be deposited in parking
meters are levied and assessed as fees to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic upon
the public streets and the cost of supervising and regulating the parking of vehicles in the parking
meter zones, and to cover the cost of purchasing, acquiring, installing, operating, maintaining,
supervising and regulating parking meters.
Section 700:85. Reparking to Avoid Overparking. A vehicle will be deemed to remain stopped,
parked or left standing for longer than the time allowed, if it has not been moved at least out of the
block face following the expiration of a posted time limit or upon receiving notice of a 24 hour
parking limitation. A vehicle may not re-park in the same block face during the limited parking
period.
Section 700:90. West St. Germain Street. In order to implement elements of the City's transportation
control plan for air quality improvements, measures must be taken to control the parking and
movement of vehicles on West St. Germain Street from its intersection with 8th Avenue to its
intersection with 10th Avenue. Efforts must be focused on those hours of the day in greatest need of
air quality improvement, presently 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Subd 1. Double Parking. No person will stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic control device on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at either
edge or curb of that portion of West St. Germain Street from its intersection with 8th Avenue
to its intersection with 10th Avenue.
Subd 2. Idling of Engines. No person who has stopped or parked a vehicle at the edge or
curb of that portion of West St. Germain Street from its intersection with 8th Avenue to its
intersection with 10th Avenue will idle or otherwise leave the engine of that vehicle running
for a period of time in excess of 5 minutes.
Subd 3. Delivery Vehicles. Parking space for delivery vehicles will be established on the
south side of West St. Germain between the intersection with 8th Avenue and its intersection
with 9th Avenue. The parking space will be 65 feet in length. It is a violation of this
ordinance for any vehicle other than designated delivery vehicles to stop or park in the
established space.
Subd 4. Posting. Signs will be posted and maintained to give notice of the provisions of this
section as follows:
(a) No double parking. Two signs to a block on both sides of St. Germain Street
from its intersection with 8th Avenue to its intersection with 10th Avenue
(total of eight signs).
(b) Delivery vehicles only. Two signs will be posted designating the zone and
indicating its limits. The curb within the delivery zone will be painted to
indicate its limits.
Subd 5. Enforcement. Law enforcement personnel will concentrate enforcement efforts
between the hours of 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. in respect to violations of provisions of this section as
well as all other traffic regulations affecting West St. Germain Street from its intersection
with 8th Avenue to its intersection with 10th Avenue.
Subd. 6. Illegal Acts, Penalties. It is unlawful to park a motor vehicle contrary to the
provisions of this ordinance. Any vehicle so parked is the act of the registered owner as well
as the act of the person actually parking the vehicle. For the purposes of this section, the
registered owner is defined to include motor vehicle rental or leasing of corporate owners. It
is a defense to any violation if the registered owner shows that on the date of the offense title
had been transferred to another.
Section 700:91. A violation of this section is a petty misdemeanor.
History: Ord. 2336 2-5-07; Ord. 2374 9-24-07; Ord. 2389 2-25-08; Ord. 2935 5-19-08; Ord. 2413 12-01-08; Ord.
2418 12-29-08; Ord. 2419 12-29-08; Ord. 2445 10-26-09; Ord. 2513 11-7-11; Ord. 2529 5-21-12; Ord. 2582 2-
10-14.
Section 703 - Traffic Signal Preemption System
Section 703:00. Definitions.
Subd. 1. Emergency Vehicle:
An emergency vehicle is a vehicle equipped and identified according to law and operated by
the St. Cloud Police and/or Fire Departments or any other vehicle so designated by State
statute.
Subd. 2. Traffic Signal Preemption System (TSPS):
A traffic signal preemption system (TSPS) is a traffic-control system designated for use by
emergency vehicles to improve traffic movement by temporarily controlling signalized
intersections. Under written agreement with the City, the TSPS can be used by transit system
operators to improve transit movements at traffic signals.
Section 703:10. Conditions for Using the Traffic Preemption System.
Subd. 1. Fire Department: City-owned Fire Department vehicles will use the TSPS while
on emergency responses only. The Fire Department standard operating procedures include
conditions for using the TSPS.
Subd. 2. Police Department: City-owned Police Department vehicles may use the TSPS
while on emergency responses only, all other use by the Department is prohibited.
Subd. 3. St. Cloud MTC: Regularly scheduled buses may use the TSPS system in a “low
priority” and non-emergency mode. The operators of the traffic signal system will control
the programming and operation of the “low priority” system. The MTC will follow all
procedures prescribed by the City in utilizing the TSPS.
Subd. 4. City or County Maintenance Personnel, or their contractors under written
agreement, may activate the TSPS only when testing or repairing the system. Sirens and
flashing red lights need not be used except when the test vehicle must exceed the posted
speed limits. In such instances, said test must be pre-approved and coordinated through the
Fire Chief.
Subd. 5. The use of TSPS within the City by non-City emergency vehicles is allowed.
Provided that the emergency vehicle will follow all procedures prescribed by the City in
utilizing the TSPS.
Subd. 6. Unless specifically approved, it is unlawful for any person to activate the TSPS in
the City by any means whatsoever.
Section 756 - Downtown Public Facilities
756:00. Establishment of Commission and District. There is hereby established a Downtown Public
Facilities Commission and Downtown Public Facilities District.
Subd. 1. The Commission. The Commission will consist of five voting members and five exofficio,
non-voting City staff members who will be appointed by the Mayor and approved by
the City Council.
Subd. 2. The Public Facilities District. The district is defined as follows: Beginning at the
intersection of the center of the Mississippi River and the center of the right-of-way of the
DeSoto Bridge; thence, northerly along the centerline of the Mississippi River to the
centerline of the Burlington Northern right-of-way; thence westerly along the centerline of
the Burlington Northern right-of-way to the easterly right-of-way of Sixth Avenue North;
thence, northerly along the easterly right-of-way of Sixth Avenue North to the northerly
right-of-way of Third Street North; thence, westerly along the northerly right-of-way of
Third Street North to the westerly right-of-way of Seventh Avenue North; thence, southerly
along the westerly right-of-way of Seventh Avenue North to the northerly right-of-way of
Second Street North; thence, westerly along the northerly right-of-way of Second Street
North to the centerline of the Burlington Northern right-of-way; thence, westerly along the
centerline of the Burlington Northern right-of-way to the centerline of Eighth Avenue North;
thence, southerly along the centerline of Eighth Avenue North to the northerly right-of-way
of Second Street North; thence, westerly along the northerly right-of-way line of Second
Street North to the westerly right-of-way of 12th Avenue North; thence, southerly along the
westerly right-of-way of 12th Avenue North to the center right-of-way of T.H. 23; thence,
easterly along the centerline of T.H. 23 to the westerly right-of-way of Seventh Avenue
South; thence, southerly along the westerly right-of-way of Seventh Avenue South to the
southerly right-of-way of Third Street South; thence, easterly along the southerly right-ofway
of Third Street South to the easterly right-of-way of Fourth Avenue South; thence,
northerly along the easterly right-of-way of Fourth Avenue South to the center of the rightof-
way of T.H. 23; thence, easterly along the centerline of the right-of-way of T.H. 23 to the
point of beginning.
756:05. Terms. The term of each commmission member will be for three years and until a successor
is appointed and approved. No person may be appointed to more than two successive terms. Any
member that misses three consecutive meetings, without approval of the Mayor and of the
Downtown Public Facilities Commission will be automatically terminated as an appointed member
and a vacancy declared.
756:10. Vacancies. If the office of any Commission member becomes vacant, the vacancy will be
filled in the same manner in which the last regular appointment was made for the unexpired portion
of the term.
756:15. Qualifications. All members will serve without compensation. Appointments to the
Commission will represent the following groups/interests:
Subd. 1. Business Interests. Two individuals will be appointed who are either an owner, operator or
lessee of two separate business establishments within the downtown public facilities district.
Subd. 2. Employee Interests. One individual will be appointed who is an employee of a business
establishment within the downtown business district which does not have an individual
appointed in accordance with Subd. 1. of this section. The appointee of this qualification
may not have an ownership interest in a downtown business district business establishment
or land parcel, nor be an operator or lessee of a downtown business district establishment or
land parcel nor be an officer nor managerial or supervisory level employee.
Subd. 3. Patron Interests. One individual will be appointed who does not have a direct or indirect
financial nor employment interest in any property or business interest in the downtown
business district who will represent the public at large as a patron of the downtown public
facilities district.
Subd. 4. At Large Interest. One individual that qualifies for membership under Section 756:15 of
this ordinance will be appointed as an at large member.
756:20. Chairperson. The Commission will appoint one of its members as chairperson for a term of
one year. The chairperson will preside over all meetings of the Commission and will perform all
other duties and functions assigned by the Commission or the Council.
756:25. Vice Chairperson. The Commission will appoint one of its members as vice chairperson for
a term of one year. The vice chair will resume the duties of the chairperson in his/her absence.
756:30. Meetings. The Commission will meet at such times and at such places as it will designate.
The Commission may adopt and from time to time amend their rules of procedure. Action by the
Commission will be the affirmative vote of not less than a majority of its members, unless otherwise
specified herein. All meetings of the Commission are open to the public and the Commission will
keep a record of its meetings, resolutions, findings, and reports. The Commission will act in an
advisory and review capacity to the Mayor, unless otherwise specified.
756:35. Responsibilities. The Downtown Public Facilities Commission will:
Subd. 1. Uses on City Controlled Property. Recommend to the Mayor the provision of and location
for the following facilities and uses on the City owned property and right-of-way; bike racks,
seating, telephones, post office and public information kiosks, transit stops and shelters,
plantings, ornaments, protection from the elements, furniture, sculpture, pedestrian and
traffic control devises, lighting or heating facilities, fountains, trash receptacles, walls,
barriers, or other fixtures, and equipment, facilities and appurtenances which will enhance
the free movement, safety, convenience, and enjoyment of pedestrians and benefit the
adjoining properties, the downtown business district, and the public at large.
Subd. 2. Requests for Permits or Licenses for Activities and Business Uses in the Central Business
District. Grant or deny requests, received in writing for permits or licenses for activities and
uses in the Central Business District including advertising, decorations or banners, displays
of merchandise, exhibits, public solicitations, art and cultural displays, parades,
demonstrations, building or passageway construction over or under the Central Business
District or other special uses not otherwise defined in his section, including temporary
private uses. The Commission may recommend to the City Council a fee for permits or
licenses granted pursuant to this section. The City Council by a majority vote will have the
right of review and the right to reverse any action taken by the Downtown Public Facilities
Commission.
Subd. 3. Public Parking Facilities Not Financed by Special Service District Fees. Make
recommendations to the Mayor regarding all acquisitions and/or sales of public parking
facility properties. Review and recommend plans and procedures for the construction or
alteration of public parking facilities and other appurtenant structures and improvements.
Recommend reasonable rules and regulations for the management of public parking
facilities, including charges and fees for use. Recommend solutions to parking problems in
the downtown business district.
Subd. 4. Pedestrian Walkway System. Perform those functions as delineated in the Transportation
Plan of the General Development Plan (Comprehensive Plan) for the Central Business
District Pedestrian Walkway System.
Subd. 5. Special Service District. The Downtown Public Facilities Commission will advise the City
Council in connection with the construction, maintenance, and operation of improvements
and the furnishing of special services within a district as may be established by the City
Council in accordance with Laws, 1985, as amended by Laws 1989 Chapter 210. The
Commission will make recommendations to the City Council on requests and complaints of
owners, occupants and users of property within the special service district. The Commission
will review and comment to the City Council on any proposal to provide services or to
impose service fees within the district.
756:40. Special Service District. It is the purpose of this subsection to establish a special service
district as provided for in Laws of Minnesota 1985 Chapter 301, as amended by Laws of Minnesota
1989 Chapter 210, to recover from properties located within the special service district all or a
portion of those costs for the operation, maintenance, debt service, replacement and improvements
which are attributable to the municipal parking system; to provide additional security services within
the special service district; and to provide for additional maintenance, replacement and
improvements in the Central Business District.
Subd. 1. Establishment. A special service district is established for financing purposes of the
municipal parking system, as authorized in Laws of Minnesota 1985, Chapter 301, as
amended in Laws of Minnesota 1989 Chapter 210, which is defined as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the center of the Mississippi River and the center of the right-of-way
line of the DeSoto Bridge; thence northerly along the centerline of the Mississippi River to
the center of the right-of-way line of the Veterans Memorial Bridge; thence westerly along
the center of the right-of-way line of the Veterans Memorial Bridge and continuing west
along the center of the right-of-way line of First Street North to the center of the right-of-way
line of Sixth Avenue North; thence northerly along the center of the right-of-way line of
Sixth Avenue North to the center of the right-of-way line of the Burlington Northern
Railroad; thence northwesterly along the center of the right-of-way line to the center of the
right-of-way line of Second Street North; thence westerly along the center of the right-ofway
line of Second Street North to the center of the right-of-way line of 11th Avenue North;
thence south along the center of the right-of-way line of 11th Avenue North and continuing
south along the center of the right-of-way line of 11th Avenue South to the center of the
right-of-way line of Second Street South and continuing south to the center of the right-ofway
line of T.H. 52 and 23; thence easterly along the center of the right-of-way line of T.H.
52 and 23 to the point of beginning.
Subd. 2. Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, the following words, terms and
abbreviations will have the meaning set out below, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise.
(a) "Gross Square Footage": The total square footage of the horizontal areas of the floors of
the building (including but not limited to usable basements, closets, storage and mechanical
rooms, mezzanines, bathrooms, common corridors and areas, and hallways), measured from
the exterior faces of the exterior walls.
(b) "Hotel/Motel Unit": A building occupied as a temporary abiding place of individuals
who are lodged with or without meals in which there are more than ten sleeping rooms
usually occupied singly and no provisions made for cooking in any individual room or
apartment.
(c) "Residential Dwelling Unit": One or more rooms in a building or portion thereof,
designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, designed for occupancy by one
family for living purposes and having its own permanently installed kitchen and bathroom
facilities.
(d) "Family": Persons living together on the premises in a single dwelling unit under one of
the following conditions:
1. Four or fewer unrelated persons, or
2. Any number of persons related by blood or marriage, or
3. Any number of persons related by blood or marriage and two unrelated persons.
(e) "Lodging House Dwelling Unit": Each sleeping room in a structure where only sleeping
rooms are provided, with a common entrance, internal access to all rooms (except as stated
below), one or more bathrooms, and one or more kitchens to provide lodging for five or
more persons in contradistinction to residential dwelling units and motels/hotels open to
transients. Bathrooms and bedrooms may have locks on the doors.
(f) "Distance Benefit Factor": The distance from the closest property line to the nearest
public parking lot or ramp as follows: 1.00 = within 300 lineal feet, 1.00 = 301 to 600 lineal
feet, 1.00 = 601 to 900 lineal feet, 1.00 - 901 or more lineal feet.
(g) "Parking Demand Factor": Total parking demand created by land or space use type will
be as follows: Office/Service = .0017/gross square foot, Public = .0007/gross square foot,
Retail = .0025/gross square foot, Transportation = .0025/gross square foot, Vacant =
.0007/gross square foot, Hotel/Motel = .7/hotel/motel unit, Residential = .4/residential
dwelling unit or lodging house dwelling unit, Non-profit Property Ownership = .0007/gross
square foot.
(h) "Storage Space": The gross square footage of a space which is designed or is used to
provide storage service capabilities to one or more space uses.
(i) "Space Use, Office/Service": The use of property or a building for the primary purpose of
providing administrative, clerical or professional activities or functions or for providing
repair, maintenance or incidental service for a person or tangible product.
(j) "Space Use, Public": The use of property or a building for a function or services provided
by a unit of government including but not limited to: non-office related governmental
facilities (i.e. library, jail, law enforcement, civic, convention, courthouse, fire station, and
similar uses), public and non-profit elementary, junior high and senior high schools, and
churches.
(k) "Space Use, Retail": The use of property or a building for the primary purpose of selling
a tangible product to a consumer.
(l) "Space Use, Transportation": The use of property or a building for the primary purpose
of providing a means of conveyance or travel from one place to another.
(m) "Space Use, Vacant": A property or building which is designed to be but is not
occupied, is without content, without work or activity, is not lived in, nor put to any use.
Space used for or that is designed for other uses for storage purposes does not constitute
vacant.
(n) "Space Use, Dwelling": The use of a property or building for the primary purpose of
providing more or less permanent living accommodations or lodging.
(o) "Space Use, Non-profit Property Ownership": A property or building which is occupied
by and owned by an entity certified under Title 26 of the USCS, Sections 501c(3) or 501c(4).
(p) "Common Areas": Those areas which are a common amenity to one or more occupants
of an area, including but not limited to bathrooms, hallways, corridors, stairways, fire
escapes, lobbies, closets, and storage spaces.
(q) "Parking Demand": Gross square footage of the applicable space use times (x) parking
demand factor for the applicable space use times (x) the applicable distance benefit factor.
(r) "Net Parking Demand": Parking demand less private parking provided through property
ownership or a minimum one-year property lease which is located within 150 lineal feet of
the nearest special service district boundary line.
(s) "Total Net Parking Demand": The sum of the net parking demand for all properties
located within the special service district.
(t) "Special Service Fee": Net parking demand divided by total net parking demand times
the total service fee, as established by resolution, for the special service district.
(u) "Parking Space": A land area of such shape and dimensions and so prepared as to be
usable for the parking of a motor vehicle and so located as to be readily accessible to a public
street or alley and so constructed as to meet the requirements of Article 6, Sections 2.1, 2.3,
2.4, 2.7, 2.8, and 2.9 of the Zoning Ordinance for the City of St. Cloud.
Subd. 3. Service Charge Imposition. Service charges will be imposed by resolution as provided for
in Laws of Minnesota 1985 Chapter 301, as amended by Laws of Minnesota 1989 Chapter
210.
Subd. 4. Service Charge Collection. Service charges, established by the City Council by resolution
in accordance with Laws of Minnesota 1985 Chapter 301, as amended in Laws of Minnesota
1989 Chapter 210, are due and payable on July 1 of each year. The Finance Director will
annually compute the service fee due the City and render a statement on an annual basis, to
the owner of property within the service district.
Subd. 5. Charges a Lien. Each service fee levied pursuant to this section and by resolution of the
City Council, in accordance with Laws of Minnesota 1985 Chapter 301, as amended by
Laws of Minnesota 1989 Chapter 210, will be a lien against the property, and all such
charges due on September 30 of each year, more than 30 days past due, and having been
properly mailed to the owner of the property, will be certified by the City Clerk to the
County Auditor between the first and tenth day of October of each year. The City Clerk in
certifying late service fees to the County Auditor, will specify the amount of the lien, the
description of the property and the name of the property owner. The amount certified will be
extended upon the tax rolls against such premises in the same manner as other taxes, and
collected by the County Treasurer and paid to the City, along with other taxes.
Subd. 6. Space Use Status Appeal for Special Service District. Each property owner may appeal the
space use status for that year by filing with the City Clerk, no later than May 15, an objection
to the stated space use status and requesting an opportunity to provide evidence
substantiating a change in the space use status to the Downtown Public Facilities
Commission. The Downtown Public Facilities Commission will hear such appeal(s) and
make substantiated space use status changes no later than July 1 of each year. Property
owner(s) may appeal the decision of the Downtown Public Facilities Commission regarding
space use status to the City Council by filing a request to appeal the decision with the City
Clerk no later than July 15 of the respective year. Upon receipt of the request to appeal the
decision of the Downtown Public Facilities
Commission, the City Council, if it determines appropriate, will hold a public hearing on the appeal
and will establish the space use status for the property no later than September 1 of the
respective year.
Section 760 - Snowmobiles
Section 760:00. Definitions.
Subd. 1. "Snowmobile" means a self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice or
natural terrain steered by wheels, skis or runners.
Subd.2. "Owner" means a person, other than a lien holder having a property interest in or
title to the snowmobile and who is entitled to the use or possession of the snowmobile.
Subd. 3. "Operate" means to ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile.
Subd. 4. "Operator" means every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile.
Subd. 5. "Roadway" means all that portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel.
Subd. 6. "Street" or "Highway" means the entire width between the boundary lines of way
or place when any part thereof is open to the use of the public in the City, as a matter of
right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
Section 760:05. Purpose.
Snowmobiles are primarily used for recreational purposes in off-road locations. As the City
becomes increasingly urbanized the operation of snowmobiles within the corporate limits is
less compatible with community needs. Individuals have a right to expect snowmobile
operators to respect property rights. Public facilities and grounds, although snow covered are
susceptible to damage by snowmobiles. Operation of snowmobiles at inappropriate times
can negatively impact the peace and tranquility of our neighborhoods. Operation of
snowmobiles on and adjacent to public streets and sidewalks creates safety risks for all users
of those facilities. Snowmobile mobility presents a difficult enforcement problem for law
enforcement officers who patrol primarily in automobiles. The registered owners of
snowmobiles need to assume a part of the responsibility when those machines are operated
inappropriately. Snowmobiles are great recreational vehicles when operated at appropriate
locations and can serve a valuable purpose in emergency situations. Such use should
continue. The State of Minnesota regulates the operation of snowmobiles in Chapter 84 of
our State law starting at Section 84.81. All snowmobilers need to operate their machines in
accordance with those laws. Additionally, Section 84.87 authorizes Cities to adopt
additional regulations that are effective within the City limits. The City of St. Cloud has
decided that it is in the best interest of the City to limit the operation of snowmobiles. The
sections, which follow, establish those limitations.
Section 760:10 Permitted Areas Of Operation.
Subd. 1. Snowmobiles may be operated on the following roads and locations in the City.
(a) Ditches of State Highways and County Roads in the manner allowed by State law and
County Ordinance.
(b) Private property owned by the snowmobile operator.
(c) On private property not owned by snowmobile operator, with the written or spoken
permission of the landowner.
(d) In designated snowmobile trail access and service areas. The designated areas are:
i. The vehicle parking lot located in Pineview Park.
ii. From the northern right-of-way line of 41st Street South to the southern rightof-
way line of 43rd Street South between the east right-of-way line of
Clearwater Road and County Road 75.
(e) On groomed and signed snowmobile trails as designated by the State & County
Snowmobile Trail Maps.
Section 760:15 Prohibited Areas of Operation.
Subd. 1. No snowmobile may be operated in any of the following locations.
(a) Public sidewalks.
(b) City streets and alleys.
(c) Boulevards within any public right-of-way.
(d) Private property of another without the written or spoken permission of the landowner.
(e) Any trails, walk paths, bike paths.
(f) Within any ponding basins.
(g) Within any City park.
(h) All school property.
(i) All City property.
(j) Lake George.
(k) Mississippi River.
(l) Sauk River.
Section 760:20. Unlawful Acts. It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile within the
limits of the City of St. Cloud.
Subd. 1. At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all surrounding
circumstances; and, with the exception of State or grant-in-aid snowmobile trails, in no case
greater than 20 miles per hour.
Subd. 2. At any place in a careless, reckless or negligent manner or heedlessly in disregard
of the rights or safety of others or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger or
cause injury or damage to any person or property.
Subd. 3. During the hours from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any day on any street or closer
than one hundred feet to any dwelling which is usually occupied by one or more persons;
Subd. 4. So as to tow any person or thing in a public street or highway except through use
of a rigid tow bar attached to the rear of the snowmobile;
Subd. 5. Within 100 feet of any fisherman, pedestrian, skating rink or sliding area where the
operation would conflict with use or endanger other persons or property.
Section 760:25. Single File. Snowmobiles will operate in single file when traveling in groups of
two or more.
Section 760:30. Equipment. No person will operate a snowmobile any place within the limits of
the City unless it is equipped as required in the following subdivisions:
Subd.1. Standard mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the noise of
operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation. No person will use a
muffler cutout, by-pass, straight pipe or similar device on a snowmobile motor.
Subd.2. Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the snowmobile
under any condition of operation.
Subd. 3. A safety or so-called "dead-man" throttle in operating condition. A safety or
"dead-man" throttle is defined as a device which, when pressure is removed from the engine
accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be disengaged from the driving track.
Subd. 4. Front and rear lights as required by state law will be on at all times a snowmobile
is in operation.
Subd.5. Running lights or reflective material, at least 16 inches square on each side, forward
of the handlebars, so as to reflect or beam light at a ninety-degree angle.
Section 760:35. Removal of Ignition Key. Every person leaving a snowmobile on a public place
will lock the ignition and remove the key.
Section 760:40. Emergency Operation. Notwithstanding any prohibitions in this ordinance, a
snowmobile may be operated contrary to the regulations prescribed in this section only in a police
designated emergency or by any City employees involved in performing essential services for the
City, or by any on-duty law enforcement officers responsible for the enforcement of this ordinance
and the laws and order of the State of Minnesota.
Section 760:45. Owners Penalty.
It is unlawful for any person who is the owner or in lawful control of a snowmobile to permit the
snowmobile to be operated contrary to the provisions of this section. Violations are petty
misdemeanors and are subject to fines up to $300.
Section 780 - "Parades"
Section 780:00. Definition. "Parade" means any march or procession consisting of people, animals,
or vehicles, except funeral processions, upon any public street, sidewalk or alley, which does not
comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or controls.
Section 780:05. Permit Required. No person will engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any
parade, unless a permit to conduct such parade has been obtained from the Chief of Police, or, as the
City Council.
Section 780:10. Application For Permit.
Subd. 1. A person seeking the issuance of a parade permit will file in writing an application with the
Chief of Police on forms provided. The application will be filed with the Chief of Police not
less than 30 days in advance of the date of the proposed parade. The Chief of Police has the
discretion to consider any application for a permit to conduct a parade which is filed less
than 30 days prior to the date the parade is to be conducted.
Subd. 2. The application for a parade permit will set forth the following information:
(a) The name of the applicant, the sponsoring organization, the parade chairman and the
addresses and telephone numbers of each.
(b) The purpose of the parade, the proposed date of the parade, the location of the
assembly area, the location of the disbanding area, route to be traveled and the approximate
time when the parade or motorcade will assemble, start and terminate.
(c) A description of the individual floats, marching units, vehicles, bands, including a
description of any sound amplification equipment to be used.
(d) Such other information as the Chief of Police may deem reasonably necessary.
Section 780:20. Permit Issuance or Denial. The Chief of Police may deny the application for a
permit if the Chief of Police finds any of the following:
(a) The conduct of the parade will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement
of other traffic contiguous to its route.
(b) The conduct of the parade would require the diversion of so great a number of police
officers of the City to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto
as to prevent normal police protection to the City.
(c) The Chief of Police makes a finding that the cost to the City to provide an adequate
number of police personnel to maintain order and safety within the City is prohibitive or
beyond the City's ability to sustain.
(d) The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade
will unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to areas
contiguous to such assembly areas.
(e) The conduct of such parade will interfere with the movement of fire fighting
equipment enroute to a fire.
(f) The parade is not scheduled to move from its point of origin and to its point of
termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays enroute.
(g) The parade is to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any produce or goods and
is designed to be held purely for private profit.
(h) The Chief of Police makes any finding contrary to the findings required to be made
for the issuance of a permit.
(i) The information contained in the application is found to be false or nonexistent in
any material detail.
(j) The applicant refused to agree or abide by or comply with all conditions of the
permit.
Section 780:30. Time for Action on Application; Notice of Denial. The Chief of Police will act
upon the application for a parade permit within five business days. If the Chief of Police
disapproves the application, notice will be delivered or mailed to the applicant, within five business
days, after the date upon which the application was filed. The notice will state the reasons for the
denial of the permit.
Section 780:40. Appeal Procedure. Upon a denial by the Chief of Police of a permit application the
applicant may appeal from the determination within five days to the City Council by filing a written
notice of appeal for hearing by the City Council at its next meeting. Upon appeal, the City Council
may reverse, affirm, or modify in any regard the determination of the Chief of Police. In the event
an application is not filed within the required time the applicant may request a waiver of the time
requirement by the City Council at its next regular meeting, or at a special meeting which may be
called by the City Council to consider the matter. If it finds unusual circumstances the City Council
may waive the time requirement.
Section 780:50. Revocation of Permit. Any permit for a parade issued pursuant to this section may
be summarily revoked by at any time when by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other
emergency, the Chief of Police determines that the safety of the public or property requires such
revocation. Notice of such action revoking a permit will be delivered in writing to the permittee by
personal service or by certified mail.
790 – Valet Parking
790:00. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean:
Subd. 1. Authorized valet loading zone: A location which has been approved by the city
council or its designee as an area where valet parking is permitted.
Subd. 2. Valet parking: The process by which a patron's vehicle is removed from spaces
on the public street to a private parking area for storage and subsequent retrieval upon the
patron's demand.
Subd. 3. Valet parking license: The license issued by the City Clerk allowing a valet
parking operator to operate within the city.
Subd. 4. Valet parking operator: A natural person, corporation, partnership, business
association, or other organizational entity who, through its agents and employees,
provides the service of valet parking.
790:05. Valet Loading Zones. Valet parking service is permitted to operate only in authorized
valet loading zones. Valet parking operators shall conduct valet parking only in an authorized
valet loading zone.
790:10. License required. Valet parking licenses are required whenever valet loading zones are
operated or valet parking services are conducted within the public street right of way. Valet
parking services provided entirely on private property are not subject to the licensing
requirements and restrictions of the chapter. No valet parking operator shall conduct valet
parking services within the public street right-of-way without a license required under this
chapter. Additionally, a valet parking operator must obtain a permit for each authorized valet
loading zone in which it operates a valet parking service.
790:20. License fee. The annual license fees for a valet parking license shall be as established in
Section 510 of the City Code of Ordinances.
790:25. Permit fee. The annual permit fees for an authorized valet loading zone shall be as
established in Section 580 of the City Code of Ordinances.
790:30. Refund of fee. If the application for a license is not granted, the applicant shall be
refunded the fees paid by the applicant, less the fee for processing and application.
790:40. Liabilities and claims.
Subd. 1. All persons accepting a license under this chapter and operating under it assume
all liability for any and all accidents, injuries and damages that may be caused to any
person or property by the operation of a valet parking service and shall at all times save
the city harmless from all claims, damages, actions or causes of action arising therefrom
including reasonable attorney's fees and all expenses and, on ten (10) days' notice from
the city, shall appear and defend all suits against the city as a result of any such accident,
injury or damage.
Subd. 2. The valet parking operator shall indemnify the city for all damages that may
result to city property by virtue of the operation of valet parking.
790:50. License application. Application for a license under this chapter shall be made on forms
provided by the City Clerk and shall contain such information as the City Clerk may require,
including:
Subd. 1. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant; whether the applicant
is a natural person, partnership, corporation or unincorporated association; the names and
addresses of all partners, if a partnership, or of all officers and directors, if a corporation.
Subd. 2. Insurance information as required by section 790:90 of this chapter.
Subd. 3 The name and address of the business or businesses or entities which contracted
with the valet parking operator for valet parking services at the authorized valet loading
zone, and the name and address of the owner of the property at that location, if different
from the business or businesses; the name and telephone number of the owner or manager
of such businesses; and a copy of the agreement to provide valet parking at the authorized
valet loading zone.
Subd. 4. A copy of the valet loading zone authorization, issued by the city council or its
designee, for the authorized valet loading zone which specifies location and the permitted
days and hours of operation.
Subd. 5. Proof of availability of off-street parking spaces to be used by the applicant.
790:60. Insurance required. Each applicant for a valet parking license shall file with the City
Clerk a public liability policy or certificate of insurance from a company licensed to do business
in the State of Minnesota insuring the applicant against any and all liability incurred in the use or
operation of vehicles in the course of providing the service of valet parking. The policy of
insurance shall be in the limits of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for
injury or death to one person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injury or death
for each occurrence, and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for property damage. The applicant
and the city shall be named as joint insureds on the liability policy.
790:700. Employees. A valet parking operator shall ensure that all employees who operate
motor vehicles have in their possession at the time of such operation a valid driver's license and
are eighteen (18) years of age or older.
790:80. Valet parking operator to pay all fines and fees. Valet parking operators shall pay all
fines and fees, including towing charges, arising in connection with a patron's vehicle that is in
the possession or control of the valet parking business at the time such fine, fee or charge is
incurred. This does not preclude the valet parking operator from also being cited for violations of
this chapter that resulted in the imposition of the fines and fees.
790:90. Prohibited acts. No valet parking operator licensed under this chapter, or its employees
or agents, shall commit any of the following acts:
Subd. 1. Provide the service of valet parking at a location not authorized by the city
council or its designee.
Subd. 2. Provide the service of valet parking before or after the time of day specified in
the valet loading zone authorization issued by the city council or its designee.
Subd. 3. Park patrons' vehicles on a public street.
Subd. 4. Except for that required by section 790:100 of this chapter, place signs, cones,
or any other object in a traffic lane, parking lane or sidewalk, or otherwise block or
hinder movement in a traffic lane.
Subd. 5. Allow vehicles to remain in the authorized valet loading zone longer than
fifteen (15) minutes.
Subd. 6. Violate any traffic law, including, but not limited to, laws prohibiting double
parking, use of alleys for through traffic, obstructing traffic, illegal "U" turns, and
speeding.
Subd. 7. Store patrons' keys or operate any other aspect of the valet parking service from
a vehicle parked on a public street.
Subd. 8. Knowingly permit its employees or agents to loiter in the immediate vicinity of
the authorized valet loading zone in a manner which disturbs the peace and quiet of other
persons.
790:100. Required conduct. Valet parking operators licensed under this chapter, and their
employees and agents, shall:
Subd. 1. Fully comply with the requirements of the valet loading zone authorization
issued by the city council or its designee.
Subd. 2. Operate vehicles in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws,
and in a manner so as to assure the safety of persons and property.
Subd. 3. Provide each patron with a prenumbered receipt indicating the valet parking fee
and the name and address of the operator.
Subd. 4. Display a sign, whose design and location shall be approved by the City Clerk,
indicating any fee for valet parking. This sign shall be easily visible to patrons as they
enter the authorized valet loading zone.
Subd. 5. Ensure that a supervisor designated by the valet parking operator is at the
authorized valet loading zone at all times during hours of operation.
Subd. 6. Provide adequate staffing to ensure that vehicles do not remain in the authorized
valet loading zone for longer than fifteen (15) minutes.
790:110. Revocation, suspension or nonrenewal. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of
this section may subject a license holder, after notice and hearing, to a monetary penalty, or in
the case of repeat or serious violations, license revocation, suspension, or non-renewal by the
city council.
CHAPTER VIII
Section 800 - 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor
Section 800:00. Provisions of State Law Adopted. The provisions of Minnesota Statutes,
Section 340A.101, relating to the definition of terms, are adopted and made a part of this
ordinance as if set out in full.
Section 800.01. Other Definitions.
Subd. 1. Liquor Service Manager. “Liquor Service Manager” is the person
responsible for overseeing the daily operations of the establishment and for
compliance with State and local laws
Subd. 2. Local Contact. “Local Contact” is the person(s) required to be on the
premises of the establishment daily, who is familiar with daily operations, and who
is available for contact by city officials and law enforcement in emergency and nonemergency
situations.
Section 800:05. License Required.
Subd. 1. No person, except wholesalers and manufacturers to the extent authorized
by law, will deal in or dispose of by gift, sale, or otherwise, or keep or offer for sale,
any 3.2 percent malt liquor within the City without first having received a license as
provided by this ordinance. Licenses will be of three kinds:
(a) "On-Sale"
(b) "Off-Sale"
(c) "Temporary On-Sale".
Subd. 2. On-Sale License. "On-Sale" license will be granted only to bona fide
clubs, establishments for sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor at retail, restaurants,
including restaurants operated in the place of manufacture of a brewer licensed
pursuant to Minn. Stat. §340A.301, subd. 1., and hotels. "On-Sale" licenses will
permit the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor for consumption on the premises only.
Subd. 3. Off-Sale License. "Off-Sale" licenses will permit the sale of 3.2 percent
malt liquor at retail, in the original package, for consumption off the premises only.
Subd. 4. Manufacturer. A manufacturer of 3.2 percent malt liquor may sell such
liquor without a license to licensed dealers holding either "On-Sale" or "Off-Sale"
licenses, and may sell and deliver 3.2 percent malt liquor, in quantities of not less
than two gallons, direct to consumers at their homes. Such manufacturer or any
affiliated or subsidiary company will not sell 3.2 percent malt liquor except as
prescribed in this ordinance. An affiliated or subsidiary company will be one in
which such manufacturer or its stockholders own a majority of the stock.
Subd. 5. Temporary On-Sale. "Temporary On-Sale" will permit the sale of 3.2
percent malt liquor for consumption at a designated premises only under the
auspices or sponsorship of a non-profit organization. A temporary license for
consumption on the campus of St. Cloud State University will be issued only for
those places designated by the University.
Section 800:07. Licensed Premises. "Licensed premises" is the premises described in the
approved license application. In the case of a restaurant, club, or exclusive liquor store
licensed for on-sales of alcoholic beverages and located on a golf course, "licensed
premises" means the entire golf course except for areas where motor vehicles are regularly
parked or operated.
Section 800.08. Sidewalk Cafes.
Subd. 1. Sidewalk Cafes. Sidewalk Liquor Sales Allowed Within the Central
Business District. Any restaurant within the Central Business District as to which
an on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license has been issued and to which a permit
has been issued under the provisions of Section 440:00 of this Code, may have an
area that is contiguous to the completely enclosed licensed premises included in
the area licensed to permit the sale and/or consumption of 3.2 percent malt liquor
in such contiguous area that is not wholly within a completely enclosed building.
The licensee must declare its intention to provide outdoor sales and service within
the adjacent public right of way in its annual license application. The Paramount
Theatre may offer liquor sales and service within the adjacent public right of way
during programmed events without the requirement of meal or food service.
(a) Limitations on Sidewalk Liquor Sales.
Sale of liquor within the public right of way is allowed subject to the following
terms and conditions:
1. Time. Sales of liquor in sidewalk cafes is limited to the hours commencing at
10 a.m. and ending at 12 midnight. No licensee, nor the employee, nor the
agent of any licensee, will serve, dispense, or in any manner furnish liquor in a
sidewalk cafe at any other time; nor permit the presence of any open bottle or
open receptacle containing liquor in the unenclosed area within thirty minutes
after the expiration of the time of any day when liquor may be legally sold in
the unenclosed area. No sales are permitted in the unenclosed area during
these times and on these days if otherwise prohibited by the provisions of
Section 800 of this Code.
2. Food Service Facilities. A restaurant offering sidewalk liquor sales must have
facilities for serving not less than 30 guests at one time and must maintain an
adequate staff, including a cook whose duties must include the preparation or
cooking of meals in a kitchen located on the premises, for service in the
restaurant. Food service must be available at all times during which sidewalk
liquor sales are offered.
3. Barriers. Where barriers defining the unenclosed liquor service area are
provided at the discretion of the license holder, the service area may be
defined by planters, walls, rope, stanchions, contrasting colored pavers
installed with permission of the City of St. Cloud pursuant to Section 635:30,
or decorative fences. Chain link fencing, snow fencing, and other forms of
demarcation determined by City Administration to be inconsistent with the
desired character of the Central Business District are prohibited.
4. Supervision. A Liquor Service Manager will be assigned at all times of
operation the responsibilities of supervising the activities within the sidewalk
liquor service area.
5. Waste Collection. Covered garbage receptacles must be provided within the
liquor service area. No waste liquids, garbage, litter or refuse will be dumped
or drained into sidewalks, streets, gutters, drains, public trash receptacles or
any other place except those receptacles provided within the liquor service
area or within the adjacent restaurant.
6. General Standards. Private furniture and facilities must be installed and
maintained in compliance with all requirements of Section 635:30.
7. Insurance. Any establishment offering liquor service within the public right of
way must file with the City Clerk evidence on insurance insuring against
liability imposed by law arising out of the ownership, maintenance or
operation of such liquor service. The certificate must state that all coverage
afforded to the enclosed premise is extended to the outdoor service area. The
certificate must further state that coverage may not be cancelled except upon
ten days written notice filed with the City Clerk’s Office. Sale of liquor
within the public sidewalk must cease and facilities be removed at any time
the required insurance is not in place.
(b) No Expectation of Renewal. Utilization of the sidewalk for outdoor sales and
service must be deemed experimental and as such, no expectation must be had by
the licensee that the outdoor area will continue to be allowed through annual
licensing, even though no misconduct occurred win the outdoor area.
(c) Failure to Comply with Applicable Standards. Failure to comply with the
provisions of Section 810:05, Subdivision 7 and any other applicable provision of
local, State, or Federal law can result in forfeiture of the license holders’ right to
utilize the sidewalk for outdoor sales and service. Private facilities must be
removed at the sole expense of the licensee upon order of the City of St. Cloud.
Violations occurring within the public right of way can be subject to penalty
against the principal on-sale license for the premises.
Section 800:09 Seasonal Outdoor Sales.
(a) Seasonal Outdoor Sales Allowed. The sale of 3.2 percent malt liquors
pursuant to any of the licenses issued in accordance with Section 800 of the Code,
will be limited to the sale and consumption inside of a structure on the licensed
premises, unless the licensee declares its intention to provide for outdoor sale and
service on the licensed premises in its annual license application.
(b) Limitations on Area Licensed for Seasonal Outdoor Sales. Seasonal outdoor
liquor sales are allowed subject to the following terms and conditions.
1. Time. Sales of liquor in the licensed area is limited to the hours commencing
at 10 a.m. and ending at 2:00 a.m. licensees, employees, and agents of any
licensee, will not serve, dispense or in any manner furnish liquor in the
licensed area at any other time; nor permit the presence of any open bottle or
open receptacle containing liquor in the licensed area within 30 minutes after
the expiration of the time of any day when liquor may be legally sold. Sales
are not permitted in the licensed area during these times and on these days if
otherwise prohibited by the provisions of Section 810 of this Code.
2. Access. The primary access and egress will be from the main premise or
structure and no other access or egress will be allowed other than those
required as emergency exits.
3. Free Passage Controlled. The outdoor sales area will be defined or
structurally constructed so as to prohibit the free passage of any person or
substance beyond said area.
4. Supervision. A Liquor Service Manager will be assigned, at all times of
operation, the responsibilities of supervision of the activities within the
licensed area.
5. Live Entertainment. Live entertainment or the use of sound producing
equipment is permitted when controlled in such a manner that it remains in
compliance with noise control regulations set forth in this Code.
6. Food Service The restaurant which is the holder of the on-sale license must
have facilities for serving not less than 30 guests at one time and must
maintain an adequate staff, including a cook whose duties must include the
preparation or cooking of meals in a kitchen located on the premises, for
service in the restaurant.
7. Insurance. Any establishment offering outdoor liquor service must file with
the City Clerk evidence on insurance insuring against liability imposed by law
arising out of the ownership, maintenance or operation of such liquor service.
The certificate must state that all coverage afforded to the enclosed premise is
extended to the outdoor service area. The certificate must further state that
coverage may not be cancelled except upon ten days written notice filed with
the City Clerk’s Office. Sale of liquor within the outdoor service area must
cease at any time the required insurance is not in place.
(c) No Expectation of Renewal. Any action of the City allowing outdoor sales
must be deemed experimental and as such, no expectation must be had by the
licensee that the outdoor area will continue to be permitted through annual
licensing, even though no misconduct occurred in the outdoor area.
(d) Violations Impact Principal License. Any violations of the provisions of this
ordinance allowing seasonal outdoors sales, or of the State law regulating the sales
of liquors which occur in the licensed area, will be considered as violations of the
principal on-sale license for the premises.
Section 800:10. Application Form. Any person desiring to sell 3.2 percent malt liquors
will make application in writing, in duplicate, to the City Clerk, on a form supplied by the
City and containing such information as the Clerk or the City Council may require.
Section 800:15. Procedure. The application will be signed and verified by the applicant,
and if the applicant is a corporation, then by an officer of the corporation before a notary
public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. No application will be considered
unless accompanied by a receipt showing the full payment of the license fee. The fee will be
returned if the license is denied. Upon the filing of an application for a license, together
with the instruments required to accompany the license, the City Clerk will immediately
deliver the application to the Mayor's Office. A copy of the application will be immediately
forwarded to the Police Chief who will immediately investigate all information material to
the application Upon the completion of the investigation, the Police Chief will submit in
writing to the Mayor's Office complete findings and recommendations. The Mayor will
then submit the application to the Council along with the Chief's report of the investigation.
Section 800:20. False Statement. Any person who willfully makes any false statement in
an application for a license, or who willfully deceives, or attempt to deceive, the Council or
any City officer on City business by any statement or answer made in connection with an
investigation or application will be held in violation of the provisions of this ordinance.
Section 800:25. Renewal Or Transfer. Applications for the renewal of licenses will be filed
with the City Clerk on or before June 1st of each year preceding the expiration of the
current license. Any person applying for this first license desiring to transfer a license from
one location to another will make application not less than two weeks prior to the regular
Council meeting at which the application will be considered. Temporary On-Sale licenses
will not be renewable and not more than three Temporary On-Sale licenses may be issued to
any one club, charitable, religious, or educational nonprofit organization during any twelve
month period. However, Temporary On-Sale licenses may be issued on successive days
provided that not more than three temporary licenses be issued to the same organization or
group during any twelve month period.
Section 800:30. License Fees. Each application for a license will be accompanied by a
receipt of the City Clerk showing payment in full of the prescribed annual fee.
Section 800:35. Date of Expiration. All licenses will expire on the last day of June of each
year. Any person desiring a license for the succeeding year will make application therefore
not later than the first day of June. A Temporary On-Sale license will be issued for one day
only and will expire at 12:00 midnight of the day for which issued.
Section 800:40. Granting of License.
Subd. 1. Review Procedure. The City Clerk will immediately after filing deliver
the license application to the Mayor, together with documents required to
accompany the license.
(a) The City Clerk will forward a copy of the application and accompanying
documents to the Planning Director, Health Department, Police Chief, and City
Attorney.
(b) The Planning Director will review the application and any other pertinent
information relative to zoning, land use compatibility, and comprehensive
planning.
(c) The Police Chief will make or cause to be made a review of the application to
determine the potential impact of law enforcement. The Police Chief will also
make or cause to be made an investigation of the applicant's character and
criminal history.
(d) The Health Department will review all license applications where the service of
food is a requirement of the license. The Health Department will confirm that
all persons applying for a license where service of food is a requirement are in
fact a locally licensed food establishment. The Health Department will also
confirm that the premises for which the license is to be issued meets all other
requirements of this code and State Statutes relating to the handling and service
of food and the designation as a restaurant, hotel, or club. The City Attorney
will review the application for compliance with all applicable statutes and
ordinances.
Subd. 2. Submission of findings and Recommendations. Within 60 days of receipt
of the application, the Police Chief, Planning Director, Health Department and City
Attorney will submit in writing to the Clerk their respective findings and
recommendations. The Clerk will immediately submit the application, including
preliminary plans, if any, to the Mayor with the reports and recommendations of the
Police Chief, the Planning Director, the Health Department, and the City Attorney
with respect to the granting or denying of the application. The Mayor will
immediately submit the application and preliminary plans, if any, to the City
Council.
Subd. 3. License Restrictions; Transfers. Each license will be issued to the
applicant only. Each license will be issued only for the premises described in the
application. No license may be transferred to another person or place without prior
City Council approval. Any person desiring to transfer a license from one location
to another will make application not less than two weeks prior to the regular Council
meeting at which the application will be considered. Changes in corporate directors
and officers must be reported within 30 days to the City Clerk. Any transfer of
stock of a corporate licensee which constitutes a transfer of more than ten percent
(10%) of that corporation's outstanding stock is deemed a transfer of the license. A
license transfer may not be made without prior Council approval.
Subd. 4. Review and Investigation Fee.
(a) At the time of each original application for a license or at the time of any
application for the transfer of an existing license, the applicant will pay in full a
review and investigation fee. If the review and investigation is conducted solely
within the State of Minnesota, the fee will be set forth in Section 510 of this
Code.
(b) Should the City Council find that an investigation is required outside the State of
Minnesota, the fee will be that established for the same class of in-State review
and investigation in addition to which will be added actual costs of review and
investigation exceeding the in-State fee. For investigation outside of the State of
Minnesota, the portion of the fee determined by the in-State schedule will be
paid at the time of the original application; any fee due in excess of that amount
must be paid prior to the license hearing and before the City Council considers
the application.
(c) Where a new application is filed as a result of incorporation by an existing
licensee and the ownership control and interest in the license are unchanged, no
additional license fee will be required.
(d) Review and investigation fees will not be refunded.
Subd. 4. Temporary On-Sale License Review. Temporary On-Sale licenses may be
issued by the City Clerk without approval by the City Council provided that
applications for Temporary On-Sale licenses are reviewed by the Chief of Police in
accordance with Section 800:15. The report of the Chief of Police will only be
forwarded to the City Clerk
Subd. 5. Proof of Financial Responsibility. At the time of filing of the application
for a license under this ordinance, proof of financial responsibility with regard to
liability imposed by Minnesota Statutes §340A.409 must be furnished to the
municipality. The municipality must submit to the Commissioner of Public Safety
the applicant's proof of financial responsibility prior to the license being granted.
Proof of financial responsibility will be provided as follows:
(a) A certificate that there is in effect for the license period an insurance policy or
pool providing at least $50,000 of coverage because of bodily injury to any one
person in any one occurrence, $100,000 because of bodily injury to two or more
persons in any one occurrence, $10,000 because of injury to or destruction of
property of others in any one occurrence, $50,000 for loss of means of support
of any one person in any one occurrence, and $100,000 for loss of means of
support of two or more persons in any one occurrence; or
(b) A bond of a surety company with minimum coverages as provided in clause (1);
or;
(c) A certificate of the State Treasurer that the license has deposited with the State
Treasurer $100,000 in cash or securities which may legally be purchased by
savings banks or for trust funds having a market value of $100,000.
Subd. 5. The requirements do not apply to licensees who by affidavit establish that
(a) they are on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licensees with sales of less than $10,000
of 3.2 percent malt liquor for the preceding year; or (b) they are off-sale 3.2 percent
malt liquor licensees with sales of less than $20,000 of 3.2 percent malt liquor for
the preceding year.
Section 800:45. Persons Ineligible For License. No license will be granted to or held by
any person included in the subdivisions which follow.
Subd. 1. Age. Persons under the age of 21.
Subd. 2. Convicted of Crime. Person who within a period of five years immediately
prior to the filing of an application have been convicted of a felony or of a violation
of any law of this State or of any ordinance of a city or the State relating to the sale
of 3.2 percent malt liquor or of intoxicating liquors.
Subd. 3. Manufacturer or Wholesaler. Persons who are a manufacturer or
wholesaler of 3.2 percent malt liquor, or who is interested in the control of any place
where 3.2 percent malt liquor is manufactured.
Subd. 4. Citizen or Resident Alien. Persons who are not a citizens of the United
States, or a resident alien.
Subd. 5. Good Character. Persons who are not of good moral character.
Subd. 6. Holder, Federal Stamp. Persons who are or during the period of licensure
become, the holder of a Federal retail liquor dealer's special tax stamp for the sale of
intoxicating malt liquor at any place, unless a local license was also issued to sell
intoxicating malt liquor at such place.
Subd. 7. Not the Proprietor. Persons who are not the proprietor of the establishment
for which the license is issued.
Subd. 8. No Other Establishment For "On-Sale". Persons directly or indirectly
interested in any other establishment in the municipality to which an "On-Sale"
license has been issued under the ordinance.
Subd. 9. Limitation on Ownership Interest by Brewer. A brewer may not be
granted an "on-sale" license unless the brewer's ownership interest in any other
manufacturer, brewer, importer or wholesaler of 3.2 percent malt liquor meets the
requirements of Minn. Stat. §340A.301, subd. 7(b).
Section 800:50. Conditions of License.
Subd. 1. Every license will be granted subject to the conditions specified in the
following subdivisions and all other provisions of this ordinance and the provisions
of any other applicable ordinance or of State law;
Subd. 2. License Posted. The license will be posted in a conspicuous place on the
licensed premises at all times.
Subd. 3. Licensee Responsible for Conduct. Every licensee will be responsible for
the conduct of the place of business and the conditions of sobriety and order in it.
The act of any employee on the licensed premises authorized to serve or sell 3.2
percent malt liquor is deemed the act of the licensee as well and the licensee is liable
to all penalties provided by this ordinance equally with the employee.
Subd. 4. Employing Minors. Persons under 18 years of age may not serve or sell 3.2
percent malt liquor in a licensed 3.2 percent malt liquor or intoxicating liquor
establishment.
Subd. 5. Slot Machines and Gambling Devices. Licensees will not keep, possess or
operate or permit the keeping, possession, or operation of slot machines, or a
gambling device or apparatus on the licensed premises or any room adjoining the
licensed premises under control. However, gambling devices may be kept or
operated and raffles conducted on licensed premises or any room adjoining the
licensed premises under the licensees control where the gambling device or raffle is
licensed pursuant to the laws of the State of Minnesota. This subdivision does not
apply to dice kept or used on the premises for purposes permitted under Minnesota
Statutes Sections 340A.410, Subd. 5 and 609.761, Subd. 4.
Subd. 6. Owner of Equipment. Equipment or fixture in any licensed place will not
be owned in whole or in part by any wholesaler, manufacturer, or distiller of 3.2
percent malt liquor;
Subd. 7. Display of Intoxicating Liquor.
(a) A person holding a license to sell 3.2 percent malt liquor who does not also hold
a license to sell intoxicating liquor, will not sell or permit the consumption or
display of intoxicating liquor on the premises, or serve any liquids for the
purpose of mixing the same with intoxicating liquor. The presence of
intoxicating liquors on the premises of such licensee will be prima facie
evidence of possession of intoxicating liquors for the purpose of sale and the
serving of any liquid for the purpose of mixing the same with intoxicating
liquors will be prima facie evidence that intoxicating liquor is being permitted to
be consumed or displayed contrary to this ordinance.
(b) A person holding a license to sell 3.2 percent malt liquor and a permit issued by
the State Liquor Control Commissioner, pursuant to Minnesota Statutes
Annotated, Chapter 735, to operate a bottle club, but who does not have a
license to sell intoxicating liquor, may display intoxicating liquors and permit
their consumption on the premises, in the manner permitted by State statute. In
no event may intoxicated liquor be sold on the premises.
Subd. 8. City Officials Right to Enter. Any Police Officer, Health Officer, or
properly designated officer of the City has the unqualified right to enter, inspect, and
search the premises of the licensee during business hours without a search warrant
and any Police Officer has the right to seize all gambling devices found on the
licensed premises.
Subd. 9. Ethyl Alcohol or Neutral Spirits. No "On-Sale" establishment will keep
ethyl alcohol or neutral spirits on the licensed premises or permit their use on the
premises either alone or mixed with any other beverage.
Subd. 10. Local Contact Required to be On Premises. A designated Local Contact
will be present on the licensed premises. At the time of the application for a license,
the applicant will designate a maximum of three individuals as Local Contacts of
the licensed premises. No other persons may be designated as a Local Contact
without the prior approval of the City Council. Each designated Local Contact is
subject to the requirements of Section 800:45.
Subd. 11. Persons who have not been trained under a training program approved by
the City Clerk for the current licensing year may not serve or sell 3.2 percent malt
liquor in a licensed 3.2 percent malt liquor establishment. An exception is made for
persons currently participating in a training program when they are under the direct
supervision and accompanied by a person who is already certified as trained. The
license holder must maintain a list on the licensed premises of those persons who
have been trained as required by this subdivision together with the date that training
was completed. The list must be certified by the license holder and in the case of a
corporation or club, an officer of that entity. The list will immediately be made
available upon the request of a law enforcement officer or other city official.
History: Ord. 2349 4-2-07; Ord. 2507 9-26-11
Section 800:55. Hours of Operation. 3.2 percent malt liquor will not be sold on Sunday
between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. nor between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any
week day Monday through Saturday inclusive. Licensees, employees, and agents of any
licensee, will not serve, dispense, or in any manner furnish 3.2 percent malt liquor; nor
permit the consumption of any 3.2 percent malt liquor; nor permit the presence of any open
bottle or open receptacle containing 3.2 percent malt liquor on the licensed premises on
Sunday between 2:30 a.m. and 12:00 noon, nor between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 8:00
a.m. on any week day Monday through Saturday inclusive.
Section 800:60. Physical Facilities.
Subd. 1. Partitions or Screens. There will be no partition, box, stall, screen, curtain, or
other device which will obstruct a view of any part of the room, except that partition,
subdivision, or panels not higher than 48 inches from the floor may be maintained.
Subd. 2. Toilet Facilities. Every "On-Sale" licensee will maintain upon the licensed
premises for which the license is issued public toilets conveniently located and of easy
access for the accommodations of its customers. The toilets will conform to the City's
building code and will be maintained at all times in conformance with municipal ordinances
and State laws. Separate toilets will be provided for each sex and will be properly
designated.
Section 800:65. Clubs. Licensed club will sell 3.2 percent malt liquor except to members and to
guests in the company of members.
Section 800:70. Restrictions on Purchase or Consumption.
Subd. 1. Mix or Prepare Liquor. No person will mix or prepare liquor for consumption in
any public place of business not licensed to sell liquor "On-Sale" and no person will
consume liquor in any such place except as permitted by this ordinance.
Subd. 2. Samples Authorized. Off-sale licenses and municipal liquor stores may provide
samples of malt liquor which the licensee or municipal liquor store currently has in stock
and is offering for sale to the general public without obtaining an additional license,
provided the samples are dispensed at no charge and consumed on the licensed premises
during the permitted hours of off-sale in a quantity less than 100 milliliters of malt liquor
per variety per customer.
Section 800:75. Suspension or Revocation of License; Civil Penalty.
Subd. 1. Notice of Violation. The Police Chief will report, in writing, any violation of the
provisions of this section or Minnesota Statutes Chapter 340A committed in the operation
of the licensee's business, to the City Attorney's Office, giving all facts and circumstances
known. If the City Attorney's Office determines from the facts and circumstances known to
it, that the violation may warrant a suspension or revocation of the licenses held by the
licensee, it will fix a time and place for a hearing sufficiently in advance to enable ten days
written notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing. The City Attorney's Office
will then report to the Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting that a hearing has
been scheduled on an alleged violation at the licensed premises.
Subd. 2. Hearing on Alleged Violation. The hearing will be held before an independent
hearing examiner. At the time of the hearing, the licensee may appear and present any
evidence which is material to the investigation. The hearing officer will make a finding of
facts as to whether a violation of the provisions of this section or Minnesota Statutes
Chapter 340A has been committed in the operation of the licensee's business and whether
the violation was willful in nature. The hearing officer will also make a recommendation of
what penalty, if any, will be applied. The Council will adopt the hearing officer's findings
of fact that the licensee is guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance or
State law, and may impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for each violation, suspend the
license for up to 60days, revoke the license, or impose any combination of these sanctions,
subject to the provisions of the presumptive penalties set forth in Section 800:80. In the
event of suspension, the Council will also suspend any licenses held by the licensee under
the intoxicating liquor ordinance, and in the event of a revocation, the Council will also
revoke any licenses held by the licensee under the intoxicating liquor ordinance. The
licensee will be given notice in writing of any such action by the City Attorney's Office.
A 3.2 percent malt liquor or intoxicating liquor license will not be renewed or reissued to
any licensee who has not paid to the City the full amount of any civil penalty previously
imposed by the City against the licensee under this section.
Subd. 3. Temporary On-Sale License Violations. In the event that any holder of a
Temporary On-Sale license violates any of the provisions of this ordinance, the City Clerk
may refuse to issue an organization, group or individual a subsequent license. In the event
of such refusal, the aggrieved party may petition the City Council for a hearing in order to
present any evidence which the aggrieved party deems material to the refusal.
Section 800:80. Penalties for Violations.
Subd. 1. Penalties. Upon a finding by the City Council that a violation of an offense designated
in Subdivision 2 of this Section has occurred, the Council will, at a minimum, apply the
following adverse penalties:
1) For a first violation within a 24 month time period...................................... a $750.00 civil
penalty.
2) For a second violation within a 24 month time period...............................a $1,500.00 civil
penalty.
3) For a third violation within a 24 month time period................................ a suspension or
revocation of license. A liquor establishment that has its liquor license revoked under this
Section becomes eligible only for a provisional liquor license subject to the terms and conditions
outlined in Section 800:85 of this Chapter and subject to approval by the City Clerk. The City
will notify the establishment’s insurance company of the license suspension or revocation.
Subd. 2. Violations Enumerated.
a. Violation of Minnesota Statute §340A.502: To sell, serve or furnish alcohol to an
obviously intoxicated person.
b. Violation of Minnesota Statute §340A.503: To sell, serve or furnish alcohol to
persons under the age of 21.
c. Section 800:50 – Violations of Conditions of License:
Subd. 4: prohibiting employing minors to serve alcohol
Subd. 7: restrictions on the display of alcohol
Subd. 9: prohibition on ethyl alcohol and neutral spirits
d. Section 800:55: To sell, serve or furnish alcoholic beverages after hours.
e. Violations of City Code/State Law pertaining to fire, building or health codes. Such
violations will only be considered a strike in the event a criminal citation, criminal complaint or
administrative citation is issued.
Section 2. Chapter 810 of the 2007 Code of Ordinances is amended by adding a new Section
810:75, entitled Provisional Liquor License, which will read as follows:
Section 800:85 Provisional Liquor License.
Subd. 1. Duration of Provisional License. Provisional Liquor Licenses will be issued for a 12
month period.
Subd 2. Mitigation Plan Required. The applicant for a provisional liquor license must submit a
mitigation plan that specifically describes steps proposed by the applicant to eliminate future
violations.
Subd. 3. Application Review. The application for a provisional license will be presented to the
City Clerk for review. The City Clerk will forward the application and mitigation plan to
appropriate departments for review and comment. The City Clerk will approve, disapprove, or
approve with conditions the application and mitigation plan. If the City Clerk denies an
application and mitigation plan or approves with conditions, it will state the reasons for doing so
in writing.
Subd. 4. Provisional License Application Fee. An application fee for a provisional license must
be accompanied by a provisional license application fee. Fees will be set forth in Section 555 of
this Code. An application will not be processed or considered by the City Council until the
application fee is paid.
Subd. 5. Drink Specials Prohibited. A provisional liquor license holder may not offer drink
specials or other promotions during the provisional licensing period.
Subd. 6. Compliance Checks. Liquor license compliance checks will be conducted frequently in
order to ensure implementation of the mitigation plan and compliance with this section.
Subd. 7. Revocation of Provisional License. Additional ordinance or statutory violations or
failure to comply with a mitigation plan during a provisional licensing period may result in
revocation of the provisional liquor license.
History: Ord. 2349 4-2-07. Section 810:85 entitled “Penalty; Training Program” repealed by Ord. 2349 4-2-07, Section 800:48
entitled Proximity to schools, churches, residentially zoned property and the St. Germain Business District repealed by Ord. 2454
4-5-10, Ord. 2466 5-24-10, Ord. 2704 5-22-17
Section 810 - Intoxicating Liquor
Section 810:00. Provisions of State Law Adopted. The provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter
340A, relating to the definition of terms, are adopted and made a part of this ordinance as if set out
in full.
Section 810.01. Definitions.
Subd 1. Licensed Premises. “Licensed Premises is the premises described in the approval
license application. In the case of a restaurant, club, or exclusive liquor store licensed for
on-sales of alcoholic beverages and located on a golf course, “licensed premises” means the
entire golf course except for areas where motor vehicles are regularly parked or operated.
Subd. 2. Liquor Service Manager. “Liquor Service Manager” is the person responsible for
overseeing the daily operations of the establishment and for compliance with State and local
laws
Subd. 3. Local Contact. “Local Contact” is the person(s) required to be on the premises of
the establishment daily, who is familiar with daily operations, and who is available for
contact by city officials and law enforcement in emergency and non-emergency situations.
Section 810:05. Licenses.
Subd. 1. License Required. No person, except wholesalers will directly or indirectly deal
in, sell, or keep for sale any intoxicating liquor without first having received a license to do
so as provided in this ordinance.
Subd. 2. On-Sale Licenses. "On-Sale licenses will be issued only to hotels, restaurants,
including restaurants operated in the place of manufacture of a brewer licensed pursuant to
Minn. Stat. §340A.301, subd. 1, exclusive liquor stores, and clubs, and will permit "onsales"
of liquor only. The number of licenses issued pursuant to this ordinance will be
established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. The following classes of
on-sale licenses will be used for the purposes of establishing license fees:
Class A: Exclusive Liquor Store, On-Sale
Class B: Hotels, On-Sale
Class C: Restaurants, On-Sale
Class D: Clubs, On-Sale
Subd. 3. Off-Sale Licenses. "Off-Sale" licenses will be issued only to exclusive liquor
stores and drug stores; the number of licenses issued pursuant to this ordinance will be
established from time to time by the City Council. The following classes of off-sale
licenses will be used for the purpose of establishing license fees:
Class E: Exclusive Liquor Stores, Off-Sale
Class F: Drug Stores, Off-Sale
Subd. 4. Sunday Sales. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 810:35 of this
ordinance, any hotel, restaurant, taproom or club as defined in this ordinance to which an
on-sale license has been issued, and which has facilities for serving not less than 30 guests
at one time, may serve intoxicating liquors between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sundays and
2:00 a.m. on Mondays in conjunction with the serving of food. Such establishment will
maintain an adequate staff, including a cook whose duties will include the preparation or
cooking of meals in a kitchen located on the premises, for service in the restaurant, hotel,
taproom or club. It is unlawful for any such establishment, directly or indirectly, to sell or
serve such intoxicating liquors without having first obtained a special Sunday license. The
special Sunday license is subject to all the requirements imposed upon on-sale licenses by
this ordinance and by State Statute. The following license class will be used for the
purposes of establishing the license fee:
Class H: Special Sunday
Subd. 5. On-Sale Wine Licenses. "On-Sale Wine Licenses" will be issued for the sale of
wine not exceeding 24 percent alcohol by volume, for consumption on the licensed
premises only, in conjunction with the sale of food. An on-sale wine license may be issued
only to a restaurant having facilities for seating not fewer than 25 guests at one time. The
holder of an on-sale wine license who is also licensed to sell on-sale 3.2 percent malt
liquors may sell intoxicating malt liquors at on-sale without an additional license. Licenses
under this section are not valid unless first approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
The following license class will be used for the purposes of establishing the license fee:
Class I: On-Sale Wine.
Subd. 6. Temporary On-Sale Licenses.
(a) A club or charitable, religious or other non-profit organization in existence for at least
three years may apply for and be granted a temporary license for the on-sale of
intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the City sponsored by the
licensee. The license will be issued for not more than three consecutive days, may
authorize sales on premises other than those owned by the licensee. Liquor service may
be provided by the holder of the temporary on-sale intoxicating license or by contract
with the holder of a full year on-sale intoxicating liquor license issued in the State of
Minnesota.
(b) Application for temporary on-sale licenses will be made on a form prescribed by the
State of Minnesota and will not be subject to other criteria relating to application forms
and procedures for licenses as set forth in Section 810:10, Subd. 1 of this Code.
(c) All applications must be submitted to the City Clerk's office at least 60 days prior to the
date of the event. The application will be provided by the City Clerk's office and will be
accompanied by a non-refundable fee set forth in Section 511:00 of this Code, and proof of
financial responsibility as set forth in Section 810:10, Subd. 2 of this Code.
(d) Upon review of the application, the City Council will approve or disapprove the license
in its discretion. The following license class will be used for the purposes of establishing
the license fee:
Class J: Temporary On-Sale.
Subd. 7. Sidewalk Cafes.
(a) Sidewalk Liquor Sales Allowed Within the Central Business District. Any restaurant
within the Central Business District to which an on-sale liquor license has been issued
and to which a permit has been issued under the provisions of Section 440:00 of this
Code, may have an area that is contiguous to the completely enclosed licensed premises
included in the area licensed to permit the sale and/or consumption of 3.2 percent malt
liquor or intoxicating liquors in such contiguous area that is not wholly within a
completely enclosed building. The licensee must declare its intention to provide outdoor
sales and service within the adjacent public right of way in its annual license application.
The Paramount Theatre may offer liquor sales and service within the adjacent public right
of way during programmed events without the requirement of meal or food service.
(b) Limitations on Sidewalk Liquor Sales. Sale of liquor within the public right of way is
allowed subject to the following terms and conditions:
1. Time. Sales of liquor in sidewalk cafes are limited to the hours commencing at 10
a.m. and ending at 12 midnight. No licensee, nor the employee, nor the agent of any
licensee, will serve, dispense, or in any manner furnish liquor in a sidewalk cafe at
any other time; nor permit the presence of any open bottle or open receptacle
containing liquor in the unenclosed area within thirty minutes after the expiration of
the time of any day when liquor may be legally sold in the unenclosed area. No sales
are permitted in the unenclosed area during these times and on these days if otherwise
prohibited by the provisions of Section 810 of this Code.
2. Food Service Facilities. A restaurant offering sidewalk liquor sales must have
facilities for serving not less than 30 guests at one time and must maintain an
adequate staff, including a cook whose duties must include the preparation or cooking
of meals in a kitchen located on the premises, for service in the restaurant. Food
service must be available at all times during which sidewalk liquor sales are offered.
3. Barriers. Where barriers defining the unenclosed liquor service area are provided at
the discretion of the license holder, the service area may be defined by planters, walls,
rope, stanchions, contrasting colored pavers installed with permission of the City of
St. Cloud pursuant to Section 635:30, or decorative fences. Chain link fencing, snow
fencing, and other forms of demarcation determined by City Administration to be
inconsistent with the desired character of the Central Business District are prohibited.
4. Supervision. A Liquor Service Manager will be assigned at all times of operation the
responsibilities of supervising the activities within the sidewalk liquor service area.
5. Waste Collection. Covered garbage receptacles must be provided within the liquor
service area. No waste liquids, garbage, litter or refuse will be dumped or drained into
sidewalks, streets, gutters, drains, public trash receptacles or any other place except
those receptacles provided within the liquor service area or within the adjacent
restaurant.
6. General Standards. Private furniture and facilities must be installed and maintained in
compliance with all requirements of Section 635:30.
7. Insurance. Any establishment offering liquor service within the public right of way
must file with the City Clerk evidence on insurance insuring against liability imposed
by law arising out of the ownership, maintenance or operation of such liquor service.
The certificate must state that all coverage afforded to the enclosed premise is
extended to the outdoor service area. The certificate must further state that coverage
may not be cancelled except upon ten days written notice filed with the City Clerk’s
Office. Sale of liquor within the public sidewalk must cease and facilities be removed
at any time the required insurance is not in place.
(c) No Expectation of Renewal. Utilization of the sidewalk for outdoor sales and service
must be deemed experimental and as such, no expectation must be had by the licensee
that the outdoor area will continue to be allowed through annual licensing, even though
no misconduct occurred win the outdoor area.
(d) Failure to Comply with Applicable Standards. Failure to comply with the provisions
of Section 810:05, Subdivision 7 and any other applicable provision of local, State, or
Federal law can result in forfeiture of the license holders’ right to utilize the sidewalk for
outdoor sales and service. Private facilities must be removed at the sole expense of the
licensee upon order of the City of St. Cloud. Violations occurring within the public right
of way can be subject to penalty against the principal on-sale license for the premises.
Subd. 9. Seasonal Outdoor Sales.
(a) Seasonal Outdoor Sales Allowed. The sale of intoxicating liquors pursuant to any of
the licenses issued in accordance with Section 810 of the Code, will be limited to the sale
and consumption inside of a structure on the licensed premises, unless the licensee
declares its intention to provide for outdoor sale and service on the licensed premises in
its annual license application.
(b) Limitations on Area Licensed for Seasonal Outdoor Sales. Seasonal outdoor liquor
sales are allowed subject to the following terms and conditions.
1. Time. Sales of liquor in the licensed area is limited to the hours commencing at 10
a.m. and ending at 2:00 a.m. licensees, employees, and agents of any licensee, will not
serve, dispense or in any manner furnish liquor in the licensed area at any other time;
nor permit the presence of any open bottle or open receptacle containing liquor in the
licensed area within 30 minutes after the expiration of the time of any day when
liquor may be legally sold. Sales are not permitted in the licensed area during these
times and on these days if otherwise prohibited by the provisions of Section 810 of
this Code.
2. Access. The primary access and egress will be from the main premise or structure and
no other access or egress will be allowed other than those required as emergency
exits.
3. Free Passage Controlled. The outdoor sales area will be defined or structurally
constructed so as to prohibit the free passage of any person or substance beyond said
area.
4. Supervision. A Liquor Service Manager will be assigned, at all times of operation,
the responsibilities of supervision of the activities within the licensed area.
5. No Live Entertainment. Live entertainment or the use of sound producing equipment
is permitted when controlled in such a manner that it remains in compliance with
noise control regulations set forth in this Code.
6. Food Service The restaurant which is the holder of the on-sale license must have
facilities for serving not less than 30 guests at one time and must maintain an
adequate staff, including a cook whose duties must include the preparation or cooking
of meals in a kitchen located on the premises, for service in the restaurant.
7. Insurance. Any establishment offering outdoor liquor service must file with the City
Clerk evidence on insurance insuring against liability imposed by law arising out of
the ownership, maintenance or operation of such liquor service. The certificate must
state that all coverage afforded to the enclosed premise is extended to the outdoor
service area. The certificate must further state that coverage may not be cancelled
except upon ten days written notice filed with the City Clerk’s Office. Sale of liquor
within the outdoor service area must cease at any time the required insurance is not in
place.
(c) No Expectation of Renewal. Any action of the City allowing outdoor sales must be
deemed experimental and as such, no expectation must be had by the licensee that the
outdoor area will continue to be permitted through annual licensing, even though no
misconduct occurred in the outdoor area.
(d) Violations Impact Principal License. Any violations of the provisions of this
ordinance allowing seasonal outdoors sales, or of the State law regulating the sales of
liquors which occur in the licensed area, will be considered as violations of the principal
on-sale license for the premises.
Subd. 9. Brewery/Taproom License
a) A Brewer licensed under Minn. Stat. §340A.301 may be issued an On-Sale Brewery
Taproom License for the “on-sale” of malt liquor produced on the licensed premises,
subject to the following conditions:
1) The on-sale of malt liquor may only be made during the days and hours that “on-sale”
of liquor may be made, as prescribed by State Law or within this Chapter.
2) A Brewer may only hold one (1) Brewery Taproom License within the City.
3) The only beverage alcohol that may be sold or consumed on the premises of a
licensed Brewery Taproom will be the malt liquor produced by the Brewer upon the
Brewery Taproom premises.
4) The holder of a Brewery Taproom License who also holds a Brew Pub off-sale license
is permitted to sell Growlers, which is defined as a container with a capacity of up to
64 ounces, for the take-out or off-sale of craft beer. The Growler must be sealed by a
paper or adhesive band strip or sleeve that is applied over the top of the closure in
such a manner that the seal must be broken in order to open the container. The
adhesive band, strip or sleeve shall bear the name and address of the brewer.
5) Nothing in this subdivision precludes the holder of a Brewer Taproom License from
also holding a license to operate a restaurant on the premises of the brewery.
b) A Brewery Taproom License may not be issued to a Brewer if the Brewer seeking the
license, or any person having an economic interest in the Brewer seeking the license or
exercising control over the Brewer seeking the license, is a Brewer that brews or produces
more than 250,000 barrels of malt liquor annually or a winery that produces more than
250,000 gallons of wine annually, as defined and prescribed by Minn. Stat. §340.301.
Subd. 10. Consumption and Display “Bottle Club” Permit
a) A permit issued under this subdivision authorizes the establishment to permit the
consumption and display of intoxicating liquor on the premises. The permit does not
authorize the sale of intoxicating liquor.
b) A permit may only be issued to the following establishments:
1) a restaurant;
2) a hotel;
3) an establishment licensed for the sale of 3.2 malt liquor;
4) a club as defined in Minn. Stat. §340A.101, subd. 7, or an unincorporated
club otherwise meeting that definition; and
5) a bed and breakfast facility as defined in Minn. Stat. §340A.4011.
c) Establishments holding a Consumption and Display Permit are subject to the same
terms and conditions as intoxicating liquor license holders and as provided by this
ordinance and state law. These conditions include, but are not limited to proof of
financial responsibility and regular alcohol compliance checks.
d) It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit any person under the age of twenty-one
(21) to loiter or remain in any room where intoxicating liquor is being displayed or
consumed, unless that person is accompanied by his/her parent or guardian, which
parent or guardian is 21 years or older. The terms, conditions and exceptions outlined
in Section 810:30 Subd. 15, Underage Presence in Licensed Premises, shall apply to
holders of Consumption and Display Permits.
e) All managers and employee of an establishment holding a consumption and display
permit must complete an alcohol service training program approved by the City Clerk
f) An establishment holding a Consumption and Display Permit is subject to social host
liability contained in Section 820 of this Code.
Subd. 11. Brew Pub Off-Sale Intoxicating
A Brew Pub Off-Sale Intoxicating Malt Liquor license may be issued to a brewer who
holds a brewer license issued by the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety for the
operation of a brewpub and shall be operated in and as a part of a restaurant establishment
for which an on-sale intoxicating liquor license has been issued by the city.
a. An off-sale license may be issued solely for the malt liquor produced and
packaged on the licensed premises and only upon approval of the license by the
Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety.
b. Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale at
exclusive liquor stores and must be removed from the licensed premises before the
applicable off-sale closing time requirements.
c. Only malt liquor may be brewed or manufactured at the licensed premises and
not more than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a calendar year may be brewed or
manufactured at the licensed premises.
d. The malt liquor sold off-sale shall be packaged in 64-ounce containers
commonly known as "growlers" and shall have the following requirements for
packaging:
i. The containers shall bear a twist type closure, cork, stopper or plug.
ii. At the time of sale, a paper or plastic adhesive band, strip or sleeve shall be
applied to the container and extend over the top of the twist type closure, cork,
stopper or plug forming a seal that must be broken upon opening of the
container.
iii. The adhesive band, strip or sleeve shall bear the name and address of the
brewer/licensee selling the malt liquor.
iv. The containers shall be identified as malt liquor, contain the name of the
malt liquor, bear the name and address of the brewer/licensee selling the
malt liquor, and the contents in the container packaged as required herein shall
be considered intoxicating liquor unless the alcoholic content is labeled as
otherwise in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rules, part
7515.1100.
Class O: Brew Pub Off-Sale Intoxicating
Subd. 12. Small Brewer Off-Sale Intoxicating
A “Small Brewer Off-Sale Intoxicating" license authorizes a micro-brewery that
manufactures less than 20,000 barrels of malt liquor per year to sell malt liquor to the public
in 64-ounce containers, commonly known as “growlers,” or in 750 milliliter bottles as
permitted by Minn. Stat. §340A.301. The amount of malt liquor sold at off-sale may not
exceed 500 barrels annually; off-sale shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale at
exclusive liquor stores, and the off-sale must be removed from the premises before the
applicable off-sale closing time at exclusive liquor stores.
(a) The malt liquor shall be packed in 64-ounce containers commonly known as
"growlers" or in 750 milliliter bottles. The containers or bottles shall bear a twist-type
closure, cork, stopper, or plug. At the time of the sale, a paper or plastic adhesive band,
strip, or sleeve shall be applied to the container or bottle and extended over the top of the
twist-type closure, cork, stopper, or plug forming a seal that must be broken upon opening
of the container or bottle. The adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall bear the name and
address of the brewer. The containers or bottles shall be identified as malt liquor, contain
the name of the malt liquor, bear the name and address of the brewer selling the malt liquor,
and shall be considered intoxicating liquor unless the alcoholic content is labeled as
otherwise in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rules, part 7515.1100.
(b) A brewer may, but is not required to, refill any growler with malt liquor for off-sale
at the request of a customer. A brewer refilling a growler must do so at its licensed premises
and the growler must be filled at the tap at the time of sale. A growler refilled under this
paragraph must be sealed and labeled in the manner described in paragraph (a).
(c) A brewer may only have one license under this subdivision.
(d) The City may not issue a license under this subdivision to a brewer if the brewer
seeking the license, or any person having an economic interest in the brewer seeking the
license or exercising control over the brewer seeking the license, is a brewer that brews
more than 20,000 barrels of its own brands of malt liquor annually or a winery that produces
more than 250,000 gallons of wine annually.
Class P: Small Brewer Off-Sale Intoxicating
Subd. 13. Sunday Growler Off-Sale Intoxicating
Authorizes a small brewer that manufactures less than 20,000 barrels of malt liquor per
year to sell malt liquor to thepublic in 64-ounce containers, commonly known as
“growlers,” or in 750 milliliter bottles as permitted by Minn. Stat §340A.301, on Sundays
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
Class Q: Sunday Growler Off-Sale Intoxicating
Section 810:10. Application for License.
Subd. 1. Forms and Procedure.
(a) Forms. Any person desiring to sell intoxicating liquors under licenses as defined
will make application in writing providing an original and four copies to the City
Clerk. The application will be on a form provided by the City Clerk, and will
include the form prescribed by the State Liquor Control Commissioner, will state the
category of on-sale license applied for (hotel, restaurant, exclusive liquor store, or
club), and will state the name of the applicant, his age, representations as to
character, with such references as the Council may require, citizenship, the type of
license applied for (on-sale, off-sale, special May Bowle, Sunday sales, temporary
on-sale, on-sale wine) the business in connection with which the proposed license
will operate and its location, whether the applicant is owner and operator of the
business, how long the business has been at that place, and such other information as
the Council may require. The application will be verified, and any person who
willfully makes any false statement in an application for a license, or who willfully
deceives, or attempt to deceive, the Council or any City official by any statement or
answer made in connection with an investigation, will be in violation of the
provisions of the ordinance.
(b) Whenever the application for an on-sale license to sell intoxicating liquor is for
premises on which new construction or the alteration of existing structures is to occur,
the application will be accompanied by a set of preliminary plans showing the interior
and exterior design, including site and space allocation and utilization.
(c) The applicant will submit with the completed application form an executed release of
information authorizing the Chief of Police to obtain any information pertaining to the
applicant's character or criminal history which may be deemed confidential, private, or
privileged by the laws of the United States or of any state.
(d) The applicant will also submit any additional information as may be required by the
Planning Director, Health Department, Police Chief, and City Attorney. Each
applicant for an initial on or off-sale liquor license, a license renewal, or an applicant
for a transfer of these licenses will authorize, by signed statement, the City to request
from the Minnesota Commissioner of Revenue a tax clearance certificate pursuant to
M.S. Section 290.612 and 297A.431. The City Clerk will then request the certificate
from the Commissioner, which will disclose and make public to the City, amounts of
State tax delinquencies and instances of non-filing of tax returns. The Commissioner
will not disclose to the City any amounts of tax liability where there is an
administrative or court action questioning the amount or the validity of the liability or
where the taxpayer's appeal period has not expired.
(e) Review Procedure.
1. Upon the filing of an application for a license, together with the documents
required to accompany the license, the City Clerk will immediately deliver the
application to the Mayor. The City Clerk will forward a copy of the application
and accompanying documents to the Planning Director, Health Department,
Police Chief, and City Attorney.
2. The Planning Director will review the application and any other pertinent
information relative to zoning, land use compatibility, and comprehensive
planning.
3. The Police Chief will make or cause to be made a review of the application to
determine the potential impact of law enforcement. The Police Chief will also
make or cause to be made an investigation of the applicant's character and
criminal history.
4. The Health Department will review all license applications where service of
food is a requirement of the license. The Health Department will confirm that
all persons applying for a license where service of food is a requirement are in
fact a locally licensed food establishment. The Health Department will also
confirm that the premises for which the license is to be issued meets all other
requirements of this chapter and State Statute relating to the handling and
service of food and the designation as a restaurant, hotel, or club.
5. The City Attorney will review the application for compliance with all applicable
statutes and ordinances.
6. Within 60 days of receipt of the application, the Police Chief, Planning Director,
Health Department, and City Attorney will submit in writing to the Clerk their
respective findings and recommendations. The Clerk will immediately submit
the application, including preliminary plans, if any, to the Mayor with the
reports and recommendations of the Police Chief, the Planning Director, the
Health Department, and the City Attorney in respect to the granting or denying
of the application. The Mayor will immediately submit the application and
preliminary plans, if any, to the City Council.
(f ) Review and Investigation Fee. At the time of each original application for a
license or at the time of any application for the transfer of an existing license, the
applicant will pay in full a review and investigation fee. If the review and
investigation is conducted solely within the State of Minnesota, the fee will be as
set forth in Section 510 of this Code.
Should the City Council find that an investigation is required outside the State of
Minnesota, the fee will be that established for the same class of in-State review
and investigation in addition to which will be added actual costs of review and
investigation exceeding the in-State fee. For investigations outside of the State of
Minnesota, the portion of the fee determined by the in-State schedule will be paid
at the time of the original application; any fee due in excess of that amount must
be paid prior to the license hearing and before the City Council considers the
application.
Where a new application is filed as a result of incorporation by an existing
licensee and the ownership control and interest in the license are unchanged, no
additional license fee will be required.
The Review and investigation fee will not be refunded.
Subd. 2. Proof of Financial Responsibility. At the time of filing of the application for a
license under this ordinance, proof of financial responsibility with regard to liability
imposed by Minnesota Statutes §340A.409 must be furnished to the municipality. The
municipality must submit to the Commissioner of Public Safety the applicant's proof of
financial responsibility prior to the license being granted. Proof of financial responsibility
will be provided as follows:
(a) A certificate that there is in effect for the license period an insurance policy or pool
providing at least $50,000 of coverage because of bodily injury to any one person in
any one occurrence, $100,000 because of bodily injury to two or more persons in any
one occurrence, $10,000 because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any
one occurrence, $50,000 for loss of means of support of any one person in any one
occurrence, and $100,000 for loss of means of support of two or more persons in any
one occurrence; or
(b) A bond of a surety company with minimum coverages as provided in clause (1); or
(c) A certificate of the State Treasurer that the licensee has deposited with the State
Treasurer $100,000 in cash or securities which may legally be purchased by savings
banks or for trust funds having a market value of $100,000.
Proof of financial responsibility will not apply to licensees who by affidavit establish that
(a) they are on-sale 3-2 malt liquor licensees with sales of less than $10,000 of 3-2 malt
liquor for the preceding year; (b) they are off-sale 3-2 malt liquor licensees with sales of less
than $20,000 of 3-2 malt liquor for the preceding year; and (c) they are holders of on-sale
wine licenses with sales of less than $10,000 for wine for the preceding year.
Subd. 3. Approval of Security. Surety bonds and liability insurance policies will be
approved as to form by the City Attorney. The filing of the above described security for
license is deemed sufficient for the purpose of the issuance of a "Special License for Sunday
Liquor Sales", provided the terms of such security are amended to include the periods
during which such licensee is operating under a "Special License for Sunday Liquor Sales".
Subd. 4. License Fees. Each application for a license will be accompanied by a receipt
from the City Clerk showing payment in full of the annual fee.
Subd. 5. Date of Expiration. All licenses will expire on the last day of June of each year.
Any person desiring a license for the succeeding year will make application not later than
the first day of June preceding the expiration of the current license.
Section 810:12. Contents of Application. In addition to the information which may be required by
the State Liquor Control Commissioner's form, the application will contain the information set forth
in the subdivisions which follow.
Subd. 1. True name, place, and date of birth, and street residence address of applicant.
Subd. 2. Whether applicant is married or single. If married, true name, place and date of
birth, and street residence address of applicant's spouse.
Subd. 3. Whether applicant and spouse are registered voters of St. Cloud.
Subd. 4. Street addresses at which applicant has been living during the preceding 10 years.
Subd. 5. Kind, name and location of every business or occupation applicant has been
engaged in during the preceding 10 years.
Subd. 6. Names and addresses of applicant's employers for the preceding 10 years.
Subd. 7. Whether or not applicant has ever been convicted of any felony, crime, or
ordinance violation. If so, when, where and for what such convictions were had.
Subd. 8. Whether applicant has ever been engaged as an employee in operation of a saloon,
cafe or other business of similar nature. If so, when, where and for how long.
Subd. 9. Whether applicant is a natural person, corporation, partnership, or unincorporated
association.
Subd. 10. If applicant is other than a natural person, the name of the manager or proprietor
of the premises to be licensed, giving all the information about the manager or proprietor as
is required about the applicant by Subd. 2 above.
Subd. 11. If applicant is other than a natural person, the names of all the members or
owners thereof, giving all the information about the members or owners as is required about
the applicant by Subd. 2 above. This Subd. 11, however, will not apply to a hotel applying
for an "On-Sale" license to be owned and operated by it.
Subd. 12. The floor number, street number, and square footage of rooms where the sale or
consumption of liquor is to be conducted, and if to be conducted in a hotel or restaurant, the
number of dining rooms, square footage, open to the public where meals are regularly
served to guests. The applicant will include a diagram drawn to scale (scale must be
indicated on diagram) on size 8½" by 11" graph paper showing the gross area of rooms
where sales or consumption of liquor is to be conducted. Calculations of gross areas will be
made without further exclusion as to location of bars, coolers, restrooms, etc. Each floor
will be shown on a separate diagram.
Subd. 13. Names and addresses of the owner and any lessees of the land upon which is
located the building which houses the premises to be licensed.
Subd. 14. Names and addresses of all owners, lessees, mortgagors or vendors of fixtures or
furniture used or to be used in the premises to be licensed.
Subd. 15. Name and address of every person who will have charge, management or control
of the place licensed.
Subd. 16. If applicant is a corporation, partnership, unincorporated association, or club, the
name and general purpose of such corporation, partnership, unincorporated association, or
club, and the names and street addresses of all officers. In addition, corporations will file
with the application two certified copies of the by-laws, articles of incorporation, and
minutes of the meeting setting forth the officers of the corporation.
Subd. 17. If applicant is a corporation, the state of incorporation, and a complete list of all
stockholders with number of shares owned by each. This subdivision 18, however, will not
apply to a hotel applying for an "On-Sale" license to be owned and operated by it.
Subd. 18. If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners.
Subd. 19. If a permit from the Federal government is required by the laws of the United
States, whether or not such permit has been issued and, if so, in what name.
Subd. 20. Exact legal description of the premises to be licensed.
Subd. 21. Whether or not all real estate and personal property taxes for the premises to be
licensed have been paid, and if not paid, the years for which delinquent.
Subd. 22. Where an applicant is a party to a civil action/ pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 340A.801
the applicant will include a copy of the summons and complaint with the license
application.
Subd. 23. Other information as the City Council may require.
Section 810:15. Granting of Licenses.
Subd. 1. Council Investigation, Hearing. The Council will investigate all facts set out in
the application and will hold a public hearing before granting the license. A notice of the
filing of the application will be published in the legal newspaper at least one week before
the public hearing, giving the name of the applicant, the location of the premises, and the
time and place when the application will be considered. Opportunity will be given to any
person to be heard for or against the granting of the license. After the investigation and
hearing, the Council will grant or refuse the application in its discretion. No "Off-Sale"
license will become effective until it, together with the bond furnished by the applicant, has
been approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety. After approval, the City Clerk will
immediately issue the license.
Subd. 2. Information to Commissioner of Public Safety. The City Clerk will, within ten
days after the issuance of any "On-Sale" license under this ordinance, submit to the
Commissioner the full name and address of each person granted a license, the trade name, if
any, the effective license date, and the date of expiration of the license. He will also submit
to the Commissioner any change of address, transfer, cancellation, or revocation of any
"On-Sale" or "Off-Sale" license by the Council during the license period.
Subd. 3. License Restrictions; Transfers. Each license will be issued to the applicant only.
Each license will be issued for only the compact and contiguous space specified in the
application or shown on the final plans pursuant to Section 810:16. A license may not be
transferred to another person or place without City Council approval. Any person desiring
to transfer a license from one location to another will make application not less than two
weeks prior to the regular Council meeting at which the application will be considered.
Changes in corporate directors and officers must be reported within 30 days to the City
Clerk. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee which constitutes a transfer of more
than ten percent (10%) of that corporation's outstanding stock is deemed a transfer of the
license. No such transfer may be made without prior Council approval.
Section 810:16. Issuance of License.
Subd. 1. Final Plans Reviewed. Where an on-sale license to sell intoxicating liquor is
granted for premises on which new construction or alteration of existing structures is to
occur, the applicant will submit a set of detailed final plans showing interior and exterior
design, including site and space. These plans will be certified by a registered architect or
engineer. The Council will review the plans for compliance with the preliminary plans
included in the original application, as required by Section 810:10, subd. 1(a).
Subd. 2. Certificate of Occupancy Required. For premises on which new construction or
alteration of existing structures is to occur no license to sell intoxicating liquor will be
issued until a certificate of occupancy is issued by the City for premises constructed in
accordance with the application and plans reviewed by the Council. Prior to issuance of the
certificate of occupancy, the Chief Building Official will certify to the Clerk that
construction was or was not in accordance with the final plan reviewed by the City Council.
Where the construction is found not to be in accordance with the final plan, the Chief
Building Official will state all significant deviations.
Subd. 3. Council To Review Deviations. Where the certification to the Clerk indicates that
construction was not in accordance with the final plans, the Clerk will not issue the license
but will return the application together with the final plans and statement of deviations to
the City Council for further action.
Section 810:20. Persons Ineligible For License.
Subd. 1. A license will not be granted to or held by any person included in the subdivisions
which follow.
Subd. 2. Age. Under 21 years of age.
Subd. 3. Good Character. A person who is not of good moral character or repute.
Subd. 4. A Citizen or Resident Alien, Non-Resident. A person who is not a citizen of the
United States, or an alien admitted for permanent residence, or who has otherwise obtained
a work authorization from the U.S. immigration and naturalization services.
Subd. 5. Convicted of a Crime. A person who, within five years prior to the application of
such license, has been convicted of any willful violation of any law of the United States or
the State of Minnesota or of any local ordinance with regard to the manufacture, sale,
distribution, or possession for sale or distribution of intoxicating liquor.
Subd. 6. No Other Establishment. A person who already has a direct or indirect interest in
three on-sale intoxicating establishments or one off-sale intoxicating establishment in the
municipality to which a license of the same class has been issued under this ordinance. An
applicant for an initial license under this section is eligible for only one license during the
first year of operation. For purposes of this sub-division, a year of operation will consist of
at least twelve consecutive months of actual business operation. The term "interest"
includes any pecuniary interest in the ownership, operation, management, or profits of a
retail liquor establishment, but does not include: bona fide loans; bona fide rental
agreements; bona fide open accounts or other obligations held with or without security
arising out of the ordinary and regular course of business of selling or leasing merchandise,
fixtures or supplies to such establishments; an interest in a corporation owning or operating
a hotel but having at least 150 or more rental units holding a liquor license in conjunction
therewith; or ten percent or less interest in any other corporation holding a license.
Subd. 7. Not The Proprietor. Who is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the
license is issued.
Subd. 8. Spouse. Whose spouse has a financial interest in any "On Sale" or "Off Sale"
intoxicating liquor establishment or whose spouse has had a liquor license revoked within
five years prior to the date of application.
Subd. 9. Corporations. In the case of a corporation, the manager or person in charge will be
subject to all of the above qualifications, and the corporation itself will be subject to
subdivisions 4, 5, 6 and 7.
Subd. 10. Limitation on Ownership Interest by Brewer. A brewer may not be granted an
on-sale license unless the brewer's ownership interest in any other manufacturer, brewer,
importer or wholesaler of intoxicating malt liquor meets the requirements of Minn. Stat.
§340A.301, subd. 7(a).
Section 810:25. Places Ineligible For Licenses.
Subd. 1. A license will not be granted for places included in the following subdivisions
unless otherwise expressly permitted in this section.
Subd. 2. Payment of Taxes, Etc. Any premises on which assessments or other financial
claims of the City or State are due, delinquent, or unpaid. The City may waive strict
compliance with this provision where an action has been commenced pursuant to the
provisions of Minnesota Statutes, questioning the amount or validity of any assessment,
tax, or other financial claim. The City may issue a conditional license where the applicant
or transferor has entered into a payment agreement with the Revenue Department or the
City to satisfy the liability in question. However, if the terms of said payment agreement
are not satisfied, the City will revoke the conditional license and the application or
transferor will waive any right to a hearing pursuant to M.S. 340.304.
Subd. 3. Distance From St. Cloud State University. Any place within 1,500 feet of the St.
Cloud State University as measured on a direct line from the nearest corner of the
administration building of the university to the main entrance of the premises proposed for
licensing.
Subd. 4. Restriction On Property Owners. Any premises owned by a person to whom a
license may not be granted under this ordinance, except an owner who is a minor, alien, or a
person who has been convicted of a crime other than the violation of Extra Session Laws
1934, Chapter 46.
Subd. 5. License of Another Class. Any place, except an exclusive liquor store, for which a
license of another class has been granted under this ordinance.
Subd. 6. Off Sale Only. Any place where non-intoxicating malt liquor is sold "On Sale".
This subsection will not apply to an "On Sale Intoxicating Liquor License".
Section 810:30. Conditions of License.
Subd. 1. Every license will be granted subject to the conditions in the following
subdivisions and all other provisions of this ordinance and of any other applicable ordinance
of the City or State law.
Subd. 2. License Posted. The license will be posted in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises at all times.
Subd. 3. Licensee Responsible For Conduct. Every licensee will be responsible for the
conduct of his place of business and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of
any employee on the licensed premises authorized to sell or serve intoxicating liquor will be
deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee will be liable to all penalties
provided by this ordinance equally with the employee.
Subd. 4. Space Named. A license will not be effective beyond the compact and contiguous
space specified in the license for which it was granted. The diagram submitted with the
application pursuant to Section 810:12, subd. 12, or the final plans submitted pursuant to
Section 810:16, will become part of the license and will show the compact and contiguous
space specified. All space specified will include the gross area of each room where sales or
consumption of liquor is to be conducted without further exclusion (as to location of bars,
coolers, restrooms, etc.).
Subd. 5 . Employing Minors. Persons under 18 years of age may not serve or sell
intoxicating liquor in a licensed intoxicating liquor establishment.
Subd. 6. Slot Machines and Gambling Devices. Licensees will not keep, possess, or operate
or permit the keeping, possession, or operation of slot machines, or a gambling device or
apparatus on the licensed premises or in any room adjoining the licensed premises under the
licensee’s control However, gambling devices may be kept or operated and raffles
conducted on licensed premises of any room adjoining the licensed premises under his
control where the gambling device or raffle is licensed as provided pursuant to the laws of
the State of Minnesota. This subdivision does not apply to dice kept or used on the
premises for the purposes permitted under Minnesota Statutes Sections 340A.410, Subd. 5
and 609.761, Subd. 4.
Subd. 7. Owner of Equipment. Equipment or fixtures in any licensed place will not be
owned in whole or in part by any wholesaler, manufacturer, or distiller of intoxicating
liquor.
Subd. 8. City Officials Right to Enter. Any police officer, health officer, or properly
designated officer of the City will have the unqualified right to enter, inspect, and search the
premises of the licensee during business hours without a search warrant and any police
officer will have the right to seize all gambling devices found on the licensed premises.
Subd. 9. Restriction On Display. On-sale liquor establishments will not display liquor
while open to the public during the hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited by this
ordinance. During all hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited by this ordinance, all bar
areas and liquor storage areas will be closed and locked, and all persons, except the
licensee, employees and law enforcing officers, will be excluded.
Subd. 10. Ethyl Alcohol Or Neutral Spirits. Licensees will not keep ethyl alcohol or neutral
spirits on the licensed premises or permit their use on the premises either along or mixed
with any other beverage.
Subd. 11. Lewd Or Indecent Conduct Prohibited. Lewd or indecent conduct will not be
allowed or permitted on the licensed premises. Lewd or indecent conduct will include
"nudity" and "sexual conduct" as those terms are defined in M.S. 617.292.
Subd. 12. Live Entertainment and Dancing. Any licensee desiring to provide live
entertainment or allow public dancing must conduct that activity entirely within the licensed
premise as that term is defined in Section 810:00 of this ordinance. Class A, B or C
licensees conducting over 12 dance events during the licensing period must pay an
additional fee as prescribed in Section 511 of this Code.
Subd. 13. Local Contact Required to be on Premises. A designated Local Contact will be
present on the licensed premises. At the time of the application for a license, the applicant
will designate a maximum of three individuals as Local Contacts of the licensed premises.
The applicant will provide the same information in respect to designated Local Contacts as
is required of the applicant under Section 810:12, Subds. 1 through 8. No other persons
may be designated as a Local Contact without the prior approval of the City Council. Each
designated Local Contact will be subject to the requirements of Section 810:20.
Subd. 14. Promoting Responsible Consumption. Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 2:00
a.m., no licensee or employee or agent of a licensee will:
(a) Sell, offer to sell or deliver to any person multiple drinks containing intoxicating
liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor for a single price, except at private functions not
open to the public.
(b) Increase the volume of alcoholic beverages contained in a drink without increasing
proportionately the price charged for such drink.
Subd. 15. Underage Presence in Licensed Premises.
a. Social Host Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit any person
under the age of twenty-one (21) to loiter or remain in any room where intoxicating
liquor is being sold or served, unless that person is accompanied by his/her parent or
guardian, which parent or guardian is 21 years or older.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one to loiter in any room
where intoxicating liquor is being sold or served, unless that person is accompanied
by his/her parent or guardian, which parent or guardian is 21 years or older.
c. Underage Social Event Permit: Upon application of any licensee, the City Clerk
may, upon recommendation from the Chief of Police, issue an underage social event
permit. Any application must be received at least 7 days in advance of the planned
event and may be granted upon such terms and conditions as the City Clerk may
specify. Specific terms and conditions may include the requirement to hire additional
security staff and/or uniformed police officers, the cost of which will be borne solely
by the licensed establishment. The licensee must include with its application for
permit an operational plan. The plan must address the following items:
1) beginning and ending date of the permit, (not to exceed 2 days);
2) provide for a physical separation between that portion of the establishment
designated for alcohol service and that portion of the establishment hosting
the underage social event. The physical separation must consist of a wall or
other durable physical separation that effectively prevents the passing or
movement of alcohol into that portion of the establishment hosting the
underage event;
3) a conspicuous sign or posting informing the public of the designated alcohol
and non-alcohol areas;
4) proactive security measures to prevent the transfer to, possession or
consumption of alcohol in the non-alcohol portion of the establishment and
prevent underage persons from entering the alcohol serving area;
d. Private Party: Nothing in this subdivision shall prohibit attendance by persons under
the age of twenty-one (21) at private parties where alcoholic beverages are sold
and/or served. A “private party” for purposes of this subdivision shall mean an event
held in licensed premises that is not open to the public and attendance is limited to a
discreet and identifiable group of persons invited by a host. A “host” for purposes of
this subdivision is a person, at least 21 years of age, who has rented a specific portion
or all of the licensed premises, and who is financially responsible for the rental of the
premises. The general public may not be allowed into or invited to the party. The
license holder shall remain responsible for and shall take proactive and appropriate
measures to insure that all applicable laws pertaining to the consumption of alcoholic
beverages are followed.
e. Exceptions: Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person 18, 19, or 20 years old
from entering a licensed establishment to:
1) Perform work for the establishment including the serving of alcoholic
beverages, unless prohibited by Minnesota State Statute;
2) Consume meals served in a defined dining area; and
3) Attend social functions that are held in a portion of the establishment where
alcoholic beverages are not served or sold.
f. Theatre/Athletic Event Exception: This subdivision is not intended to prohibit or
restrict theatre, music, sports or entertainment events where the service of alcohol is
incidental to the entertainment and where the primary source of revenue for the
licensed establishment is from the sale of tickets for the entertainment and not from
the sale of alcoholic beverages. If alcohol is served at such an event, the license
holder is required to verify age and identity at the point of sale before alcohol is sold
or provided. A licensee eligible for the theatre/athletic event exception may apply for
a one (1) year permit pursuant to the requirements of subdivision 15, paragraph c.
Subd. 16. Persons who have not been trained under a training program approved by the
City Clerk for the current licensing year may not serve or sell intoxicating liquor in a
licensed intoxicating liquor establishment. An exception is made for persons currently
participating in a training program when they are under the direct supervision and
accompanied by a person who is already certified as trained. The license holder must
maintain a list on the licensed premises of those persons who have been trained as required
by this subdivision together with the date that training was completed. The list must be
certified by the license holder and in the case of a corporation or club, an officer of that
entity. The list will immediately be made available upon the request of a law enforcement
officer or other city official.
Subd. 17. Multiple Bars.
A license shall be considered to have established multiple bars when:
1. More than one permanent bar regularly open to the public exists on the licensed
premises; and
2. The permanent bars are located in the areas of the premises separated by permanent
walls, or are located on different floors of the license premises.
For the purposes of this section, when portions of a single permanent bar are located in
separate areas of the premises divided by a permanent wall, this shall be considered as more
than one bar if the rooms each have a separate entrance to the license premises from outside
of the license premises.
Class A, B or C licensees must pay an additional fee for multiple bars are prescribed in
Section 511 of this Code.
Section 810:35. Time When Sales Are Prohibited.
Subd. 1. No intoxicating liquor will be sold during the hours as prohibited in the
subdivisions which follow.
Subd. 2. "On Sales". "On Sales" may not be made:
(a) Between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of any day.
(b) Between 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and 8:00 a.m. on Monday, unless the licensee will
have obtained a Class H Special Sunday license pursuant to this ordinance, in
which case sales may be made on Sundays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
2:00 a.m in conjunction with the serving of food.
Subd. 3. "Off Sales". "Off Sales" may not be made:
(a) After 10:00 p.m. and before 8:00 a.m. on any day except as provided herein;
(b) On Sunday, except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. or unless the
licensee has obtained a Class Q Sunday Growler Off Sale License.
(c) Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day; however, on the evening preceding these
holidays, “Off Sales” may be made until 10:00 p.m., except the day before
Christmas, December 24, no sales will be made after 8:00 p.m.
Subd. 4. Time When Sales Are Prohibited. Licensees employees, and agents of any
licensee, will not serve, dispense or in any manner furnish intoxicating liquor; nor permit
the consumption of any intoxicating liquor; nor permit the presence of any open bottle or
open receptacle containing intoxicating liquor on the licensed premises on Sunday between
2:30 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., nor between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any weekday
Monday through Saturday inclusive.
Section 810:40. Closing of Bar and Restricting Other Business Operated In Connection Therewith.
Subd. 1. The word "bar", as used in this section means the room or rooms in which a
licensee under an "On Sale" liquor license customarily prepares, or pours intoxicating drinks.
Subd. 2. All persons, except the licensee, employees and law enforcement officers, will be
excluded from the bar within 30 minutes after the expiration of the time of any day when
intoxicating liquor may be legally sold, and all doors into the bar will then be closed and
locked.
Subd. 3. If the licensee is operating any other lawful business in the building in which the
bar is located, no intoxicating liquor will be served or permitted to be consumed on the
premises where such other business is conducted during the time when the bar is closed.
Section 810:45. Merchandise Sales In "Off-Sale" Stores. No cigars, cigarettes, tobacco, or
non-intoxicating malt beverages, or soft drinks will be sold in any exclusive "Off Sale" liquor store
during the hours when the sale of intoxicating liquor is prohibited in the store.
Section 810:50. Physical Facilities.
Subd. 1. Partitions Or Screens. There will be no partition, box, stall, screen, curtain, or
other device which will obstruct a view of any part of the room, except that partition, subdivision,
or panel not higher than 48 inches from the floor may be maintained.
Subd. 2. Toilet Facilities. Every "On Sale" licensee will maintain upon the licensed
premises public toilets conveniently located and of easy access for the accommodation of
his customers. The toilets will conform to the City's building code and will be maintained
at all times in conformation with municipal ordinances and state laws. Separate toilets will
be provided for each sex and will be properly designated.
Section 810:55. Clubs. Licensed clubs will not sell liquor except to members and to guests in the
company of members.
Section 810:60. Restrictions On Purchase Of Licenses.
Subd. 1. Mix Or Prepare Liquor. No person will mix or prepare liquor for consumption in
any public place of business not licensed to sell liquor "On Sale" and no person will
consume liquor in any such place except as permitted by this ordinance.
Subd. 2. Samples Authorized. Off-sale licenses and municipal liquor stores may provide
samples of malt liquor, wine, liqueurs, cordials, and distilled spirits which the licensee or
municipal liquor store currently has in stock and is offering for sale to the general public
without obtaining an additional license, provided the wine, liqueur, cordial, and distilled
spirits samples are dispensed at no charge and consumed on the licensed premises during
the permitted hours of off-sale in a quantity less than 100 milliliters of malt liquor per
variety per customer, 50 milliliters of wine per variety per customer, 25 milliliters of liqueur
or cordial, and 15 milliliters of distilled spirits per variety per customer.
Subd 3. Catering of Liquor. Only those establishments holding an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license issued by the City of St. Cloud along with a Liquor Caterer's Permit issued
in accordance with Minnesota Statutes 340A.404 Subd. 12 shall be eligible to cater liquor
in the City of St. Cloud.
Section 810:65. Suspension Or Revocation Of Licenses; Civil Penalty.
Subd. 1. The Council will follow the provisions of this section of the ordinance on the
suspension, revocation or imposition of a civil penalty against any license granted under this
ordinance.
Subd. 2. Notice Of Violation. The Chief of Police will report, in writing, any violation of
the provisions of this section or Minnesota Statutes Chapter 340A committed in the
operation of the licensee's business to the City Attorney's Office, giving all facts and
circumstances known. If the City Attorney's Office determines from the facts and
circumstances reported, together with any other facts and circumstances known to it, that
the violation may warrant a suspension or revocation of the licenses held by the licensee, it
will fix a time and place for a hearing sufficiently in advance to enable ten days written
notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing. The City Attorney's Office will then
report to the Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting that a hearing has been
scheduled on an alleged violation at the licensed premises.
Subd.3 Hearing On Alleged Violations. The hearing will be held before an independent
hearing examiner. At the time of the hearing, the licensee may appear and present any
evidence which is material to the investigation. The hearing officer will make a finding of
facts as to whether a violation of the provisions of this section or Minnesota Statutes
Chapter 340A has been committed in the operation of the licensee's business, whether the
violation was willful in nature. The hearing officer will also make a recommendation of
what penalty, if any, will be applied. The City Council will adopt the hearing officer's
findings of fact that the licensee is guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this
ordinance or State law, other than one which calls for a mandatory revocation, and may
impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for each violation, suspend the license for up to 60
days, revoke the license, or impose any combination of these sanctions, subject to the
provisions of the presumptive penalties set forth in Section 810:70. In the event of
suspension, the Council will also suspend any licenses held by the licensee under the 3.2
percent malt liquor ordinance, and in the event of a revocation, the Council will also revoke
any licenses held by the licensee under the 3.2 percent malt liquor ordinance. The licensee
will be given notice in writing of any such action by the City Attorney's Office. No 3.2
percent malt liquor license or intoxicating liquor license will be renewed or reissued to any
licensee who has not paid to the City the full amount of any civil penalty previously
imposed by the City against the licensee under this section.
Subd. 4. Mandatory Revocation. The Council will revoke the license or licenses of any
licensee under this ordinance if the licensee willfully violates any provisions of the
Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 340A.
Section 810:70. Penalties for Violations.
Subd. 1. Penalties. Upon a finding by the City Council that a violation of an offense
designated in Subdivision 2 of this Section has occurred, the Council will, at a minimum,
apply the following adverse penalties:
1) For a first violation within a 24 month time period...................................... a $750.00
civil penalty.
2) For a second violation within a 24 month time period...............................a $1,500.00
civil penalty.
3) For a third violation within a 24 month time period................................ a suspension
or revocation of license. A liquor establishment that has its liquor license revoked under
this Section becomes eligible only for a provisional liquor license subject to the terms and
conditions outlined in Section 810:75 of this Chapter and subject to approval by the City
Clerk. The City will notify the establishment’s insurance company of the license
suspension or revocation.
Subd. 2. Violations Enumerated.
a. Violation of Minnesota Statute §340A.502: To sell, serve or furnish alcohol to
an obviously intoxicated person.
b. Violation of Minnesota Statute §340A.503: To sell, serve or furnish alcohol to
persons under the age of 21.
c. Section 810:30 – Violations of Conditions of License:
Subd. 5: prohibiting employing minors to serve alcohol
Subd. 9: restrictions on the display of alcohol
Subd. 10: prohibition on ethyl alcohol and neutral spirits
Subd. 11: lewd or indecent conduct prohibited
Subd. 14: promoting responsible consumption
Subd. 15: underage presence in licensed premises
d. Section 810:35: To sell, serve or furnish alcoholic beverages after hours.
e. Violations of City Code/State Law. Such violations will only be considered a
strike in the event a criminal citation, criminal complaint or administrative
citation is issued.
Section 810:75 Provisional Liquor License.
Subd. 1. Duration of Provisional License. Provisional Liquor Licenses will be issued for
a 12 month period.
Subd 2. Mitigation Plan Required. The applicant for a provisional liquor license must
submit a mitigation plan that specifically describes steps proposed by the applicant to
eliminate future violations.
Subd. 3. Application Review. The application for a provisional license will be presented
to the City Clerk for review. The City Clerk will forward the application and mitigation
plan to appropriate departments for review and comment. The City Clerk will approve,
disapprove, or approve with conditions the application and mitigation plan. If the City
Clerk denies an application and mitigation plan or approves with conditions, it will state
the reasons for doing so in writing.
Subd. 4. Provisional License Application Fee. An application fee for a provisional
license must be accompanied by a provisional license application fee. Fees will be set
forth in Section 555 of this Code. An application will not be processed or considered by
the City Council until the application fee is paid.
Subd. 5. Drink Specials Prohibited. A provisional liquor license holder may not offer
drink specials or other promotions during the provisional licensing period.
Subd. 6. Compliance Checks. Liquor license compliance checks will be conducted
frequently in order to ensure implementation of the mitigation plan and compliance with
this section.
Subd. 7. Revocation of Provisional License. Additional ordinance or statutory violations
or failure to comply with a mitigation plan during a provisional licensing period may
result in revocation of the provisional liquor license.
History: Ord. 2350 4-2-07; Section 810:75 entitled “Penalty; Training Program” repealed by Ord. 2350 4-2-07; 2432 7-
27-09; Section 810:28 entitled Proximity to schools, churches, residentially zoned property and the St. Germain
Business District repealed by Ord. 2455 4-5-10; Ord. 2367 5-24-10. Ord. 2528 4-23-12; Ord. 2548 2-25-13; Ord.
2549 2-25-13; Ord. 2564 9-9-13; Ord. 2586 3-24-14; Ord. 2595 6-23-14; Ord. 2607 12-22-14; Ord 2621 6-8-15; Ord.
2644 12-21-15; Ord. 2705 5-22-17; Ord. 2749 4-30-18
Section 817 - Permit to Possess Kegs Required
Section 817:00. Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions will apply:
Subd. 1.The definitions contained in Article 3, Section 2 of the St. Cloud Zoning Ordinance are
hereby incorporated herein as if fully set forth in their entirety.
Subd. 2. "Intoxicating Liquor". Ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous, and malt
beverages containing more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight.
Subd. 3. "Kegs". Containers designed for and capable of holding intoxicating or 3-2 malt liquor to
be dispensed from a tapper.
Subd. 4."3-2 Malt Liquor". Malt liquor containing not less than one-half of one percent alcohol by
volume nor more than 3.2
percent alcohol by weight.
Section 817:05. Permit to Possess Kegs Required. Any individual of lawful age under the laws of
the State of Minnesota may possess a keg in a residentially zoned area within the City of St. Cloud
after first having obtained a permit and permit sticker from the Office of the City Clerk.
Section 817:10. Permit Fee. The permit fee for each keg will be as set forth in Section 500:10 of
the Code of Ordinances.
Section 817:15. Limitations. All permits authorized under the preceding section will be subject to
the following limitations:
Subd. 1. The permit is valid for possession of one keg containing up to 16 gallons. No person may
possess more than one permit.
Subd. 2. No more than one keg may be possessed within any dwelling unit, lodging house,
fraternity house, or sorority house located in a residentially zoned area within the City of St. Cloud.
No resident will possess or allow any other person to possess a keg contrary to this section.
Subd. 3. No application will be approved without the applicant first providing written authorization
from the owner of the premises where the applicant will be possessing the keg or the owner's agent
authorized under the provisions of Section 465 of the Code of Ordinances on a form provided by
the City Clerk.
Section 817:20. Application for Permit and Permit Sticker. Any person desiring to obtain a permit
to possess a keg will fill out an application at the Office of the City Clerk setting forth the
applicant's full name, address and telephone number and the address within St. Cloud where the
applicant will be possessing the keg. In addition, the applicant will be required to provide proof of
identity and age in the form of a valid Minnesota driver's license or identification card, or valid
driver's license from another jurisdiction. Falsifying any information requested on the permit
application will constitute a violation of this ordinance. At the time of issuance of the permit, a
permit sticker will be issued to the applicant. The permit sticker will be immediately and firmly
affixed by the applicant to the keg utilizing the adhesive on the sticker and placing the sticker in a
clearly visible location upon the purchase of the keg.
Section 817:25. Return of Permit. Prior to the issuance of any subsequent keg permit and permit
sticker, the preceding permit issued and the remains of the permit sticker must be returned to the
Office of the City Clerk or in the alternative a minimum of 30 days will have elapsed since the date
of issuance of the previous permit.
Section 817:30. Persons Ineligible for Permit. No person will be issued a keg permit if that person
has been convicted of a violation of this section Section 1050:00 a violation of Minnesota Statutes,
Section 340A which occurred within the previous 365 days.
Section 817:35. Prohibitions. It will be unlawful for any person to possess a keg within the City of
St. Cloud without having first obtained a permit and permit sticker as set forth herein. A permittee
will have the permit present at the location where the keg is possessed at all times, and will exhibit
the permit upon the request of any licensed peace officer.
Section 817:40. Duty of Licensed Liquor Establishment. Each liquor establishment located in the
City of St. Cloud, licensed under the provisions of Sections 800 and 810 of the 1977 Code of
Ordinances, and offering for sale kegs containing 3-2 or intoxicating malt liquor for consumption
off-premises, will, as a condition of the license, post in a conspicuous location within five feet of
the check-out location in the establishment, a notice provided by the St. Cloud Police Department
regarding the provisions of this section.
Section 817:45. Exceptions. Any person or premises licensed under any other provision of state
law or local ordinance may possess kegs and are specifically exempted from the provisions of this
ordinance. Possession of kegs in parks in accordance with Section 236 of the Code of Ordinances
or in non-residentially zoned areas of the City of St. Cloud is specifically excepted from the
provisions of this ordinance.
History: Ord. 1450 05/07/1990 (Repealed 815)
Section 820-Social Host
820:10 Purpose and Findings. The St. Cloud City Council intends to discourage underage
possession and consumption of alcohol, even if done within the confines of a private residence,
and intends to hold persons criminally responsible who host events or gatherings where persons
under 21 years of age possess or consume alcohol regardless of whether the person hosting the
event or gathering supplied the alcohol. The St. Cloud City Council finds that:
(a) Events and gatherings held on private or public property where alcohol is
possessed or consumed by persons under the age of twenty-one are harmful to those
persons and constitute a potential threat to public health requiring prevention or
abatement.
(b) Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect underage persons, as well as the
general public, from injuries related to alcohol consumption, such as alcohol overdose or
alcohol-related traffic collisions.
(c) Alcohol is an addictive drug which, if used irresponsibly, could have drastic
effects on those who use it as well as those who are affected by the actions of the
irresponsible user.
(d) Often, events or gatherings involving underage possession and consumption occur
outside the presence of parents. However, there are times when the parent(s) is/are
present and condone the activity and in some circumstances provided the alcohol.
(e) Even though giving or furnishing alcohol to an underage person is a crime, it is
difficult to prove, and an ordinance is necessary to help further combat underage
consumption.
(f) A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person criminally responsible for
hosting an event or gathering where underage possession or consumption occurs.
820:15 Authority. This ordinance is enacted pursuant to Minn Stat. § 145A.05, Subdivision 1.
820:20 Definitions. For purposes of this ordinance, the following terms have the following
meanings:
(a) Alcohol. “Alcohol” means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of
wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin or any other distilled spirits including dilutions and
mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
(b) Alcoholic beverage. “Alcoholic beverage” means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine,
beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which
contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for
beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other
substances.
(c) Event or gathering. “Event or gathering” means any group of three or more
persons who have assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
(d) Host. “Host” means to aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control
or permit a gathering or event.
(e) Parent. “Parent” means any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
1. As natural, adoptive parent, or step-parent;
2. As a legal guardian; or
3. As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
(f) Person. “Person” means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation,
or any association of one or more individuals.
(g) Residence or Premises. “Residence” or “premises” means any home, yard, farm,
field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a
hall or meeting room, park, or any other place of assembly, public or private, where
occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or
specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented or
used with or without permission or compensation.
(h) Underage Person. “Underage person” is any individual under twenty-one (21)
years of age.
820:25 Prohibited Acts.
(a) It is unlawful for any person(s) to:
1. host or allow an event or gathering;
2. at any residence, premises or on any other private or public property;
3. where alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present;
4. when the person knows or reasonably should know that an underage
person will or does;
(i) consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage; or
(ii) possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage with the intent to
consume it; and
5. the person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent possession or
consumption by the underage person(s).
(b) A person is criminally responsible under paragraph (a) above if the person
intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels or conspires with or otherwise procures another to
commit the prohibited act.
(c) A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present at the event
or gathering to be criminally responsible.
820:30 Exceptions.
(a) This ordinance does not apply to conduct solely between an underage person and
his or her parents while in the parent’s presence and under the parent’s guidance and
supervision.
(b) This ordinance does not apply to legally protected religious observances.
(c) This ordinance does not apply to retail intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt
liquor licensees, municipal liquor stores or bottle club permit holders who are regulated
by Minn. Stat. § 340A.503, Subd. 1 (a)(1).
(d) This ordinance does not apply to situations where underage persons are lawfully
in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course and scope of
employment.
820:35 Enforcement. This ordinance can be enforced by any police officer or sheriff’s deputy
in the county.
820:40. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, word or other portion
of this ordinance is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or invalid, in whole, or in part, by
any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed severable, and such
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this law,
which remaining portions shall continue in full force and effect.
820:45 Penalty. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor.
820:50 Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect thirty (30) days following its final
passage and adoption.
History: Ord. 2464 5-24-10-New
CHAPTER IX.
Section 910 - Curfew Enforcement
Section 910:00. Purpose. It is hereby found that increased juvenile criminal activity, juvenile gang
activity, and juvenile violent crime in the City of St. Cloud and surrounding areas in recent years has
taxed local law enforcement services and jeopardized the public safety. Increased rates of juvenile
victimization has endangered the emotional and physical well being and safety of juveniles and
adults. Because of their lack of maturity and experience, juveniles are particularly susceptible to
participation in unlawful activity. Juveniles are particularly vulnerable at nighttime hours to become
victims of crime due to their inability to make critical decisions in a mature and experienced manner.
A juvenile curfew would minimize the dangers to which juveniles are subject when they are upon
the streets and in public places and establishments unattended and unsupervised by adults during late
night hours. Such a curfew would regulate juvenile activities at times and places where risk of
danger to juveniles can be the greatest, and would encourage parents and guardians of juveniles to
supervise, control, and know the whereabouts of their children during high risk nighttime hours.
Curfew enforcement seeks to reduce juvenile criminal activity during nighttime hours when local
law enforcement services are already taxed.
Section 910:05. Definitions. The following words and terms when used in this section will have the
following meanings:
Subd. 1. Juvenile. A person under the age of 18 years who is not married or who has not
been legally emancipated.
Subd. 2. Parent. Birth parents, adoptive parents and step-parents.
Subd. 3. Guardian. A person appointed or qualified by a court as a guardian of an
individual, including a limited guardian, but not a persona who is only a guardian ad litem.
Subd. 4. Responsible Adult. A person over the age of 18 years authorized by the parent or
guardian of a juvenile to have custody and control of the juvenile.
Subd. 5. Public Place. Any place to which the public has access and includes, but is not
limited to streets, highways, alleys, parking lots, parks, and common areas of libraries,
schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transportation facilities, shopping
malls, and shops.
Subd. 6. Establishment. Any privately owned place of business to which the public is
invited, including, but not limited to any place of amusement, entertainment or refreshment.
Subd. 7. Proprietor. Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating,
managing, owning or conducting the business of any establishment, including but not limited
to the members or partners of an association or partnership, and the officers of a corporation.
Subd. 8. Emergency. An unexpected situation or combination of circumstances or events,
or the resulting state that calls for prompt action, including but not limited to natural disaster,
fire, automobile accident, or situations requiring prompt action to prevent serious bodily
injury or loss of life.
Subd. 9. Serious Bodily Injury. Bodily injury creating a substantial risk of permanent
disfigurement, or the loss or impairment of the function of any body part or organ.
Section 910:10. Prohibited Acts.
Subd. 1. It is unlawful for juveniles under the age of 16 years to be present in any
establishment or public place within the City of St. Cloud from 10:00 o'clock p.m. to 5:00
o'clock a.m. of the following day, local time.
Subd. 2. It is unlawful for a juvenile aged 16 or 17 years to be present in any establishment
or public place within the City of St. Cloud on:
(a) Sunday from 11:00 P.M. to Monday 5:00 A.M.
(b) Monday from 11:00 P.M. to Tuesday 5:00 A.M.
(c) Tuesday from 11:00 P.M. to Wednesay 5:00 A.M.
(d) Wednesday 11:00 P.M. to Thursday 5:00 A.M.
(e) Thursday 11:00 P.M. to Friday 5:00 A.M.
(f) Friday 12 midnight to Saturday 5:00 A.M.
(g) Saturday 12 midnight to Sunday 5:00 A.M.
Subd. 3. It is unlawful for a parent or guardian of a juvenile to permit the juvenile to be in
any establishment or public place within the City of St. Cloud during the hours specified in
Subd. 2 of this section.
Subd. 4. It is unlawful for a proprietor of an establishment within the City of St. Cloud to
permit a juvenile to remain in the establishment, or upon the property of the establishment
during the hours specified in Subd. 2 of this section.
Section 910:15. Exceptions.
Subd. 1. This section will not apply to the following:
(a) A juvenile who is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or a responsible adult.
(b) A juvenile engaged in employment, or going to or returning home from his or her
employment without an intervening detour or stop.
(c) A juvenile involved in an emergency.
(d) A juvenile attending an official school, religious, or other recreational or educational
activity supervised by adults or sponsored or supervised by a public entity, civic
organization, religious organization, or other similar entity taking responsibility for
the juvenile; or a juvenile going to or returning home from, without an intervening
detour or stop, such an activity, when the entity supervising or sponsoring such an
activity has notified the Police Department of the date of the event, and the starting
and ending times of the event activity.
(e) A juvenile on an errand at the direction of the juvenile's parent or guardian, without
any intervening detour or stop, who has in his or her possession a note signed by the
juvenile's parent or guardian authorizing the errand, and includes the correct address
and telephone number of the present location of the parent or guardian.
(f) A juvenile engaged in interstate travel.
(g) A juvenile exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution or Article I of the Constitution of the State of Minnesota.
(h) A juvenile on the public right-of-way, boulevard, alley or sidewalk abutting the
juvenile's residence, or the residence of his or her next door neighbor. In the case of
multiple dwelling units when the juvenile does not reside within one of the units in
that building, the juvenile will have in their immediate possession a written
document showing permission to be upon the property signed by the owner or
manager of the property, and containing the date and time for which the permission
was granted.
Subd. 2. This section will not apply to a proprietor:
(a) When the proprietor reasonably and in good faith relies upon the juvenile's
representation of proof of age. Such proof of age may have been demonstrated by a
valid driver's license or identification card issued by Minnesota, another state, or a
province of Canada which includes the photograph and date of birth of the person
presenting; in the case of a foreign national from a nation other than Canada, a valid
passport; or other verifiable means, including but not limited to school identification
cards and birth certificates. Proprietors who reasonably and in good faith believe
that a juvenile has misrepresented his or her proof of age and is in violation of this
section are required to immediately notify the Police Department.
(b) When the proprietor immediately notifies the Police Department that a juvenile is
present on the premises in violation of this section.
Section 910:20. Penalties.
Subd. 1. A parent or guardian who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
Subd. 2. A proprietor, or the agent of the proprietor who is present in the establishment at
the time of a violation of this section, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
Section 915 - Defrauding an Innkeeper
Section 915:00. Defrauding Innkeeper and Others Prohibited. Any person who will obtain, food,
lodging or other accommodations at any hotel, motel, lodging house, inn, boarding house or
restaurant, without paying, with intent to defraud the owner or manager, or who obtains credit at any
hotel, lodging house, inn, boarding house or restaurant by or through any false pretense, or by or
through the aid, assistance or influence of any baggage or effects in his possession and control, but
not actually belonging to such person, will be guilty of a penal offense. Proof that food, lodging or
other accommodations was obtained by false pretense or by false or fictitious show or pretense of
baggage or other property or proof that the person refused or neglected to pay for such food, lodging
or other accommodations on demand, or that he gave in payment of such food, lodging or other
accommodations negotiable paper on which payment was refused, or that he absconded without
offering to pay for such food, lodging or other accommodations, or that he surreptitiously removed
or attempted to remove his baggage, will be prima facie proof of the fraudulent intent mentioned in
this section.
Section 920 - Disorderly Conduct on School Grounds
Section 920:05. Defacement of School Buildings. No person will mark with ink, paint, chalk or
other substance, or post hand bills on, or in any other manner deface or injure any public, private
or parochial school building or structure used or usable for school purposes within the City or
mark, deface or injure fences, trees, lawns, or fixtures appurtenant to or located on the site of
such buildings, or post hand bills on such fences, trees or fixtures, or place a sign anywhere on
any such site.
Section 920:10. Breach of Peace on School Grounds. No person will willfully or maliciously
make or assist in making on any school grounds adjacent to any school building or structure any
noise, disturbance or improper diversion or activity by which peace, quiet and good order will be
disturbed.
Section 920:15. Offensive Language and Conduct. No person will use offensive, obscene or
abusive language or engage in boisterous or noisy conduct tending reasonably to arouse alarm,
anger or resentment in others on any school grounds or in buildings or structures.
Section 920:20. Improper Conduct in School or on School Buildings and Grounds. No person
will, in any school room or in any building or on the grounds adjacent to the same, disturb or
interrupt the peace and good order of such school while in session. Any person not in immediate
attendance in such school and being in such building or upon the premises belonging thereto
who upon the request of a teacher of such school or the person in charge thereof to leave said
building or premises, will neglect or refuse to do so, will be in violation of this ordinance. No
person will loiter on any school grounds or in any school building or structure.
Section 940 - Urinating or Defecating in Public
Section 940:00. Urinating in Public. No person will urinate or defecate on or into any street,
sidewalk, lane, alley, parking lot or any other public ground, or upon any private ground,
exclusive of structures containing toilet facilities within the City of St. Cloud.
Section 960 - Trespass and Unlawful Conduct in Public Buildings
Section 960:00. Definitions. Public buildings will mean: structures or areas owned and operated by
any governmental unit for the conduct of governmental functions including, but not limited to,
schools and colleges, public and private; libraries, parks, playgrounds, airports, holding ponds,
courthouses; jails and reformatories; city, county, state or federal administrative offices.
Section 960:05. Trespass. It is unlawful for any person to remain in a public building or upon the
grounds thereof after being requested to leave said premises by persons lawfully responsible for the
control and maintenance thereof, when the continued presence of any person will injure or endanger
the safety of said buildings or unreasonably interfere with the administration thereof.
Section 960:10. Interfere with Public Business. It is unlawful for any person to willfully harass,
disrupt, interfere with or obstruct any public or governmental business or function being conducted
within or upon the premises or grounds of any public building.
Section 972:00 - Use of Municipal Holding Ponds
Section 972:00. Use of Municipal Holding Ponds Prohibited. It will be unlawful for any person to
wade, swim or operate any watercraft in or upon the waters of any municipal holding pond, or to go
upon the frozen surface of any municipal holding pond, unless such use is specifically approved or
permitted by the Director of Parks and Recreation or the Director of Public Works.
CHAPTER X
Section 1000 - Nuisances
Section 1000:00. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this section to protect the safety, health, peace and general welfare of the public. It is
specifically found that the property conditions regulated in this section negatively impact upon the
aesthetics, the residential quality and the visual peace and quiet of our neighborhoods. The maintenance
of these nuisances are inappropriate for residential uses and are therefore likely to have a negative impact
upon residential property values.
Section 1000:10. Definitions.
Subd 1. Front yard area. An open, unobstructed yard across the front of a lot between the building
or allowed building line and the front property lines excluding on appropriately surfaced
designated driveway to the garage or house as defined by the St. Cloud Land Development Code
Subd. 2. Litter. Garbage, refuse, rubbish and all other waste material which if not deposited as
specified by this ordinance, tends to create a danger to public health, safety or welfare.
Subd. 3. Motor Vehicle. Any motorized, self-propelled vehicle of a type that may be used to
convey persons or materials or to perform a task.
(a) For purposes of this section the definition of motor vehicle does not include the
following:
(i) Home maintenance equipment such as riding lawn mowers or snowblowers.
(ii) Mobile construction equipment not licensable for public streets that is being
used for construction or remodeling at the residence. The temporary parking of
mobile construction equipment is permitted only for the duration of the
construction or remodeling project. This section does not permit the permanent
storage or parking of mobile construction equipment.
(iii) Recreational Vehicles as defined by Ordinance Section 355, the City of St.
Cloud Land Development Code.
Subd. 4. Outside. Outside of an enclosed storage facility and visible from any other property.
Subd. 5. Side yard area. Any open unobstructed yard between the building or allowed building
line and either side lot line to the rear yard line.
Section 1000:15. Nuisances Affecting Safety, Health, Peace and General Welfare.
The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public safety, health, peace, and general welfare:
Subd. 1. Fireworks, Explosives. All use or display of fireworks and use of explosives except as
provided by law.
Subd. 2. Large Crowds. The use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use of
a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and
the full use of public streets or sidewalks.
Subd. 3. Material From Aircraft. Throwing, dropping or releasing printed material, paper or other
material or objects from an airplane, balloon, drone or other aircraft or in such a manner as to
cause such materials to fall within the City.
Subd. 4. Littering. No person will throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk, or other
public place within the City except in public receptacles or authorized private receptacles for such
collection. Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in private receptacles will do so in such a
manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements and by wild or domestic
animals upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.
Subd. 5. Spit on Sidewalks, Etc. To spit on any public sidewalk or on the walls or floor of any
public building or in any public conveyance.
Subd. 6. Vehicle With Filth. Any vehicle which will contain any animal filth, manure, decaying
animal or vegetable matter will not be parked more than 20 minutes on the streets or alleys
anywhere in the City; nor will any such vehicle be parked or left standing for more than 20
minutes on any private premises in the City within a residential zone.
Subd. 7. Leaking, Spilling Liquids, Etc. From Trucks, Etc. To transport by truck or other vehicle,
over any street, alley or other public way, any fine substance or fluid materials, unless such truck
or vehicle is so constructed as to prevent the leakage of such material, substance or liquid, or the
emission of an offensive odor or smell.
Subd. 8. Glass in Streets. No person will deposit or cause to be deposited any breakable glass
upon any sidewalk, street, alley or public grounds in the City.
Subd. 9. Unreasonable Acceleration Prohibited.
(a) Unreasonable Acceleration Defined. Unreasonable acceleration is the acceleration
or unnecessary exhibition of speed of a motor vehicle which reduces the normal
rolling traction of a tire or tires on the driving surface, thereby causing them to emit
a squealing or screeching sound, or causing the throwing of sand or gravel by the tire
or tires of said vehicle or both. Prima facie evidence of such unreasonable
acceleration will be the squealing or screeching sounds by the tire or tires or the
unnecessary throwing of sand or gravel by the tire or tires or both.
(b) Unreasonable Acceleration on Public Property Prohibited. Unreasonable
acceleration by any motor vehicle upon any public street, road, parking lot, or
driving way within the corporate limits of the City of St. Cloud is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance and is prohibited.
Subd. 10. Engine Braking Prohibited.
(a) No person may slow a vehicle by the practice known as engine braking, also referred
to as "jake braking" or "dynamic braking," whereby rapid downshifting of a vehicle's
engine is used in lieu of applying a vehicle's brakes, causing loud noises to emit from
the vehicle's engine and exhaust system. Engine braking by any motor vehicle on any
public highway, street, parking lot or alley within the corporate limits of the City of
St. Cloud is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and is prohibited.
(b) The foregoing provision will not apply to emergency vehicles.
Section 1000:20. Outside Parking and Storage.
Subd. 1. No person will cause, undertake, permit or allow the outside parking and storage of
motor vehicles on residentially-zoned property unless it complies with the following
requirements:
(a) The parking or storage of motor vehicles is not allowed on any required front yard or
side yard setback area nor on any landscaped area. In any event motor vehicles
parked or stored on residential property must be parked or stored on an improved
parking surface.
Subd. 2. Any vehicle so parked is the act of the registered owner as well as the act of the person
actually parking the vehicle. A registered owner is defined to include motor vehicle renewal or
leasing agencies or corporate owners. It will be a defense to any violation that the registered
owner shows that the date of the offense the title has been transferred to another.
Subd. 3. Penalty. A violation of 1000:20 is a petty misdemeanor as defined by Minn. Stat.
609.02, Subd. 4a.
Subd. 4. Fines for Violation. The Parking Violations Bureau will collect fines for violations in
accordance with the fine schedules adopted from time to time by the City Council. Payment of
the scheduled fine indicated on the violation notice, enclosed in said notice and deposited in the
manner described thereon and received by the Parking Violations Bureau, will satisfy the
violation.
Subd. 5. Enforcement. It is the duty of parking officers to report to the Parking Violations
Bureau the following information:
1. The license number of such vehicle.
2. The date and hour of which such violation was found to exist.
3. The nature of the violation
4. Any other necessary facts relating to such violation.
Subd. 6. Tags. The parking officer will attach to a vehicle referred to in this subdivision a notice
to the owner or operator thereof that the vehicle has been parked in violation of the provisions of
this subdivision and directing the owner or operator to make payment as required by this
subdivision.
Subd. 7. Exceptions. The prohibitions of this section will not apply to the following:
(a) Any motor truck, pickup truck or similar vehicle being used by a public utility,
moving company, or similar company, which is actually being used to service a
residence not belonging to or occupied by the operator of the vehicle.
(b) Any vehicle which is actually making a pickup or delivery at the location where it is
parked. Parking for any period of time beyond the period of time reasonably necessary
to make such pickup or delivery and in excess of the two-hour limit will be unlawful.
(c) Lawful nonconforming uses as defined by the St. Cloud Land Development Code.
(d) Temporary Permits for Community Events.
(i) Residential property owners may allow for the temporary parking of motor
vehicles on landscaped areas subject to the following conditions:
(1) The parking is for the purpose of accommodating a community
event.
(2) Public parking facilities and street parking do not afford adequate
parking for the event.
(3) The residence is located within a quarter-mile of the event.
(4) The parking permitted will be limited to the duration of the event.
History: Ord. 2425 4-6-09; Ord. 2569 11-18-13; Ord. 2709 05-22-17.
Section 1002-Disruptive Intoxication
1002:10: Declaration of Policy. It is the policy of the City of St. Cloud to provide for the
safety, health and welfare of the public while prohibiting certain harmful conduct of
intoxicated persons.
1002:20: Definitions.
Subd. 1. Public Place: includes a building or place controlled by the City, a
school, a place of worship, any public street, including public sidewalk, alley,
walk or other publicly owned lands and any indoor or outdoor area, whether
privately or publicly owned, to which the public have access by right or by
invitation, express or implied, whether by payment of money or not. Public place
excludes the premises of a licensed alcohol establishment.
Subd. 2. Intoxicated Person. A person who is presently impaired, mentally or
emotionally, as a result of the presence of alcohol, drugs or a controlled substance
in the person’s body. Evidence of an intoxicated person may include, but is not
limited to, any combination of the following indicators:
(a) odor of intoxicants on the breath,
(b) bloodshot, watery eyes,
(c) dilated pupils,
(d) stumbling or staggering
(e) slurred speech
(f) failure of Standardized Field Sobriety Test
(g) failure of Drug Recognition Protocol
(g) alcohol concentration of .08 or more.
Subd. 3. Public Disruption. Conduct by an individual to include loud, boisterous
yelling, urinating in public, lewd or combative conduct, or disobeying a police
officer’s lawful command.
1002:30: Disruptive Intoxication: No person, while intoxicated, in a public place shall
conduct him or herself so as to be a danger to themselves or others and/or engage in a
public disruption.
1002:40: Sobriety Testing. No person shall be cited under this section without first
having been offered and failed the Standardized Field Sobriety Test or a Portable Breath
Test (PBT); however, a person incapable because the person is intoxicated or belligerent
that performing SFST or a PBT would put the individual, peace officers or others at risk
of harm and/or having refused Field Sobriety Testing or a PBT where officer has
reasonable articulable suspicion to request testing may still be cited under the criteria set
forth in Section 1002:20 Subd. 2.
1002:45: Misdemeanor. A violation of this Section is designated a misdemeanor.
History: Ord. 2465 5-24-10 New; Ord. 2625 7-22-15
Section 1005 - Public Nuisances
Affecting Health and Safety
Section 1005:00. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this section to protect the safety, health, peace and general welfare of the public. It is
specifically found that the property conditions regulated in this section negatively impact upon the
aesthetics, the residential quality and the visual peace and quiet of our neighborhoods. The maintenance
of these nuisances are inappropriate for residential uses and are therefore likely to have a negative impact
upon residential property values.
Section 1005:10. Definitions.
Subd. 1. Abandoned vehicle. A motor vehicle, that:
(a) has remained illegally:
a. for a period of more than 48 hours on any property owned or controlled by a unit of
government, or more than four hours on that property when it is properly posted; or
b. on private property for a period of time, as determined under Minnesota Statute
168B.04, subdivision 2, without the consent of the person in control of the property; and
c. lacks vital component parts or is in an inoperable condition such that it has no
substantial potential for further use consistent with its usual functions, unless it is kept in
an enclosed garage or storage building.
(b) A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in Minnesota Statute 168.10, is not considered an
abandoned vehicle.
(c) Vehicles on the premises of junk yards and automobile graveyards that are defined, maintained,
and licensed in accordance with Minnesota Statute 161.242, or that are licensed and maintained in
accordance with local laws and zoning regulations, are not considered abandoned vehicles.
(d) A vehicle being held for storage by agreement or being held under police authority or pursuant
to a writ or court order is not considered abandoned, nor may it be processed as abandoned while the
police hold, writ, or court order is in effect.
Subd. 2. Abandoned Well. A well which has been permanently discontinued, or which is in such
disrepair that its continued use is impracticable, endangers the quality of the groundwater or may
be a health or safety hazard.
Subd. 3. Accumulations of Manure.
(a) Pets. An accumulation of manure that exceeds that which would ordinarily occur in two days.
(b) Other Domestic Animals. An accumulation of manure that exceeds the requirements for manure
storage established by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Feedlot Rules.
(c) An accumulation of manure which is otherwise considered excessive due to odor or appearance,
or which cannot be contained on the premises.
Subd. 4. Diseased Animal. An animal with an infectious or contagious disease.
Subd. 5. Enforcement officer. City officials identified in Section 1100, subd. 4.
Subd. 6. Front yard area. An open, unobstructed yard across the front of a lot between the building or
allowed building line, and the front property line and between side yard property lines as defined
by the St. Cloud Land Development Code.
Subd. 7. Garbage. Any organic wastes normally produced from the handling and use of foods, except
dishwater and waste-water.
Subd. 8. Inoperable vehicle. Any motor vehicle which cannot be legally and safely driven or propelled
under its own power due to its existing condition.
Subd. 9. Junk vehicle. A vehicle that:
(a) is three years old or older;
(b) is extensively damaged, with the damage including such things as broken or missing wheels,
motor, drive train, or transmission;
(c) is apparently inoperable;
(d) does not have a valid, current registration plate; and
(e) has an approximate fair market value equal only to the approximate value of the scrap in it.
Subd. 10. Motor Vehicle. Any motorized, self-propelled vehicle of a type that may be used to convey
persons or materials or to perform a task.
(a) For purposes of this section the definition of motor vehicle does not include the following:
a. Home maintenance equipment such as riding lawn mowers or snow blowers.
b. Mobile construction equipment not licensable for public streets that is being used for
construction or remodeling at the residence. The temporary parking of mobile
construction equipment is permitted only for the duration of the construction or
remodeling project. This section does not permit the permanent storage or parking of
mobile construction equipment.
c. Recreational Vehicles as defined by Ordinance Section 355, the City of St. Cloud Land
Development Code.
Subd. 11. Outside. Outside of an enclosed storage facility and visible from any property and/or public
place.
Subd. 12. Private Premises. Any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used wholly or
in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, and will include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule, or mailbox belonging
or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
Subd. 13. Public Nuisance. Any action or failure to act that adversely affects the public health as
follows:
(a) Annoy, injure or endanger the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public;
(b) Offend public decency;
(c) Interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous for passage, any public highway or right-ofway,
or waters used by the public;
(d) In any way render a considerable number of persons insecure in life or in use of property.
Subd. 14. Public Place. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any
and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
Subd. 15. Real property. Any public or private land within the city, including whatever is erected,
growing upon or affixed to the land.
Subd. 16. Rubbish. Any wastes which are not garbage and will include but not be limited to the
following:
(a) Yard waste which includes grass clippings, leaves and garden waste, tree branches and brush;
or
(b) Furniture, appliances, trash and similar materials; or
(c) Old machinery and debris which includes old-machinery, motor vehicle components parts,
including but not limited to engines, transmissions, wheels, tires and doors, cut or uncut timber,
pipes, or other junk or debris; or
(d) Material that is no longer of value for its original purpose.
(e) Construction and/or remodeling materials on residential property which are not being currently
utilized.
Subd. 17. Unreasonable Quantities. Amounts such that the health, safety or welfare of the public is
damaged or threatened.
Section 1005:20. Obstructing Health Official. No person will willfully oppose or obstruct a Health&
Inspection Department employee or enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of the health laws
of the City of St. Cloud or with the performance of any legal duty.
Section 1005:30. Diseased Animals. No person will negligently or willfully permit diseased animals to
escape control or to run at large.
Section 1005:40 Nuisances Affecting Health, Safety, Peace and General Welfare. The following are
declared to be nuisances affecting health, safety, peace and general welfare and are prohibited:
Subd. 1. Accumulations of manure, rubbish and garbage which might constitute a nuisance by reason of
appearance, odor, sanitation, possible littering of neighboring properties or a fire hazard.
Subd. 2. The pollution of any water supply, stream, lake, or body of water by sewage, industrial wastes
or other pollutants.
Subd. 3. Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot or cinders in unreasonable quantities.
Subd. 4. Barbed and Electrified Wire Fences. All barbed wire or electrified fences.
(a) Except those located in or on:
a. Rural Residential and Agricultural zoned districts;
b. Commercial or industrial zoned area and used in connection with security fencing, and
having the first strand at least six feet above normal grade;
c. Property owned or leased by federal, county, state, city or other government
subdivisions.
Subd. 5. Abandoned Excavation. To leave any abandoned basement, well, shaft, wall, cesspool, or
septic tank, or other excavation unless covered or filled or otherwise protected as to prevent people from
accidentally falling into the same or being injured.
Subd. 6. Abandoned Refrigerator. To leave any unused refrigerator or other container with doors that
fasten automatically when closed.
Subd. 7. Dangerous Machinery, Etc. All unguarded dangerous machinery, equipment or other property
in any public place or so situated or operated on private property as to attract minor children.
Subd. 8. Electrical Disturbances. All interference and disturbance of radios and television sets caused
by electrical appliances and equipment.
Subd. 9. Dust in Parking Lots. To operate any private parking lot without keeping the same reasonably
free from dust.
Subd. 10. Indoor furniture use outdoors. No person shall place, use, keep, store or maintain any
upholstered furniture not manufactured for outdoor use, including, without limitation, upholstered chairs,
upholstered couches and mattresses, in outdoor areas, in or on any porch, patio or other unenclosed
structure where such furniture is visible from a public right-of-way or from the ground level of adjacent
property, and no property owner shall permit any such activity to occur on property owned by them.
(a) Exemptions:
a. That such furniture was placed in the refuse pick-up area as part of a trash or recycling
program and is scheduled for removal;
b. That such furniture was temporarily placed in order that it be offered for sale at a yard or
garage sale for no more than four days in any six-month period and a sign is placed on or
near the furniture indicating that it is for sale.
c. That such furniture was temporarily placed in order that it be offered for sale at a
commercial tent sale upon property occupied by a furniture retailer for no more than 60-
days in any six-month period.
Subd. 11. Placement or storage of ice fish houses, skateboard ramps, playhouses or other similar
non-permanent structures or equipment outside continuously for longer than 24 hours in the front yard
area of residentially-zoned property.
Subd. 12. Placement or storage of non-commercial pipe, lumber, forms, steel, machinery, or similar
materials outside on residentially-zoned property, unless shielded from ordinary public view by means of
a fence, shrubbery or trees.
Section 1005:60. Abandoned and Junk Vehicles. The presence, accumulation, or improper storage of
abandoned and junk motor vehicles on public or private property and the public streets and highways of
this city is hearby found to create an unsightly condition tending to reduce the value of real property, to
invite plundering, to create fire and safety hazards, and to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a
hazard to the health and safety of minors. The accumulation and outside storage of such motor vehicles is
further found to promote blight and deterioration in the community in many instances. It is further found
that such abandoned and junk motor vehicles are often in the nature of rubbish, litter and unsightly
debris. Therefore, the accumulation and storage of such motor vehicles on real property, except as
hereinafter permitted, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may by abated as such,
which remedy shall be in addition to any remedy provided in this or other ordinances of this city or by
state law.
Subd. 1. Open storage of abandoned and junk vehicles. No person shall park, store, leave or permit the
parking, storing or leaving of any abandoned or junk vehicle upon any real property, including private
property, within the city for a period of 14 successive days, unless such motor vehicle is completely
enclosed in a building or unless such motor vehicle is so stored on private property in connection with a
duly licensed business or commercial enterprise operated and conducted pursuant to law when such
parking or storing of motor vehicles is necessary to the operation of the business or commercial
enterprise.
Subd. 2. Notice to remove.
(a) Whenever the enforcement officer ascertains that an abandoned or junk vehicle is present on
real property within the city, they shall cause notice to be placed upon such abandoned or junk
vehicle using substantially the following words:
NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED MOTOR
VEHICLE AND TO THE OWNER OR PERSON(S) IN LAWFUL POSSESSION OR CONTROL
OF THIS LAND.
This motor vehicle (setting forth a brief description), located at (setting forth a brief description of
the location), is improperly stored, and its present storage will be in violation of Section 1005:70
of the Code of Ordinances on (setting forth a date 14 days from the date of this notice) unless such
motor vehicle is removed and stored within a building. Failure to remove and store said motor
vehicle is a misdemeanor. In addition, this motor vehicle shall be removed and disposed of in
accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 168B;
(b) The notice set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall not be less than eight inches by ten
inches and shall be sufficiently weatherproofed to withstand normal exposure to the elements.
(c) In addition to the posting, the enforcement officer(s) shall mail on the day of posting or within
a reasonable timeframe, a copy of the written notice to the last registered owner of said motor
vehicle and to the owner or persons in lawful possession of the real property upon which the
motor vehicle is located.
Subd. 3. Failure to remove. Failure by the owner of the motor vehicle or owner or person in lawful
possession of the real property upon which the motor vehicle is located to removed and store the motor
vehicle after notice had been given and the 14 day period has expired, shall constitute a misdemeanor.
Section 1005:70. Enforcement. It is the duty of the Health & Inspections Department to enforce the
provisions of this ordinance, including the power to inspect private premises and issue orders for
abatement.
Subd. 1. Abatement of Nuisance, Abatement of Abandoned Vehicle, and Abatement of Junk Vehicle
Violations. If, after service of notice, the person served fails to abate a nuisance, abandoned vehicle or
junk vehicle violation or make the necessary repairs, alterations or changes as required by the order of
the Health and Inspections Department, the same may be abated under the direction of the Health
Director. The expenses for abatement will include a $75.00 administrative fee in addition to the actual
costs of abatement. Abatement actions that require the presence of City staff for more than one hour
during the abatement or other extraordinary coordination efforts will be additionally billed to the affected
property owner at the rate of $60.00 per hour. Abatement expenses will be levied against the property as
a special assessment and collected as in the case of other special assessments.
(a) Removal and disposal of abandoned and junk vehicles. The removal and disposal of said motor
vehicles shall be made in accordance with the provisions set forth in Minnesota Statutes Chapter
168B.
Subd. 2. Certification fee: A $50.00 charge will be added to all accounts certified to the County Auditor's
office for collection. This fee is to be considered separate and distinct from any penalty or interest that
may be charged by the County as a result of the certification.
History: Ord. 2413 12-01-08.; Ord. 2413 09-10-12; Ord. 2710 05-22-17
Graffiti Ordinance
Section 1007:00
Section 1007:00. Findings and Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to help prevent the
spread of graffiti vandalism and to establish a program for the removal of graffiti from public
and private property. The Council finds that graffiti is a public nuisance and that its presence
and proliferation detracts from property values and has an overall negative impact upon the City.
Graffiti vandalism has been recognized to substantially contribute to the spread of gang activity,
violence, crime and deterioration of property values. Unless the City acts to remove graffiti from
public and private property, the graffiti tends to remain. Other properties then become the target
of graffiti, and entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in which to
be, all to the detriment of the city.
Section 1007:05. Definitions.
Subd. 1. “Graffiti” means any unauthorized inscription, work, figure, painting or other
defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or
engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by any
graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti was not authorized in advance by the
owner or occupant of the property, or despite advance authorization, is otherwise deemed
a public nuisance by the City Council.
Subd. 2. “Graffiti Implement” means any paint, aerosol or pressurized containers of
paint, indelible broad tipped markers, paint stick, etching equipment or any other device
capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or manmade surface. A paint
stick is further defined as any device containing a solid form or paint or other similar
substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure.
Subd. 3. “Responsible Party” means an owner, legal occupant or an entity or person
acting as an agent for an owner by agreement, which has authority over the real property
or is responsible for the property’s maintenance or management. Irrespective of any
arrangement to the contrary with any other party, each property owner shall always be a
responsible party for the purposes of this section. There may be more than one
responsible party for a particular property.
Section 1007:10. Prohibited Acts. The following acts constitute graffiti vandalism.
Subd. 1. It is unlawful for any person to intentionally place or apply, or attempt to place
or apply, graffiti on any surface of a structure, fixture or object located on public or
private real property within the city without the advance authorization of a responsible
party for the property. This subdivision applies to permanent, temporary or moveable
structures or objects such as vehicles and railroad cars.
Subd. 2. It is unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement with the intent to
use the same to place or apply graffiti on any public or private real property within the
city or on any surface of a permanent structure, fixture or object located thereon.
Section 1007:15. Graffiti as Public Nuisance.
Subd. 1. The existence of graffiti on public or private property in violation of this
Ordinance is expressly declared to be a public nuisance and, therefore, is subject to the
removal and abatement provisions specified in this Ordinance.
Subd. 2. It is the duty of both the owner of the property to which the graffiti has been
applied and any person who may be in possession or who has the right to possess such
property to at all times keep the property clear of graffiti.
Section 1007:20. Removal of Graffiti.
Subd. 1. Removal by the Perpetrator. Any person applying graffiti on public or private
property shall have the duty to remove the graffiti within 24 hours after verbal or written
notice by the City. Such removal shall be done in a manner prescribed by the Chief of
Police or the Health Director. Any person applying graffiti shall be responsible for the
removal or for the payment of removal. Failure of any person to remove graffiti or pay
for the removal shall constitute an additional violation of this Ordinance. Where graffiti
is applied by an unemancipated minor, the parents or legal guardian will also be
responsible for such removal or for the payment of the removal.
Subd. 2. Property Owner Responsibility. It is unlawful for any responsible party to
permit property that is defaced with graffiti to remain defaced for a period of 72 hours
after receiving notice from the City.
Subd. 3. Right of City to Remove or Abate.
a. Use of Public Funds. Whenever the City becomes aware or is notified and
determines that graffiti is located on publicly or privately owned property
viewable from a public or quasi-public place, the City shall be authorized to use
public funds for the removal of the graffiti, or for the painting or repairing of the
graffiti, but will not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of
any more extensive an area than that where the graffiti is located.
b. Notification. The Health Director will notify the responsible party in person or
in writing and require the person to remove the graffiti or otherwise abate the
nuisance. Verbal notice will be documented and at a later time reduced to
writing. Written notice will be served upon the responsible party by regular mail.
If the property is not occupied and the address of the responsible party is
unknown, then service on the responsible party may be accomplished by posting a
copy of the notice on the premises. The notice will require the responsible party
to take reasonable steps within 72 hours to remove the graffiti or otherwise abate
the nuisance.
c. Abatement of Nuisance. If after service of notice, the responsible party fails to
remove the graffiti or otherwise abate the nuisance within the prescribed time
period, then the Health Director may cause the nuisance to be abated at the
expense of the City of St. Cloud. The City Council may seek to recover
abatement expenses by assessing the cost of removal of graffiti against the
property and certify the costs for collection in the same manner as taxes and
special assessments are certified and collected.
History: Ord. 2393 4-21-08.
Section 1010:00 - High Risk Sexual Conduct
Section 1010:00. Findings. It is found that there are within the City of St. Cloud commercial
premises, buildings and structures, which, by reason of the design and use of such premises,
buildings or structures are conducive to the spread of communicable disease of danger to persons
frequenting such premises, buildings and structures, and to the public health, safety and welfare of
the community. The health, safety and welfare of all persons in the City of St. Cloud must be
protected through the application and enforcement of standards regulating such premises, buildings
and structures, in order to eliminate the possibility of the spread of, or infection by, contagious
disease. The sexually transmittable disease of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, is found to
be irreversible and uniformly fatal. The incidence of this disease is found to occur in discernible
population groups. The risk factors for obtaining or spreading the disease are associated with highrisk
sexual conduct. The commercial premises, buildings and structures where persons are placed at
risk of infection from this disease or other communicable diseases facilitated by their design or use
for high risk sexual conduct are in need of regulation and of establishment of minimal standards for
the prevention of the spread of this disease and other communicable diseases for the protection of
the public health, safety and welfare of the community.
Section 1010:05. Definitions.
Subd. 1. The term "high risk sexual conduct" means:
(a) fellatio;
(b) anal intercourse;
(c) vaginal intercourse with persons who engage in sexual acts in exchange for money.
Subd. 2. The term "hazardous site" means any commercial premises, building or structure,
which is a site of high-risk sexual conduct.
Subd. 3. The phrase "booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms"
means:
(a) Enclosures specifically offered to persons for a fee or as an incident to performing
high risk sexual conduct; or
(b) Enclosures which are part of a business operated on the premises which offers
movies or other entertainment to be viewed within the enclosure, including
enclosures where movies or other entertainment is dispensed for a fee. The phrase
"booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms" does not mean
enclosures which are private offices used by the owners, manager, or persons
employed on the premises for attending to the tasks of their employment, and which
are not held out to the public or members of the establishment for hire or for a fee or
for the purpose of viewing movies or other entertainment for a fee, and are not open
to any persons other than employees.
Subd. 4. The phrase "doors, curtains or portal partitions" means full, complete,
non-transparent closure devices through which one cannot see or view activity taking place
within the enclosure.
Subd. 5. The phrase "open to an adjacent public room so that the area inside is visible to
persons in the adjacent public room" means either the absence of any "door, curtain or portal
partition" or a door or other device which is made of clear, transparent material such as glass,
plexiglass or other similar material meeting building code and safety standards, which
permits the activity inside the enclosure to be viewed or seen by persons outside the
enclosure.
Subd. 6. The words "Health Director" means the City of St. Cloud Health Director.
Section 1010:10. Building Standards.
Subd. 1. No commercial building, structure, premises will be so constructed, used, designed
or operated for the purpose of engaging in, or permitting persons to engage in, sexual
activities which include high risk sexual conduct.
Subd. 2. No person will own, operate manage, rent, lease or exercise control of any
commercial building, structure, or premises, which contains:
(a) Partitions between subdivisions of a room, portion or part of a building, structure or
premises having an aperture which is designed or constructed to facilitate sexual
activity between persons on either side of the partition.
(b) Booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room, or individual rooms, used for the
viewing of motion pictures or other forms of entertainment, having doors, curtains or
portal partitions, unless such booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room, or
individual rooms so used will have at least one side open to an adjacent public room
so that the area inside is visible to persons in the adjacent public room. Such areas
will be lighted in a manner that the persons in the areas used for viewing motion
pictures or other forms of entertainment are visible from the adjacent public rooms,
but such lighting will not be of such intensity as to prevent the viewing of the motion
pictures or other offered entertainment.
Subd 3. The standards as set forth in this section will not apply to buildings, structures and
premises that are lawfully operating as hotels, motels, apartment complexes, condominiums
or rooming houses.
Section 1010:15. Powers of the Health Director.
Subd. 1. In exercising powers conferred by this or any other section of this ordinance
relating to communicable diseases, the Health and Housing Advisory and Appeals
Committee (HAAC) and the Health Director will be guided by the most recent instructions,
opinions and guidelines of the Center for Disease Control of the United States Department of
Health and Human Services which related to the spread of infections diseases.
Subd. 2. In order to ascertain the source of infection and reduce its spread, the Health
Director and persons under the Health Director's direction and control, have full power and
authority to inspect or cause to be inspected, and to issue orders regarding any commercial
building, structure or premises, which may be a site of high risk sexual conduct. If the
Health Director determines that a hazardous site exists, the Health Director will declare it to
be a public health hazard and public health nuisance and will then:
(a) Notify the management, owner or tenant of the premises that that Director has
reasonable belief that the premises, building or structure is a hazardous site.
(b) Issue warnings to the management, owner or tenant of the premises
stating the reasons for the Director's belief that the premises, building,
or structure is a hazardous site.
(c) Once such notice and warnings have been issued, the Director, or the Director's
appointee will proceed as follows:
(1) After the management, owner or tenant of the premises has been notified in
writing as to the basis of the Director's determination, the management,
owner or tenant will have ten days to request a hearing before the Health and
Housing Advisory and Appeals Committee for a determination as to the
existence of such hazardous site. If the management, owner or tenant of the
premises does not request a hearing within ten days of the notice, the
Director will then cause the premises to be posted with a warning advising
the public that the premises have been declared a hazardous site. The Health
Director will cause orders to be issued to the management, owner or tenant of
the premises constituting the hazardous site to take corrective measures to
prevent high risk sexual conduct from taking place within the premises.
(2) If the management, owner or tenant of the premises requests a hearing, the
hearing will be held before the Health and Housing Advisory and Appeals
Committee at a date not more than 30 days after demand for a hearing. After
considering all evidence, the Health and Housing Advisory and Appeals
Committee will make a determination as to whether the premises constitute a
hazardous site. The Health and Housing Advisory and Appeals Committee
will then issue a decision based upon all evidence presented. If the Health
and Housing Advisory and Appeals Committee makes a determination that
the premises constitute a hazardous site, the Healh Director will then issue an
order and cause the premises, building or structure to be posted with a
warning advising the public that the premises have been declared a hazardous
site.
Subd. 3. If, within 30 days from issuance of the orders to the management, owner or tenant
of the hazardous site, the Health Director determines that such corrective measures have not
been undertaken, then the Health Director may order the abatement of the hazardous site as a
public nuisance, which will be enforced by mandatory or prohibitory injunction in a court of
competent jurisdiction; or may secure a court order for the closure of the premises
constituting the "hazardous site" until the premises, building, or structure is in compliance
with the standards set forth in Section 1010:10.
Subd. 4. Any person who removes, destroys, or defaces warnings posted on premises will be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
Section 1015 Clandestine Drug Lab Sites and Chemical Dumpsites
Section 1015:00 Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to reduce public exposure to
health risks where law enforcement officers have determined that hazardous chemicals
from a suspected clandestine lab site or associated dumpsite may exist. The City Council
finds that such sites may contain hazardous chemicals, substances, or residues of
hazardous chemicals and substances that place people, particularly children or adults of
child-bearing age, at risk of exposure through inhabiting or visiting the site, now and in
the future.
Section 1015:10 Interpretation and Application.
Subd. 1. The provisions of this ordinance will be interpreted and applied as the
minimum requirements necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare.
Subd. 2. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this ordinance are
either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable provisions imposed by
any other law, ordinance, statute, resolution, or regulation of any kind, the
regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or
requirements will prevail.
Section 1015:15 Definitions. The following terms or words will be interpreted as
follows:
Subd. 1. “Child” means any person less than 18 years of age.
Subd. 2. “Chemical dumpsite” means any place or area where chemicals or other
waste materials used in a clandestine drug lab have been located.
Subd. 3. “Clandestine drug lab” means the unlawful manufacture or attempt to
manufacture controlled substances.
Subd. 4. “Clandestine drug lab site” means any place or area where law
enforcement has determined that conditions associated with the operation of an
unlawful clandestine drug lab exist. A clandestine drug lab site may include
dwellings, accessory buildings, accessory structures, vehicles, a chemical
dumpsite or any land.
Subd. 5. “Controlled substance means” a drug, substance or immediate precursor
in Schedules I through V of Minn. Statutes 152.02. This term does not include
distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages, intoxicating liquors or tobacco.
Subd. 6. “Household hazardous wastes” means waste generated from a
clandestine drug lab. Such wastes will be treated, stored, transported or disposed
of in a manner consistent with the Minnesota Department of Health and
Minnesota pollution Control Agency rules and regulations.
Subd. 7. “Manufacture”, in places other than a pharmacy, means and includes the
production, cultivation, quality control, and standardization, by mechanical,
physical, chemical or pharmaceutical means, packing, repacking, tableting,
encapsulating, labeling, relabeling, filling, or by other process, of drugs.
Subd. 8. “Owner” means any person, firm or corporation who owns, in whole or
in part, the land, building, structure or vehicle associated with a clandestine drug
lab site or chemical dumpsite.
Subd. 9. “Public Health Nuisance” means all dwellings, accessory structures and
buildings, adjacent property or vehicle associated with a clandestine drug lab site
or chemical dumpsite, are potentially unsafe due to health hazards, and will be
considered a public health nuisance.
Section 1015:20. Declaration of a Property as a Public Health Nuisance. If law
enforcement or a chemical assessment determines the existence of a clandestine drug lab
site or chemical dumpsite, the property will be declared a Public Health Nuisance.
Subd.1. Notice to Other Authorities. The law enforcement authority or other
agency requesting a chemical assessment that identifies conditions associated
with a clandestine drug lab site or chemical dumpsite must promptly notify the
appropriate child protection agency if children are or have been present, the St.
Cloud Fire Department Hazmat/Chemical Assessment Team and the City of St.
Cloud Health and Inspections Department of the property location, property
owner if known and conditions found.
Subd. 2. The Health and Inspections Department will promptly post the property
as a Public Health Nuisance at all probable entrances to the building, structure or
property. Removal of the posting by anyone other than the Health and
Inspections Department or law enforcement authority is prohibited.
Subd. 3. Occupancy Prohibited. Upon the issuance of a notice of a Public Health
Nuisance and posting, all occupants of the building or structure will immediately
vacate the premises. No person will occupy, enter or allow occupancy or entrance
to a building or structure declared a public health nuisance until the public health
nuisance declaration is vacated or modified to allow occupancy.
Subd. 4. The Health and Inspection Department is authorized to modify the
conditions or remove the notice of a Public Health Nuisance.
Subd. 5. Modifications or removal of the notice of a Public Health Nuisance will
occur only after documentation from a qualified environmental hazard testing and
cleaning firm, stating that the health and safety risks including those to neighbors
and potential dwelling occupants are sufficiently abated or corrected to allow safe
occupancy of the dwelling.
Section 1015:25. Notice of Public Health Nuisance to Concerned Parties. The Health
and Inspections Department will notify the owner of the property by mail in addition to
the following parties:
Subd. 1. Occupants of the property.
Subd. 2. Neighbors at probable risk.
Subd. 3. Other state and local authorities if appropriate, such as the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency and the Minnesota Department of Health, which are
known to have public and environmental protection responsibilities to the
situation.
Section 1015:30. Property Owner’s Responsibility to Act. Within ten days of receiving
the notice of Public Health Nuisance, the owner and/or occupant will act to accomplish
the following:
Subd. 1. Notify the Health and Inspections Department that the Clandestine Drug
Lab Site has been and will remain vacated and secured until the Health and
Inspections Department acts to remove the Notice of Public Health Nuisance.
Subd. 2. Contract with one or more acceptable environmental hazard testing and
cleaning firms (acceptable firms are those that have provided the Health and
Inspections Department assurance of appropriate equipment, procedures, and
staff) to accomplish the following:
a. Conduct a detailed onsite assessment.
b. Determine the extent of contamination.
c. Carry out and /or direct remediation operations.
d. Perform and/or direct follow-up sampling and testing.
e. Determine that the risks are sufficiently reduced, according to
Minnesota Department of Health guidelines, to allow renewed
occupancy of the Clandestine Drug Lab Site.
Section 1015:35 Property Owner’s Responsibility for Costs and the City of St. Cloud
Costs.
Subd. 1. Consistent with Minnesota Statutes Chapter 145A, the property owner
will be responsible for:
a. Private contractor’s fees, cleanup, remediation, and testing of the
Clandestine Drug Lab Site, and;
b. The City of St. Cloud’s fees and costs of administering notices,
enforcing vacating, cleanup, remediation, and testing of the
Clandestine Drug Lab Site.
Subd. 2. Nothing in this ordinance is intended to limit the property owners,
occupants, or the City of St. Cloud’s right to recover costs, referenced in this
section, from persons contributing to the contamination, such as the operators of
the Clandestine Drug Lab and/or other lawful sources.
Subd. 3 The City of St. Cloud’s administrative and enforcement services,
referenced in Subd. 1, b. of this Section include but are not limited to, the
following:
a. Posting the site.
b. Notification of concerned parties.
c. Remediation services.
d. Laboratory fees.
e. Expenses related to the recovery of cost, including the property
assessment process.
f. Administrative fees
g. Other services associated with assessing, vacating, and remediation of
the property.
Section 1015:40. Recovery of Public Costs
Subd. 1. If, after service of the notice of a Public Health Nuisance, the property
owner fails to arrange appropriate assessment and cleanup within ten days, the
Health and Inspections Department is authorized to proceed in a prompt manner
to initiate the on-site assessment and cleanup.
Subd. 2. If the Health and Inspections Department is unable to locate the property
owner within ten days of the notice of Public Health Nuisance, The Health and
Inspections Department is authorized to proceed in a prompt manner to initiate the
on-site assessment and cleanup.
Subd. 3. The Health and Inspections Department may abate the nuisance by
removing any hazardous structure, building or condition, in accordance with
Minnesota Statute Chapter 463.
Subd. 4. If the City of St. Cloud abates the Public Health Nuisance, in addition to
any other legal remedy, the City of St. Cloud will be entitled to recover all costs.
The City of St. Cloud may recover costs by civil action against the person or
persons who own the property or by assessing such costs as a special tax against
the property in the manner that taxes and special assessments are certified and
collected.
Section 1040 –Animal Control Ordinance
Section 1040:00. Definitions.
Subd. 1. "Animal Control Officer" means the city staff charged with the duty of picking
up and impounding unlicensed dogs, strays, and abandoned animals as herein provided.
Subd. 2. “Animal Shelter”or “City of St. Cloud Animal Shelter” means any premises
designated by the City Council for the purpose or impounding or caring for animals held
under the authority of this Section.
Subd. 3. "At Large" means off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the
owner, or other competent person, by leash not exceeding eight feet in length.
Subd. 4. “Dangerous Animal” means an animal that has:
a. without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a human
being on public or private property;
b. killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's
property; or
c. been found to be potentially dangerous, and after the owner has
notice that the animal is potentially dangerous, the animal
aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or
domestic animals.
Subd. 5. “Domestic Animal” means any of various non-venomous animals domesticated
so as to live and breed in a tame condition. Domestic animals do not include any animal
considered “non-domestic” as defined by this ordinance section. Domestic animals are
limited to:
a. Dogs: Canis lupus familiaris
b. Cats: Felis catus
c. Rabbits: Order Lagomorpha
d. Ferrets: Mustela putorius furo
e. Any of the class of Aves (birds) that are caged and otherwise kept inside
the residence;
f. Any of the class of Aves (birds) kept under the owners or caretakers
control and within properties that are zoned Rural Residential or
Agricultural by the St. Cloud Land Development Code, further providing
that those birds are not free to leave the property.
g. Any of the order of Rodentia such as mice, rats, gerbils, hamsters,
chinchillas & guinea pigs;
h. Any of the class of Reptilia such as snakes, lizards, and turtles excepting
those meeting the non-domestic animal definition;
i. Any of the class of Amphibian such as salamanders, frogs, toads excepting
those meeting the non-domestic animal definition;
j. Any of the order of Erinaceomorpha such as hedgehogs and moon rats
k. Sugar gliders: Petaurus breviceps
Subd. 6. "Kennel" means any place, building, tract of land, abode, or vehicle where three
or more dogs are kept and maintained, with the exception of locations where the owners
have been issued a Multiple Animal Permit. Kennel does not include a veterinarian
licensed to practice in the State of Minnesota who keeps, congregates or confines dogs in
the normal pursuit of the practice of veterinary medicine. Kennel does not include an
animal shelter owned and operated by any political subdivision of the State or providing
animal sheltering services under contract with any political subdivision of the State.
Subd. 7.“Non-domestic Animal” means those animals considered to be naturally wild and
not naturally trained or domesticated; or which are considered to be inherently dangerous
to the health, safety, and welfare of people. Unless otherwise defined, non-domestic
animals shall include:
a. Any member of the cat family (felidae) including, but not limited to, lions,
tigers, cougars, bobcats, leopards and jaguars, but excluding those
recognized as domesticated house cats.
b. Any naturally wild member of the canine family (canidae) including, but
not limited to, wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes, and jackals, but excluding
those recognized as domesticated dogs.
c. Any hybrid or crossbreeds between an animal defined in clauses (a) or (b)
and a domestic animal and offspring from all subsequent generations of
those hybrids or crosses, such as the crossbreed between a wolf and a dog.
d. Any member or relative of the rodent family including any skunk (whether
or not descented), raccoon, or squirrel, but excluding those members
otherwise defined or commonly accepted as domesticated pets.
e. Any poisonous, venomous, constricting, or inherently dangerous member
of the reptile or amphibian families including, but not limited to,
rattlesnakes, boa constrictors, pit vipers, crocodiles and alligators.
f. Goats, pigs, poultry, horses, cattle, llama, bison, except as allowed by the
City of St. Cloud Land Development Code.
g. Any other animal that is not explicitly listed above but which can be
reasonably defined by the terms of this section including, but not limited
to exotic animals, human primates, bear, deer, and game fish.
Subd. 8. "Owner" means any person, keeper, custodian or legal entity owning, harboring
or keeping an animal, whether temporary or permanent
Subd. 9. “Potentially Dangerous Animal” A potentially dangerous animal is an animal
which has:
a. When unprovoked, bitten a human or a domestic animal on public or
private property; or
b. When unprovoked, chased or approached a person upon the streets,
sidewalks, or any public or private property, other than the animal owner's
property, in an apparent attitude of attack; or
c. A known history or propensity, tendency or disposition to attack while
unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans
or domestic animals.
Subd. 10. “Premises” shall mean any building, structure, shelter or land whereupon
animals are kept or confined.
Subd. 11 ."Proper enclosure" means securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and
locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the animal from escaping and providing
protection from the elements for the animal. A proper enclosure does not include a porch,
patio, or any part of a house, garage, or other structure that would allow the animal to exit of
its own volition, or any house or structure in which windows are open or in which door or
window screens are the only obstacles that prevent the animal from exiting.
Subd. 12. "Provocation" means an act that an adult could reasonably expect may cause a dog
to attack or bite.
Subd. 13. "Substantial bodily harm" means bodily injury which involves a temporary but
substantial disfigurement, or which causes a temporary but substantial loss or impairment of
the function of any bodily member or organ, or which causes a fracture of any bodily
member.
Subd. 14. Unprovoked. Unprovoked means the condition in which the animal is not
purposely agitated or disturbed. It is a rebuttable presumption that any attack on a child
fourteen years of age or younger for which a reasonable person connotes an intent to
inflict bodily harm will be considered to be unprovoked unless the child is engaged in the
commission of a crime or illegal activity, including activities classified under Minnesota
Statute 343 as cruelty to animals.
Section 1040:10. Dog License Required; Tags, Public Notice.
Subd. 1. License required. It will be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor any
dog or dogs over six months of age within the City, without having obtained a license.
a. Dog licenses. No license will be issued for any dog unless the applicant presents
proof that the dog has been immunized against rabies as required.
b. Information required. The owner is required to state the dog’s name, sex, age, and
breed and color on each license application.
c. Date of Payment of License Fee. It is the duty of the owner of a dog required to
be licensed to pay the license fee on or before the 31st day of May in each year, or
upon acquiring ownership or possession of an unlicensed dog, or upon
establishing residence in the City. All licenses will expire on the 31st day of May
of the calendar year following its issuance
d. Non-refundable. No refunds will be made on any dog license fee because of the
removal of the dog from the city or because of the death of the dog before the
expiration of the license period.
Subd. 2. Tags.
a. Upon approval of a dog license application, the applicant will be provided with a
tag which shall be permanently fastened to the collar of the dog in such manner
that the tag may be seen easily, and the tag will be worn constantly by such dog.
b. Duplicate Tags. When any dog tag is lost, a duplicate may be issued, upon
presentation of a receipt showing the payment of the license fee for the then
current year. Fees for duplicate tags will be established by City Council.
c. Offenses Involving Tags. It is unlawful to counterfeit, or attempt to counterfeit,
the tags provided for in this section or to remove from any dog a tag legally
placed upon it with the intent of placing it upon another dog, or to place such tag
upon another dog. It is unlawful for any person to transfer any tag issued, or to
place a tag upon any dog other than the one for which it was issued, provided a
tag may be transferred with the dog for which it was issued.
Subd. 3. Public Notice. The Animal Control Officer will cause a notice of the necessity of
obtaining a dog license and paying such license fee to be published in the official
newspaper of the City twice before the 31st day of May, in each year, the last publication
to be at least one week prior such date. If any owner does not obtain a license for his/her
dog by this date, a late license fee will be added onto the regular dog license fee.
Section 1040:20. Limitations. Except for kennels licensed under this ordinance and/or animal
owners who have been issued a Multiple Animal Permit as designated in the ordinance, the
following limits on animals will apply:
Subd. 1. Properties with Single Family Homes and no other dwelling units.
a. No more than two dogs over six months of age shall be owned, kept or
harbored on the premises.
b. No more than four cats over six months of age shall be owned, kept or
harbored on the premises.
c. Congregate limit. No more than 10 domestic animals may be kept or harbored
on the premises. Within the congregate total of 10 domestic animals, no more
than any combination of dogs or cats exceeding 4 are allowed subject to the
further limitations of Subd. 1a and 1b.
Example: 4 hamsters, 4 birds, 2 turtles = allowed
1 dog, 3 cats, 6 birds = allowed
3 dogs, 1 cat, 6 birds = not allowed due to violation of 1a.
2 dogs, 4 cats, 4 birds = not allowed due to violation of 1c.
2 dogs, 2 cats, 9 birds = not allowed due to violation of 1c.
Subd. 2. Properties with more than one dwelling unit or commercial or industrial zoned
properties:
a. No more than two dogs over six months of age shall be owned, kept or
harbored within a dwelling unit or other premises.
b. No more than two cats over six months of age shall be owned, kept or
harbored within a dwelling unit or other premises.
c. Congregate limit. No more than 6 domestic animals may be kept or harbored
within a dwelling unit or other premises. Within the congregate total of 6
domestic animals, no more than any combination of dogs or cats exceeding 3
are allowed, subject to the further limitations of Subd. 2a and 2b. See
examples cited above.
Subd 3. Multiple Animal Permits.
a. Application. Prior to exceeding the animal limits set forth above, owners
must make application to the Health Director for an annual animal permit that
allows them to exceed the limits listed in this section by no more than two
animals. Multiple Animal Permits will only be issued to residents that are
experiencing extraordinary circumstances such as military deployment, or will
be fostering animals for either the Tri-County Humane Society or City of St.
Cloud Animal Shelter
i. Applicants must provide information for each animal in excess of the
limit. Information must include: name, color, species, age and housing
provided for each animal as well as other pertinent information required
by the Health Director. An application fee as set by City Council shall be
submitted with the application.
b. Inspection required. Permit approval will be subject to inspection of the
premises where the animal is to be located and a review of past animal related
complaints or violations.
c. Permit conditions. Multiple animal permits shall specify any restrictions,
limitations, conditions or prohibitions which the Health Director deems
reasonably necessary to protect any person or neighboring use from unsanitary
conditions, unreasonable noise or odors, annoyance, or to protect the public
health or safety.
d. Modifications and revocation. A multiple animal permit may be modified
from time to time or revoked by the Health Director for failure to conform to
required restrictions, limitations or prohibitions. Such modification or
revocation shall be effective from and after ten (10) days following the
mailing of written notice to the person or persons keeping or maintaining such
animals. Denial, modification or revocation of a permit issued under this
section shall be appealable to the Health and Housing Advisory and Appeals
Committee.
e. Grandfathering. Owners who currently possess animals in excess of the
limitations set forth in this ordinance section, and who meet licensing
requirements prior to the date of enactment will be granted multiple animal
permits without a permit fee or inspection. These permits shall be applied for
and submitted by November 15, 2009. Animals possessed under these permits
may not be replaced without an application, fee and inspection as set forth
above.
f. Fostering. Owners who provide foster care for animals through the Tri-
County Humane Society or City of St. Cloud Animal Shelter may be granted
annual permits without providing information regarding the identification of
each animal fostered.
g. Military deployment/other exceptions. Owners that possess animals in excess
of the limitations set forth above for a deployed armed services member will
be exempt from the permit fee. Proof of ownership and deployment will be
required. Other exceptions due to extraordinary circumstances may be
approved by the Health Director on a case by case basis.
1040:30. Keeping or harboring prohibited.
Subd. 1. No person shall own, care for, have custody or control of, within the city limits,
any non-domestic animal as defined in this ordinance.
a. Exceptions. An exception may be made to this prohibition for the following:
(1) non-domestic animals specifically trained for and actually providing
assistance to the handicapped or disabled;
(2) animals permitted as provided by the Land Development Code of the City
of St. Cloud
(3) for those non-domestic animals temporarily brought into the city as part of
a licensed or permitted operating zoo,
(4) veterinarian clinics;
(5) licensed wildlife rehabilitators currently licensed by the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources, provided that the person has obtained a
City of St. Cloud permit
(6) for traveling exhibitions which keep non-domestic animals for exhibition
or show, provided that the person, traveling circus, zoo or show holds a
valid USDA license, and has obtained a state permit and a City of St.
Cloud permit, provided that such non-domestic animals are not kept in the
city more than 14 days per year.
(7) for the City of St. Cloud Animal Shelter or the Tri-County Humane
Society for the purpose of temporarily holding animals legally brought
into their custody. Non-domestic animals may not be harbored for the
purposes of animal adoption.
(8) for educational institutions, provided that a City of St. Cloud permit is
obtained.
b. Permits. Permits applications for the keeping of non-domestic animals will be
made in writing upon a form provided by the Health Director and will state
the name and address of the applicant, the kind and number of animals and the
purpose for which the animals are to be kept and the location where the
applicant proposes to keep the animals. Such permit shall specify any
restrictions, limitations, conditions or prohibitions which the Health Director
deems reasonably necessary to protect any person or neighboring use from
unsanitary conditions, unreasonable noise or odors, or annoyance, or to
protect the public health or safety. Such permit may require conditions to
ensure the humane treatment of the animal. Such permit may be modified
from time to time or revoked by the Health Director for failure to conform to
such restrictions, limitations or prohibitions. Such modification or revocation
shall be effective from and after ten (10) days following the mailing of written
notice thereof to the person or persons keeping or maintaining such animals.
Denial, modification or revocation of a permit issued under this section shall
be appealable to the Health and Housing Advisory and Appeals Committee.
Fees for this permit will be set by City Council.
Subd. 2. Restrictions on Food and Drink Establishments. It is unlawful for the owner or
operator of any establishment wherein the selling, handling, processing or preparation of
food is done to permit any animal in such establishment except as allowed by State
Statute.
Section 1040:40. Animals at Large.
Subd 1. It will be unlawful for any person having or maintaining any animal to permit
the animal to be at large or to be upon any premises other than as provided in the permit
whether or not a permit for such animals has been issued as provided under the licensing
and permit provisions of this code or other ordinance of the City.
Subd. 2. It is unlawful for any owner to allow a domestic animal to be at large at any
time.
Subd. 3. Dogs are permitted to be unleashed in off leash dog park areas as designated by
the City of St. Cloud Park Department under the following conditions:
a. The owner of the dog must be present; and
b. The dog must be under the voice control of the owner at all times; and
c. The owner of the dog must have in their possession a valid dog park permit as
provided for in Ordinance Section 236 and
d. Feces must be properly removed and disposed of in compliance with Park
Department Rules.
Section 1040:50. Barking, nuisances, property damage and fecal clean-up.
Subd. 1. Barking. No person will keep or harbor a dog an animal which habitually barks
or cries, howls or whines for a period of six minutes or longer.
Subd. 2. Nuisance noise. It is unlawful for any owner to maintain at any place within the
City any animals which, by their habitual barking, howling, whining or other disagreeable
noises, disturbs the people in the locality where kept.
Subd. 3. Damage to Property by Animals Prohibited. No person having the custody or
control of a dog, cat or other animal will permit the animal to damage any lawn, garden
or other property, public or private, or to defecate on private property, without the
consent of the owner or possessor of the property.
Subd. 4. It is the duty of each person having the custody or control of a dog, cat or other
animal to voluntarily and promptly remove any feces left by such dog animal on any
sidewalk, gutter, street, park land or other public property, or any public area, and to
dispose of the feces in a sanitary manner and to have in immediate possession a device or
equipment for the picking up and removal of feces. For the purpose of this section,
"public area" will include any property open for public use or travel, even though it is
privately owned.
a. Exception. The provisions of this subdivision do not apply to a guide dog or
service animal accompanying a blind person or to a dog when used in police or
rescue activities by or with the permission of the City. This section will not be
construed by implication or otherwise to allow dogs to be where they are
otherwise prohibited by the ordinances of the City.
Section 1040:60. Rabies Control.
Subd. 1. Dogs, Cats and Ferrets Rabies Immunization Required. All dogs, cats and ferrets
over the age of 6 (six) months harbored or maintained within the City shall be immunized
against rabies by a licensed veterinarian. The vaccines used and their duration of immunity
against rabies will be as recommended by the National Association of State Public Health
Veterinarians (NASPHV) in their annual Compendium of Animal Rabies Prevention and
Control.
a. Exceptions. No dog, cat or ferret need be vaccinated when a licensed
veterinarian has examined the animal and certified that, at such time,
vaccination would endanger its health because of its age, infirmity, debility,
illness, or other medical consideration; and such exception certificate is
presented to the animal control officer. The animal shall be vaccinated
against rabies as soon as its health and age permit.
Subd. 2. Dogs cats or ferrets or other animals known to have been bitten or exposed to a
rabid animal must be euthanized immediately or the animal’s owner must adhere to
procedures as described in the NAHSPV Compendium of Animal Rabies Prevention and
Control. Notification of exposure shall be made immediately to the Animal Control Officer.
Costs associated with exposure are incurred at the animal owner's expense.
Subd. 3. Disposition of Diseased Dogs, Cats or other Animals. If a dog, cat or other
animal quarantined under Section 1040:90 is found to be sick or diseased, the operator of
the quarantine facility will immediately report in writing to the Health Director the
condition of the dog or animal. The Health and Inspections Department may then take
possession of the dog, cat or animal for the purpose of submitting it to determine if it is
suffering from rabies. A diseased dog, cat or animal may be euthanized, if the Health
Director determines such action necessary for the protection of public health and safety,
as recommended by a licensed veterinarian.
Section 1040:70. Dangerous Animals.
Subd. 1. Designation as a Dangerous Animal. The Health Director or their designee will
designate any animal as a dangerous animal upon receiving such evidence that such
animal meets the definition set forth in this ordinance.
Subd. 2. Exemption. Animals may not be declared dangerous if the threat, injury, or
damage was sustained by a person who was:
a. committing, at the time, a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises
occupied by the owner of the animal;
b. provoking, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal or who can be
shown to have repeatedly, in the past, provoked, tormented, abused, or
assaulted the animal; or
c. committing or attempting to commit a crime.
Subd 3. Disposition of Dangerous Animals. The Health Director, after designation of an
animal as dangerous has the authority to determine the disposition of the dangerous
animal.
a. The dangerous animal will be euthanized; or
b. The dangerous animal will be subject to the following conditions:
(a) Housed in a Proper Enclosure. Proper enclosure means securely confined
indoors or in a securely locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the animal
from escaping and to provide protection for the animal from the elements. A
proper enclosure does not include a porch, patio, or any part of a house,
garage, or other structure that would allow the animal to exit of its own
volition, or any house or structure in which windows are open or in which
door or window screens are the only barriers which prevent the animal from
exiting. Such enclosure will not allow the egress of the animal in any manner
without human assistance. A pen or kennel for a dog designated as dangerous
will meet the following minimum specifications:
(1) Have a minimum overall floor size of thirty-two square feet.
(2) Sidewalls will have a minimum height of five feet and be constructed
of 11-gauge or heavier wire. Openings in the wire will not exceed two
inches, support posts will be one-and-one quarter-inch or larger steel
pipe buried in the ground eighteen inches or more. When a concrete
floor is not provided, the sidewalls will be buried a minimum of
eighteen inches in the ground.
(3) A cover over the entire pen or kennel will be provided. The cover will
be constructed of the same gauge wire or heavier as the sidewalls and
will also have no openings greater that two inches.
(4) An entrance/exit gate will be provided and be constructed of the same
material as the sidewalls and will also have no openings in the wire
greater than two inches. The gate will be equipped with a device
capable of being locked and will be locked at all times when the
animal is in the pen or kennel; and
(b) Insurance. The owner provides and shows proof annually of public
liability insurance paid in full in the minimum amount of $500,000. If the
animal is impounded, proof of insurance must be demonstrated prior to the
animal’s release; and
(c) Posting. Post the front and rear of the premises with clearly visible
warning signs including a warning symbol to inform children, that there is a
dangerous animal on the property as specified in Minnesota Statute 347:51;
and
(d) Muzzle. If the animal is a dog and is outside the proper enclosure, the dog
must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash not to exceed 6
feet in length and be under the physical restraint of a person eighteen years of
age or older. The muzzle must be of such design as to prevent the dog from
biting any person or animal, but will not cause injury to the dog or interfere
with its vision or respiration; and
(e) Microchip Identification Required. The owner of a dangerous animal is
required to have a microchip installed or injected on the animal, to the extent
that the species of the animal allows placement of the chip. The microchip
will be installed in or injected under the skin of the animal by a licensed
veterinarian and will be designed so that, when scanned by an electronic
reader, it is capable of providing the identification of the animal’s owner. The
identification number and microchip manufacturer shall be provided to the
animal control officer. The owner shall maintain current address information
with the manufacturer. All costs related to the installation and maintenance of
the chip are the responsibility of the owner. If the animal is impounded, the
microchip will be installed or injected prior to its release; and
(f) Annual Registration Fee. The owner of a dangerous dog is required to
complete an annual registration form and pay annual registration fee as set
forth in Section 565:00. Miscellaneous Licenses and Permit Charges, Subd. 3.
Dog Kennels, Licenses, Impound and Quarantine Fees, in addition to the
annual dog license. If the dog is impounded the fee will be paid prior to the
animals release.
(g) Spay/neuter: If the animal is a dog or cat, the owner shall provide proof of
spay or neuter
(h) Tag. A dangerous dog registered under this section must have a
standardized, easily identifiable tag identifying the dog as dangerous and
containing the uniform dangerous dog symbol, affixed to the dog's collar at all
times.
(i) The owner of a dog may be required to complete an approved dog
obedience class;
Subd. 4. Appeal.
a. Appeal of the Health Director’s dangerous animal designation will be a hearing
before an independent hearing examiner not more than fifteen days after receipt of the
appeal request. At the time of the hearing, the animal owner may appear and present
any evidence which he or she may deem material to the investigation. The hearing
officer will make a finding of facts as to whether a violation of the provisions of this
section has been committed. The hearing officer will affirm or reject the Health
Director’s dangerous animal designation or may impose other sanctions as warranted.
Section 1040:80. Potentially dangerous animals.
Subd. 1. Designation as a Potentially Dangerous Animal. The Health Director or their
designee will designate any animal as a potentially dangerous animal upon receiving
evidence that the animal meets any of the criteria in 1040:00 subd. 9.
Subd. 2 Notification and Procedure. When an animal is declared potentially dangerous, the
animal control officer shall cause the owner(s) of the potentially dangerous animal to be
notified in writing or in person that such animal is potentially dangerous.
a. Notice of Right to Appeal. This notice shall state the date, time, place, the
animal bit, chased, attacked or threatened , and shall advise the owner that
they have fourteen (14) days to appeal the determination or the imposition of
conditions on maintaining the animal by requesting a hearing before the
independent hearing officer.
Subd. 3. Animal Subject to Conditions. An animal that has been determined to be potentially
dangerous must do the following:
a. The animal may be required to be restrained by leash not to exceed six (6) feet
in length, and/or muzzled, and under the control of a person eighteen (18)
years of age or older at all times it is outdoors and not inside a proper
enclosure; and
b. If the animal is a dog or cat, the owner shall provide proof of spay or neuter;
and
c. The owner of a dog may be required to complete an approved dog obedience
class, and;
d. Microchip Identification Required. The owner of a potentially dangerous
animal is required to have a microchip installed or injected on the animal, to
the extent that the species of the animal allows placement of the chip. The
microchip will be installed in or injected under the skin of the animal by a
licensed veterinarian and will be designed so that, when scanned by an
electronic reader, it is capable of providing the identification of the animal’s
owner. The identification number and microchip manufacturer shall be
provided to the animal control officer. The owner shall maintain current
address information with the manufacturer. All costs related to the installation
and maintenance of the chip are the responsibility of the owner. If the animal
is impounded, the microchip will be installed or injected prior to its release;
and
Subd. 4. Noncompliance of order. If an owner fails to comply with any conditions specified
in the order and fails to request a hearing under subdivision 5 the animal shall be seized. The
animal may be reclaimed by the owner as set forth in this Section.
Subd. 5. Subsequent offenses. If an owner of an animal which has been declared potentially
dangerous and is subject to the conditions of this section has allegedly failed to comply with
the conditions, the animal may be seized by animal control. Notice shall be provided to the
owner of the basis for the seizure and the right to request a hearing before an independent
hearing officer to determine whether the conditions were violated. A request for hearing must
be made within fourteen (14) days of the seizure. If the owner fails to request a hearing
within fourteen (14) days, or is found to have violated the conditions, the animal control
officer may order the animal destroyed in a proper and humane manner and the owner shall
pay the costs of confining the animal. If the owner is found not to have violated the
conditions, the owner may reclaim the animal under the provisions of this section.
Subd. 6. Review of designation. The animal control officer may review the status of an
animal which has been determined to be potentially dangerous if a period of two years has
passed without any further incidents under section (a) above and may use discretion in
determining whether any conditions which have been ordered are still required.
Subd. 7 Limitation on additional animals. After an owner has had an animal designated as
dangerous or potentially dangerous, the owner will not be eligible for additional animal
permits or licenses until documentation is provided to the animal control officer that the
dangerous/potentially dangerous animal has either died, has been relocated to another
suitable owner, or had the designation removed by the animal control officer.
Section 1040:90. Animal Biting; Quarantine.
Subd. 1. Animal biting. Whenever any animal capable of transmitting the rabies virus has
bitten any person or domestic animal, the owner or custodian of the biting animal, upon
being notified by the Health and Inspections Department, will immediately cause the
animal to be quarantined at the City animal shelter, or by a veterinarian licensed to
practice in the State of Minnesota and approved by the Health Director, for a period of
ten days after the bite incident. The Animal Control officer may allow the owner to
quarantine the animal if proof of current rabies vaccination is provided.
Subd. 2. Release from quarantine. At the end of ten days, a veterinarian shall examine
the animal to ascertain whether symptoms of rabies exist. If the veterinarian diagnoses
the animal to be free of the signs of rabies, the animal shall be released from quarantine.
a. If a quarantined animal sickens or dies, it shall be sent to the Minnesota
Department of Health for rabies testing. The owner of the animal is responsible
for the cost of quarantine, veterinary fees and testing.
Section 1040:100. Animals subject to impoundment.
Subd. 1. Dogs. The Animal Control Officer or any duly authorized assistants, or any peace
officer, may impound any dog found in the City without the currently effective tag provided
for in this ordinance; or any dog found at large at any time within the City.
Subd. 2. Cats. It will be lawful for the Animal Control officer or any of their duly authorized
assistants, or any peace officer, to take up and impound any cat or ferret found in the City
without a currently effective rabies vaccination provided for in this ordinance; or any cat found
at large at any time within the City.
Subd. 3. Other animals. Any animal considered at large is subject to impoundment. Any
unrestrained, unlicensed or unpermitted animal required to be restrained, licensed or
permitted.
Section 1040:110. Redemption. Animals may be redeemed from the Animal Shelter by the
owner any time, during office hours, within five business days after seizure and impounding,
upon a sworn statement of ownership, proof that a license has been issued for a dog, and
presentation of a receipt showing payment to the City of the impounding fee. The animal will be
released to the owner, unless it is being held for rabies observation. The amount of the
redemption fee will be the amount established by the City Council.
Section 1040:120. Disposition of Unredeemed Animals. Any animal that is not redeemed by the
owner becomes the property of the City of St. Cloud. Suitable animals may be placed for
adoption. Animals may be euthanized or otherwise disposed of, as directed by the Health and
Inspections Department.
Section 1040:130. Interference with Officers. It unlawful for any unauthorized person to break
open the animal shelter, or to attempt to do so, or to take or let out any animal, or to take, or
attempt to take, from any officer any animal taken by them in compliance with this ordinance, or
in any manner to interfere with or hinder such officer in the discharge of their duties under this
ordinance.
Section 1040:140 Service animals. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to limit:
(1) the right of a person with disabilities to access places of public
accommodation while accompanied by a service animal as provided in
Minnesota State Statute; or
(2) the lawful use of a service animal by a licensed peace officer.
Section 1040:150. Kennels; License Required. No person will maintain a kennel within the City
except in a location permitted by the zoning ordinance. The kennel license will be in addition to
the license prescribed in preceding sections for each dog kept in such kennel, and the license fee
will be fixed from time to time by the Council and will be obtained in the same manner as the
dog license. The fee will be based upon the maximum number of dogs handled at the kennel.
The license will expire annually on May 31st of each year.
Section 1040:200. Animal Cruelty
Subd. 1. Minnesota Statute 343.20 through 343.40 are incorporated here by reference.
Section 1040:300. Waterfowl.
Subd.1. Defintions.
(a) Waterfowl. A general term referring to all “undomesticated birds” commonly
known as geese, ducks, brants, swans, river and sea ducks, gulls and similar
species.
(b) Feed. To “feed” includes the provision or dissemination of food in any
manner in the vicinity of waterfowl.
(c) Waterways. A general term referring to lakes, ponds, streams, creeks and
stormwater basins.
Subd. 2. Prohibited acts. It will be unlawful for any person to feed waterfowl on any
publicly owned land or waterways within the City.
Subd. 3. Signs.
(a) Signs will be conspicuously placed on publicly owned land and adjacent waterways
alerting the public not to feed waterfowl. Signs will be constructed not less than
twelve by eighteen inches (12”x18”) in size, bearing the words: “WARNING:
FEEDING OF WATERFOWL PROHIBITED.”
(b) Defacing, tampering, moving, or damaging such signs will constitute a
misdemeanor.
1040:400. Deer.
Subd. 1. Definitions.
(a) “Deer” means all mammals of the family Cervidae.
(b) “Feed” means the provision or dissemination of food, including salt, in any manner in
the vicinity of deer.
Subd. 2. Prohibited acts. It will be unlawful for any person to feed deer on any land not
zoned agricultural within the City.
1040:500. Enforcement.
(a) This Section will be enforced by the Police Department and/or the Health and
Inspections Department.
1040:600 Violations and Penalties.
Subd. 1 Any person violating this ordinance will be subject to a warning for the first
violation with the exception of those ordinance sections that follow.
(a) Exception. No warning is required for violations of Sections 1040:40 Animals at
Large; 1040:50 Barking, nuisances, property damage and fecal clean-up;
1040:70 Dangerous Animals; and 1040:80 Potentially Dangerous Animals;
1040:90 Animal Biting; Quarantine; 1040.130 Intereference with Officers; and
1040:400 Animal Cruelty
Subd. 2. Subsequent violations. A person violating this Section for a second and subsequent
time will be subject to an administrative penalty in accordance with the administrative fine
schedule and / or subject to criminal prosecution.
History: Ord. 2430 7/27/09, repealed and replaced ordinance in its entirety.
Section 1045 - Dutch Elm Disease and Oak Wilt and Emerald Ash Borer
Section 1045:00. Declaration of Policy. The City of St. Cloud has determined that the health of elm
and oak trees is threatened by the fatal disease known as Dutch Elm and Oak Wilt Diseases. It also
has been determined that the health of Ash trees is threatened by an insect pest known as the
Emerald Ash Borer. It has been further determined that the loss of elm, oak and ash trees growing
upon public and private property would substantially depreciate the value of property and impair the
safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of the public. It is declared to be the intention
of the City of St. Cloud to control and prevent the spread of these diseases and insect pests; this
ordinance is intended for this purpose.
Section 1045:05. Shade Tree Disease Program. It is the intention of the City of St. Cloud to
conduct a program of plant pest control pursuant to authority granted by Minnesota Statutes, Section
18G.12. This program is directed specifically at the removal of trees stricken with Dutch Elm, Oak
Wilt Disease or Emerald Ash Borer, and is undertaken at the recommendation of the Commissioner
of Agriculture and Minnesota State Statutes. The City Forester will act as coordinator for the
Commissioner of Agriculture, the City of St. Cloud, and the Department of Parks and Recreation of
the City of St. Cloud in the conduct of the program.
Section 1045:10. Nuisance Declared. The following items are a public nuisance wherever they are
found within the City of St. Cloud:
(a) Any living or standing elm tree infected to any degree with Dutch elm disease fungus,
ceratocystis ulmi (Buisman) Mureau, or which harbors any elm bark beetles, Scolytus
multistrialus (Eich.) or Hylnrgopinus rufipes (March).
(b) Any living or standing oak tree infected to any degree with Oak Wilt fungus, Ceratocystis
fagacearum.
(c) Any living or standing ash tree infested to any degree with Emerald Ash Borer, Agrilus
planipennis.
(d) Any dead elm, ash or oak tree, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other material.
Section 1045:11. Exemption. Those portions of the City that are zoned Rural Residential or
Agricultural by the St. Cloud Zoning Ordinance are exempt from the application of this Section
1045 of the Code.
Section 1045:15. Abatement. It is unlawful for any person to permit any public nuisance as defined
in this section to remain on any premises owned by him. Such nuisance will be abated in the manner
prescribed by this ordinance.
Section 1045:20. Inspection and Investigation.
Subd. 1. The Parks Director, his agent or employees assigned to him, may enter upon
private premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out any of the duties
assigned in this section.
Subd. 2. The Parks Director will inspect all premises and places within the City of St. Cloud
as often as practicable to determine whether a nuisance exists.
Subd. 3. No action to remove infected trees will be taken until positive diagnosis of the
disease has been made.
Section 1045:25. Abatement of Dutch Elm, Emerald Ash Borer or Oak Wilt Disease Nuisance on
City Property. The Parks Director will cause any nuisance, as defined in Section 1045:10, to be
removed from property of the City, including streets, boulevards and alley right-of-ways (from
property line to property line) and cause same to be sanitized or otherwise effectively treated so as to
destroy and prevent, as fully as possible, the spread of Emerald Ash Borer, Dutch elm or Oak Wilt
disease fungus. The abatement procedures will be carried out in accordance with such technical and
expert methods and plans as may be designed by the City of St. Cloud and consistent with the
regulations and requirements of the Commissioner of Agriculture of the State of Minnesota. The
Park Director will establish procedures for tree removal and disposal methods consistent therewith.
Section 1045:30. Abatement of Dutch Elm, Emerald Ash Borer or Oak Wilt Disease Nuisance on
Private Property. Whenever the Parks Director finds with reasonable certainty that a nuisance as
defined in Section 1045:10 exists on private property, including property controlled by other entities
of government and outside any public way or property of the City, within the City of St. Cloud, the
City Forester or his authorized representative will notify the owner by mail of the existence of the
nuisances and direct that the nuisance be removed and burned or otherwise effectively treated in the
approved manner within 15 calendar days after mailing of such notice. The notice will also state
that if the nuisance is not abated by the owner within the time provided, that the City of St. Cloud
will abate the nuisance and assess the costs against the property. In the event the owner of any
private or public premises upon which such a nuisance is situated fails to comply with the notice, the
Park Director, his agents or employees assigned to him, will proceed to abate the nuisance in the
manner prescribed for abatement of such nuisances on City property. Any expenses incurred by the
City of St. Cloud or by approved contractors in so doing will be a charge and a lien upon said
property and will be collected as a special assessment in the same manner as other special or as
stated in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 18G.12.
Section 1045:35. Collection of Assessments. The cost of abatement of any nuisance incurred by the
City of St. Cloud and not reimbursed by the owner on or before November 1st of each year will be
reported by the Parks Director to the City Council, through the Mayor's Office. The Council will
assess the levy and cause to be collected the amount of such costs as a special assessment upon and
against the premises and property upon which said nuisance existed in like manner as other special
assessments, payable in one sum or as stated in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 18G.12.
Section 1045:36. Transporting Elm, Ash and Oak Wood Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to
transport within the City of St. Cloud any bark bearing elm or oak wood without having obtained a
permit from the Park Director. Transporting of ash wood is strictly prohibited.
Section 1045:40. Interference Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere
with the Parks Director his agents, employees or contractors, while they are engaged in the
performance of duties imposed by this ordinance.
Section 1045:45. Position of City Forester. The Parks Director is responsible for the enforcement of
this ordinance and to coordinate the abatement program within the rules, regulations and policies set
forth by the Commissioner of Agriculture, the Mayor, and the City Council.
History: Ord. 2436 7-27-09.
Section 1050 - Noise Control Regulations
Section 1050:00. Unlawful to Make Loud or Unnecessary Noises. It will be unlawful for any
person to make, or cause to be made any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise, which either
annoys, disturbs, or affects the comfort, repose, health, or peace of others.
Section 1050:05. Unlawful Acts. The following acts set forth in the following subdivisions are
declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in violation of this ordinance, but this
enumeration is not exclusive.
Subd. 1. Horns, Signaling Devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on
any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle, except as a danger warning;
Subd. 2. Radios, Tape and Disc Players, etc. The using, operating, or permitting to be
played any radio tape or disc player, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or
device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner, considering the time
and place and the purpose for which the sound is produced, as to disturb the peace, quiet
or repose of a person of ordinary sensibilities.
(a) The play, use, or operation of any radio, tape or disc player, musical
instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the production or
reproduction of sound in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50
feet from such machine or device will be prima facie evidence of a violation of
this section.
(b) When sound violating this section is produced or reproduced by a machine or
device that is located in or on a vehicle, the vehicle's owner is guilty of the
violation. However, if the vehicle's owner is not present at the time of the
violation, the person in charge or control of the vehicle at the time of the violation
is guilty of the violation.
(c) This section will not apply to sound produced by the following:
(1) Amplifying equipment used in connection with activities which are
authorized, sponsored or permitted by the City of St. Cloud, so
long as the activity is conducted pursuant to the conditions of the
license, permit or contract authorizing such activity.
(2) Church bells, chimes or carillons.
(3) School bells.
(4) Anti-theft devices.
(5) Machines or devices for the production of sound on or in
authorized emergency vehicles.
(d) With the exception of the machines or devices listed in subsection (c), this
section will apply to all radios, tape and disc players, musical instruments,
phonographs, and machines and devices for the production or reproduction of
sound, whether on public or private property.
Subd. 3. Loud Speakers, Amplifiers for Advertising. The using, operating, or permitting
to be played any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound
amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is
cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the
attention of the public to any building or structure;
Subd. 4. Yelling, Shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing at any
time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any
office, or in any dwelling, hotel, motel, or other place of residence, or of any persons in
the vicinity;
Subd. 5. Animals, Birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing
frequent or long continued noise will disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the
vicinity;
Subd. 6. Whistles or Sirens. The blowing of a locomotive whistle or steam whistle
attached to any stationary boiler or any siren whatsoever except to give notice of the time
to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or by public emergency vehicles;
Subd. 7. Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any vehicle except
through a muffler or other device, which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises
therefrom;
Subd. 8. Vehicle and Truck Noise. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so
out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating,
grinding, rattling which will disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity,
or such other noise emitted from an automobile, motorcycle or vehicle in violation of
Minn. R. ch. 7030, as they may be amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated
into this ordinance by reference;
Subd. 9. Sound Trucks for Advertising Purposes. The use of sound trucks or any other
vehicle equipped with sound amplifying devices for the purposes of advertising any
program, project, or meeting of any public agency, private business, religious
organization, civic group, political party, or charitable organization;
Subd. 10. Loading, Unloading, Opening Boxes. The creation of a loud and excessive
noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction
of bales, boxes, crates, and containers;
Subd. 11. Construction or Repairing of Buildings. The erection (including excavating),
demolition, alteration, or repair of any building between the hours of 9 p.m. and 6 a.m. on
week days and all day Sunday except where single individuals or families work on single
family residences for their own occupancy owned by them, except that the Building
Inspector may, in cases of emergency, grant permission to repair at any time when it is
determined that such repair work will not affect the health and safety of the persons in the
vicinity;
Subd. 12. Schools, Courts, Churches, Hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on
any street or private property which unreasonably interferes with any school, institution of
learning, church, court, or hospital while the same is in use.
Subd. 13. Hawkers, Peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers, and
vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood;
Subd. 14. Pile Drivers, Hammers, etc. The operation between the hours of 9 p.m. and 6
a.m. of any pile driver, power shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, power or electric hoist,
or other appliance the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise;
Subd. 15. Blowers. The operation of any noise creating blower or power fan or any
internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of
aerating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such
engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise;
Subd. 16. Noisy Parties and Gatherings.
(a) Prohibition. No person will, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. congregate at, or participate in any party or gathering of two or more
people from which noise emanates of a sufficient volume so as to disturb
the peace, quiet, or repose of another person. No person will knowingly
remain at such a noisy party or gathering.
(b) Evidence. Noise of such volume as to be clearly audible at a distance of
50 feet from the structure or building in which the party or gathering is
occurring, or in the case of apartment buildings, in the adjacent hallway or
apartment, will be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
(c) Duty to Disperse. When a police officer determines that a party or
gathering is in violation of this section, the officer may order all persons
present at the premises where the violation is occurring, other than the
owner or tenants of the premises, to disperse immediately. No person will
knowingly remain at such a party or gathering.
(d) Exceptions. The following are exempt from violation of this section:
(i) Activities which are duly authorized, sponsored or licensed by the City
of St. Cloud, so long as the activity is conducted pursuant to the conditions
of the license, permit or contract authorizing such activity.
(ii) Church bells, chimes or carillons.
(iii) Persons who have gone to a party for the sole purpose of abating the
violation.
(e) Penalties. Every owner or tenant of the premises where a party or
gathering in violation of this section occurs, who is present at such party or
gathering, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who refuses to disperse
from a party or gathering in violation of this section after being ordered by
a police officer to do so, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
Subd. 17. Exemptions Authorized by the St. Cloud City Council. Upon special request
made by contractors, the Council may exempt contractors performing public works
operations from time prohibitions set forth within this ordinance.
History: Ord. 2431 12-01-08; Ord. 2413 12-1-08, 1050:10 repealed and renumbered 1051:00 (Landlord
Responsibility); Ord. 2637 12-7-15.
Section 1051 – Landlord Responsibility
Section 1051:00. Landlord Responsibility. For purposes of this section, owner is defined to
include corporations and partnerships as well as individual owners.
Subd. 1. The owner of a residential dwelling is responsible to cause persons occupying
each dwelling unit to conduct themselves in such a manner to ensure that persons upon
the premises are not in violation of any of the following:
(a) Noise control violations as set forth in Section 1050:05.
(b) Keg permit provisions as set forth in Section 817:35.
(c) Disorderly conduct as set forth in M.S. §609.72.
(d) Illegal gambling as set forth in M.S. §§609.75 -609.76.
(e) Prostitution as set forth in M.S. §§609.321-609.324.
(f) Unlawful sale or possession of controlled substances as set forth in M.S.
§§152.01-152.025 and §152.027 Subd. 1 and 2.
(g) Unlawful sale of alcoholic beverages as set forth in M.S. §340A.401.
(h) Unlawful possession, transportation, sale or use of a weapon as set forth in
M.S. §97B.021, §97B.045, §§609.66-609.67 and §624.716.
(i) Social host as set forth in Section 820.
(j) Disruptive intoxication as set forth in Section 1002.
Subd. 2. The Police and/or the Health and Inspections Department will be charged with
the responsibility of enforcing and administering this Section..
Subd. 3. First Violation: Upon determination by the Police that the licensed premises
were used in a manner in violation of any of the law violations enumerated in
Subdivision 1, the Health and Inspections Department will notify the owner and
managing agent of the owner by regular mail, and direct the owner and managing agent
to take steps to prevent further violations at the premises.
Subd. 4. Second Violation: If a second violation of an offense enumerated in
Subdivision 1occurs at the premises within 12 months of an incident for which notice
provided in Subd. 3 of this section was given, the owner and managing agent will be
notified of the subsequent violation by the Health and Inspections Department, and will
be required to submit a written report of actions taken by the owner and/or managing
agent to eliminate future law violations. This written report will be submitted to the
Health and Inspections Department within 15 days, excluding intervening weekends and
holidays, of the notice of violation, and will detail all actions taken by the owner and/or
the managing agent in response to all notices of violations at the premises within the
preceding 12 months.
Subd. 5. Third Violation: If a third violation of an offense enumerated in Subdivision 1
occurs at the premises within 12 months after receipt of notices pursuant to Subd. 3, a
civil fine of $500.00 will be imposed against the licensee.
Subd. 6. Additional Violations: If any further violations occur at the premises within 12
months of imposition of a $500.00 civil fine, a civil fine of $1,000.00 will be imposed
against the licensee. The property may also be subject to a revocation of the rental
license pursuant to Section 445.
Subd. 7. Right to Administrative Hearing: No fine will be imposed until after the owner
has received notice of the proposed fine and has been afforded an opportunity for a
hearing before an independent hearing officer. If the independent hearing officer finds a
violation of this section, the independent hearing officer shall impose the fines set forth in
Subd. 5 by written notice to the owner by mail within twenty days of the hearing date of
its findings. Use of the administrative hearing process in Section 1100 will be utilized.
Subd. 8. No fine will be imposed for a violation of subd. 1 which occurred during the
pendency of eviction proceedings (unlawful detainer) or within 30 days, or such other
time period required by the lease, of notice given by the owner or managing agent to a
tenant to vacate the premises, where the violation related to or occurred in the unit for
which eviction proceedings were undertaken or notice to vacate was given. Eviction
proceedings and not a bar to sanctions pursuant to this section unless a certified or
otherwise acceptable copy is provided to the Health and Inspection Department. No
action will be taken under this section against an owner who was personally, or through
designated agent, the complainant on the underlying violation of subd. 1.
For the purpose of this Subdivision 8 the designated agents will be those individuals
identified by the owner or managing agent on a list provided to and maintained at the
Health and Inspections Department. Any owner or managing agent who does not
maintain a current list of all managers, caretakers or agents for a licensed premises with
the Health and Inspections Department will not be afforded an exemption under this
subdivision for a designated agent being the complainant on the underlying violation of
subd. 1.
Subd. 9. It is irrelevant that the dwelling owner or others were not criminally prosecuted
or were acquitted of criminal charges for the incidents serving as the basis of the
suspension or revocation.
Subd. 10. Generally violations of this section will apply to individual dwelling units.
Lodging houses will be treated as one dwelling unit. The Health Director may apply
violations to the entire premises in cases where the dwelling unit cannot be determined
and/or when the scope and severity of the violation(s) are considered to impact the larger
premises.
History: Ord. 2708 5-22-17.
Section 1052 - Excessive Use of Public Services
Section 1052:00. Purposes. The City Council recognizes that the City has limited staff and
resources, and finds that repeated Nuisance Service responses present a burden to the community
as they limit the availability of law enforcement and public safety protection services to other
residents of the City. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public safety, health, and
welfare, and to prevent and abate repeated service responses, which prevent police or public
safety services to other residents of the City. It is the City’s intent to impose and collect from the
Owner, Occupant, Responsible Party, or any combination thereof, of property to which City
officials must repeatedly respond for any repeated nuisance event or activity that generates
extraordinary costs to the City. The repeat nuisance service response fee is intended to cover that
cost over and above the cost of providing normal law or code enforcement services and police
protection City-wide.
1052:10 Scope and Applicability. This chapter applies to all owners, occupants, and responsible
parties of private property which is the subject or location of the Repeat Nuisance Services
Responses by the City. This chapter shall apply to any Repeat Nuisance Service Responses as set
forth herein made by City Personnel as hereinafter defined.
1052:20 Definitions.
Subd. 1. Excessive Use of Public Services. “Excessive Use of Public Services” means each
response after three or more responses from a Public Officer in response to a claim of
Nuisance where the responses occurred within a 24 month time period to the same Private
Property. Public Services also include inspections conducted by Health and Inspections
Personnel related to nuisance conditions maintained on the property.
Subd 2. Excessive Use of Public Services Fee. “Excessive Use of Public Services Fee” shall
mean the fee imposed upon the Responsible Party as a result of Excessive Use of Public
Services.
(a) The Excessive Use of Public Services Fee shall be $100 per occurrence.
(b) An Excessive Use of Public Services Fee imposed under this section will be subject
to a 10% late penalty if delinquent.
Subd. 3. Nuisance. “Nuisance” shall mean one of more of the following behavioral incidents
occurring or committed at a specific property address:
(a) Any activity, conduct, or condition deemed a violation under any provision of the
following Sections:
a. 820 – Social Host
b. 1000 – Nuisances Generally
c. 1002 – Disruptive Intoxication
d. 1005 – Public Nuisances Affecting Health and Safety
e. 1040 – Animal Control
f. 1050 - Noise Control
(b) Any activity, conduct, or condition deemed as a public nuisance under any provision
of this ordinance;
(c) Any activity, conduct, or condition constituting disorderly conduct under Minnesota
Statute 609.72;
(d) Any activity, conduct, or condition constituting disorderly house under Minnesota
Statute 609.33;
(e) Any activity, conduct, or condition constituting a violation of any Minnesota state
law prohibiting or regulating prostitution, gambling, controlled substances, use of
firearms;
(f) Any activity, conduct, or condition constituting assault under Minnesota Statutes
609.221-.224.
Subd. 4. Public Officer. “Public Officer” shall mean a peace officer, fire marshal or
inspector, those listed in Section 1100 Subd. 4 or other city personnel responding to a claim
of Nuisance.
Subd. 5. Public Service Responses. “Public Service Responses” shall mean the Public Officer
responding to a claim of Nuisance upon a Private Property.
Subd. 6. Responsible Party. “Responsible Party” shall mean the Owner or Occupant of
private property where the Nuisance occurred, or the person responsible or involved in the
Nuisance regardless of where the Nuisance occurred.
Subd. 7. Owner. “Owner” shall mean any person who, alone or jointly and severally with
others, has legal title to any Private Property, with or without accompanying actual
possession thereof; which shall include any known agent of an owner, or any known person
holding a contract for deed, being a mortgagee, vendee, or vendor; or any other person who
maintains or permits a Nuisance and is known to the city.
Subd. 8. Occupant. “Occupant” shall mean any known lessee or tenant of private property,
any known agent of the lessee or tenant, or any other person having actual possession of the
property.
Subd. 9. Private Property. “Private Property” shall mean any location, including a house,
apartment unit, condominium, sleeping room, or other dwelling unit, whether occupied on a
temporary or permanent basis, and whether owned, leased, rented or used with or without
permission or compensation.
Section 1052:40. Applicability and Exceptions.
Subd. 1. Applicability. An Excessive Use of Public Services Fee shall be imposed for
Excessive Use of Public Services upon an Owner, Occupant, and Responsible Party for
Nuisance behavior on Private Property.
Subd. 2. Exceptions. The occurrences described in this section shall not be considered
Excessive Use of Public Services.
(a) A medically related emergency response other than medical-related emergencies that
are violation of Minn. Statute 609.78, subd. 1(4).
(b) A call by a victim in response to circumstances involving domestic assult incidents or
order for protection violations.
(c) A call by a victim of Nuisance.
Section 1052:50. Waiver. At the discretion of the Health Director, the Excessive Use of Public
Services Fees may be waived against an owner or vendor of rental property, or property held
contract for deed, who has commenced eviction proceedings against the tenant(s) or vendee(s)
responsible for the Nuisance.
Section 1052:60. Legal Remedy Non-Exclusive.
Subd. 1. Nothing in this shall be construed to limit the city’s other available legal remedies
for any violation of the law, which may constitute an Excessive Service Response hereunder,
including criminal, civil, administrative, injunctive, or other remedy. Additionally, rental
properties may also be subject to civil fines pursuant to Section 1051, Landlord
Responsibility.
Subd. 2. Nothing in this shall be construed to require that formal charges be brought in order
for conduct, activity, or condition to qualify as a Nuisance.
History: Ord. 2711 5-22-17
Section 1060 - Weapons, Regulations Relating to Use
Section 1060:00. Use of Weapons, Guns. No person except a police officer in the performance
of duty will, within the City, discharge any gun, pistol, firearm of any description or carry any
such weapon unless it is dismounted or broken apart or carried in a case in a manner that it
cannot be discharged. This subdivision does not prevent the carrying of a handgun within the
City under a permit subject to the restrictions imposed by law.
Section 1060:05. Air Rifles, Air Pistols, BB Guns, Sling Shots. No person will use or discharge
any air rifle, air pistol, BB gun, or sling shot within the City except in conjunction with a
recreation program approved by the Police Department.
Section 1060:10. Bows and Arrows. No person will shoot an arrow from a bow within the City
except in conjunction with a recreation program approved by the Recreation Department or by
permit in areas specifically described in the Deer Management Policy of the City of St. Cloud
during the authorized archery hunting season.
Section 1060:11. Exemption. Those portions of the City that are zoned Agricultural by the St.
Cloud Zoning Ordinance are exempt from the application of this Section 1060 of the Code. The
City Council may, by passing the appropriate Resolution, grant an exemption from application of
Section 1060 of the areas of the City athat are zoned Industrial or Commerical by the St. Cloud
Zoning Ordinance.
Section 1060:15. Offense by Parents, Guardians. It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of
any person under the age of 18 years to knowingly permit such person to violate any provision of
this section.
Section 1060:20. St. Cloud Regional Airport Wildlife Hazard Management: The Airport
Director may, pursuant to Federal or State wildlife permits, authorize Airport personnel to
discharge a firearm within the boundaries of the St. Cloud Regional Airport for purposes of
managing wildlife hazards that pose a potential threat to aircraft operations.
History: Ord. 2484 12-6-10; Ord. 2299
Section 1070 - Disposal of Petroleum Contaminated Soils
Section 1070:00. Disposal of Petroleum Contaminated Soils. The spreading or disposal of
petroleum contaminated soils within the limits of the City of St. Cloud will be allowed only in
those portions of the City that are zoned agricultural by the St. Cloud Zoning Ordinance under a
permit issued pursuant to this ordinance. Only petroleum contaminated soils resulting from a
spill or tank leak which took place or is taking place in the City of St. Cloud will be eligible for a
permit under this ordinance.
Section 1070:05. Requirements.
Subd. 1. The applicant for a permit ("Applicant") will comply with all requirements of
the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency ("MPCA") and will have obtained a permit from
the MPCA, subject to Stearns County and City approval, prior to any public hearing held
in conjunction with the conditional use permit application.
Subd. 2. The applicant will, along with a completed application, also submit to the
Health Director at the time of application:
(a) A detailed site plan on a minimum scale of one inch to 100' feet and contoured at
two foot levels showing the proposed disposal site and the area surrounding it for
a distance of 2,000 feet. The plan will show, at a minimum:
(1) The specific location of all buildings, which will be labeled;
(2) The specific location of all surface waters including lakes, rivers, streams,
ditches, ponds, and wetlands as defined by the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources;
(3) The specific location of the proposed disposal site;
(4) Detailed plans of the disposal site and locations of any dams, berms, and
other drainage controls.
(5) Current use of the property and a brief description of its past use.
(6) Locations of all access points to underground water including wells and
sandpoints, together with their depth.
(7) Locations of all borings and test sites.
(b) Baseline test data prior to the application for the following areas:
(1) All wells in the site plan area for levels of contaminants.
(2) If there are no wells in the site plan area less than 40 feet in depth, at least
one sample will be drawn from the disposal site at 40 feet.
(3) Soil borings on site at the rate of one for every five cres for ground water
levels and contaminants in the ground water. Two tests will be conducted
prior to application, one in April and one in November. Soil borings must
also test for soil types and contaminants, including topsoil depths and
types.
(4) All testing will be performed by an independent laboratory or testing
service certified by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, and will be
conducted in accordance with MPCA rules and regulations regarding
methodology.
(5) All test data and results will be provided to the Health Director along with
the application.
(c) Copies of any MPCA permits or applications for such permits in the possession of
the applicant.
(d) A resume of the applicant and any related individuals, business, or other entities,
reciting their financial viability, their past history or engaging in the business of
disposal of hazardous or solid waste, and an operational plan for the site. A
listing of prior MPCA and similar municipal permits received or denied must also
be provided.
Section 1070:10. Minimum Site Characteristics. To be eligible for a permit, a proposed site for
the disposal or treatment of petroleum contaminated soil must meet the following minimum
characteristics:
(a) The outermost boundaries must be located a minimum 150 feet from an adjacent
property line.
(b) The outermost boundaries must be located a minimum of 1000 feet from any
building or residence.
(c) The outermost boundaries must be located a minimum of 1000 feet from the
ordinary highwater mark of any open body of surface water including lakes,
rivers, streams, ditches, ponds or wetlands.
(d) The outermost boundaries must be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any
open tile, open well or sandpoint casing, or septic or drainage system.
(e) The minimum depth from groundwater at the site will be six feet (or ten feet in
sand soils).
(f) The site will be diked or bermed in such a manner that there will be no surface
runoff and/or run-on during heavy rains equal to a "100-year" rain or more.
Section 1070:15. Minimum Requirements. When applying petroleum-impacted soils to
approved sites, the following minimum requirements will apply to all permits:
(a) For each approved site, the maximum number of individual leak sites that may be
treated is three and the maximum amount of soil that may be deposited is
1,000cubic yards.
(b) Once soil has been used for disposal of petroleum contaminated soils, it will not
be reused for the same purpose. Soil may be used to treat petroleumcontaminated
soil only once.
(c) Application of the soils will be at a maximum rate of two inches, unless lower
levels are recommended by the MPCA.
(d) All application sites will be tilled at least every two weeks during the growing
season through September 1. Thereafter, a cover crop will be administered if
possible to prevent wind erosion.
(e) Application and tilling may only occur between sunrise and sunset. No
application may be performed during the remaining hours.
(f) Only petroleum impacted soils may be treated. No industrial or other hazardous
wastes or materials may be disposed of or treated pursuant to this ordinance.
(g) Contaminated soils must be applied immediately after delivery to the disposal
site. Stockpiling of contaminated soil will only be allowed when field conditions
prevent spreading. All stockpiled soils must be set on and covered by at least six
mil plastic. All tears must be repaired immediately.
(h) Stockpiling of contaminated soils is not permitted between November 1 and the
following April 1.
(i) All plots where contaminated soil is placed must be mapped and a log kept of the
test results of the contaminated soils, its origin and the amounts placed. A copy
of the log and map will be forwarded to the Health Director within five working
days of the application.
(j) All spreading will be accomplished using methods approved by the Health
Director and capable of providing uniform spreading at the required level.
(k) Upon completion of the treatment process, all rock four inches in diameter or
greater and all other foreign material will be removed from the soil.
Section 1070:20. Testing. Before, during, and after application, representatives of the City may
conduct whatever soil and water testing they deem proper. Persons selected by the City will
conduct the testing. The applicant will prepay the City's costs of testing by making payment into
an escrow account established for that purpose in an amount to be determined by the Health
Director. Failure to allow testing or to pay for it upon demand will be cause for immediate
suspension of the permit at the option of the Health and Housing Advisory and Appeals
Committee. Thereafter, the City in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance may revoke
the permit.
(a) Testing by the City may continue until such time as the soil's original baseline
levels have been achieved.
(b) The applicant will notify the City 30 working days in advance of the date and
time contaminated soil is scheduled for delivery to a disposal site. The City may
conduct testing of the soil prior to application to determine its content. If testing
shows discrepancies between soils and MPCA permits or certificates of origin,
the disposal of the soil may be immediately halted until the discrepancies are
rectified.
(c) The applicant will forward all test results required by MPCA regulations to the
Health Director within five days of receipt. Test results conducted by the
applicant must be accompanied by a chain of custody document showing who
took the sample, where it was taken from, when it was taken, and who analyzed it.
Section 1070:25. Security and Insurance.
(a) No application for a permit will become effective until such time as the applicant
posts a surety bond, cash escrow or letter of credit (collectedly referred to as
"security"), valid for at least 12 months and annually renewable on a calendar
year basis thereafter, in favor of the City guaranteeing that the applicant will
follow all federal, state, and local laws, rules, and regulations in the application,
treatment, and disposal of petroleum contaminated soils. In the event the
applicant will fail to perform as required, the City may, at its sole discretion,
complete performance of proper disposal and testing and make a claim against the
security for reimbursement of any costs connected with proper disposal and
testing.. The amount of the security will equal the sum of $10,000.00. The
security will remain in effect for a period of two years after disposal. The
security will be in a form approved by the City Attorney.
(b) No application for a permit will become effective until such time as the applicant
procures a policy of liability insurance in the minimum amount of $600,000. The
liability insurance will name the City as beneficiary and will be payable to the
City in the event the applicant is responsible for treating and cleaning any soil or
water contamination resulting from the disposal of petroleum impacted soil. Such
insurance will also provide for a minimum of 30 days notice to the City prior to
the cancellation of the insurance.
(c) Receipt of notice of cancellation of either the security or insurance policy will
result in the immediate revocation of the permit. The City has the option of
continuing to pay the premiums for the security or insurance, at its sole discretion,
in the event of notice of cancellation, which costs will be recovered from the
applicant, bond or insurance policy.
Section 1070:30. Access to Site. City authorities have free access to the disposal site without
notice whenever deem necessary.
Section 1070:35. Fee. The fee for a permit of this type will be as set forth in Section 565 of this
Code.
Section 1070:40. Violations of Permit; Remedies. No person may dispose of any hazardous
waste or petroleum impacted soils unless the provisions of this ordinance are complied with. In
the event of a violation, the Health Director may order an immediate suspension of the permit
and the Health Director will notify the Health and Housing Advisory and Appeals Committee of
such action and recommend to the Committee that the permit be revoked, reinstated or modified.
(a) Once suspended, no further disposal of contaminants may continue without
approval of the Health and Housing Advisory and Appeals Committee.
(b) The applicant may appeal the decision to suspend the permit to the City Council.
Pending appeals, the permit will be suspended.
(c) Once suspended, and after a violation is found to exist after hearing, the permit
may be reinstated, revoked or amended after recommendation of the Health and
Housing Advisory and Appeals Committee.
(d) Hearings before the Health and Housing Advisory and Appeals Committee will
be held within 30 days of the suspension of the permit. A decision must then be
rendered within 15 days. A hearing before the City Council must be scheduled
within 30 days of the decision rendered by the Health and Housing Advisory and
Appeals Committee, with a decision due within 15 days of the hearing. At the
hearings, applicant will be allowed the opportunity to present evidence in support
of his or her position, as well as other interested parties at the discretion of the
Committee or City Council.
(e) In the event of contamination that is in need of immediate response, the City
Council is empowered to arrange and commence corrective action immediately,
with all costs being the responsibility of the applicant and subject to a claim
against the security.
Section 1070:45. Term of Permit. The term of a permit is specifically limited to two years from
date of issue. Thereafter, an application for renewal to continue application of petroleum
impacted soil must be made in the same manner as the original application.
Section 1070:50. Completion of Disposal. In the event a permit expires, is suspended or
revoked, the applicant must still perform whatever measures are necessary to ensure completion
of the soil disposal on soil that has previously been placed on site, as well as continue testing
requirements.
Section 1070:55. Prior History of Applicant. In addition to the considerations of this ordinance,
the prior history of the applicant or any person or entity involved in the disposal process relating
to compliance with federal, state, and local laws relating to disposal of hazardous or solid waste,
is a consideration in the granting or denial of the permit. A permit may be denied solely due to
previous violations by any of said parties.
Section 1080 - Use of Waste Materials for Fertilizer and Soil Treatment
Section 1080:00. General Provisions. No person will store on, or apply to, any land within the City
of St. Cloud any fertilizer or material for the treatment of soil obtained from a source other than is
customary in normal farming operations without first securing a permit to do so from the Health
Director.
Section 1080:10. Permits.
Subd. 1. Issuance. The City may issue permits for the use of materials for fertilizer or treatment of
soil obtained from a source other than is customary in normal farming operations. The permit will be
for a period of one month, renewable upon request, and will require payment of a permit fee as set
forth in Section 565 of this Code.
Subd. 2. Supervision. The Health Director will supervise the storage and application of such material
and may summarily order cessation of such operations if the operations are in violation of this
ordinance or the permit conditions.
Subd. 3. Application. Such materials will be stored and applied in such a manner that it is not hurtful
to the inhabitants of the area, dangerous to the public health, and injurious to the neighboring property.
Subd. 4. Record Keeping. The person supplying such material will keep a record of the quantity of
such material applied to the land in the City and will produce such records upon demand by Health
Director.
Section 1080:15. Violations and Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation who will violate any of the
provisions or who makes any false statement in any document required to be submitted pursuant to
this ordinance will be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist will
constitute a separate offense.
Section 1080:20. Separability. If any court of competent jurisdiction will judge any provision of this
ordinance to be invalid, such judgment will not affect any other provisions of this ordinance not
specifically included in the judgment. If any court of competent jurisdiction will judge invalid the
application of any provision of this ordinance to a particular property, building or other structure, such
judgment will not affect the application of the provision to any other property, building or structure
not specifically included in the judgment.
Section 1090 - Disposal of Demolition Waste
Section 1090:00. Purpose. It is the intention of the City Council to prohibit the disposal of any
demolition waste within the City for the purpose of promoting the public peace, health, safety,
welfare and aesthetics of the City of St. Cloud.
Section 1090:10. Definitions.
Subd. 1. "Demolition waste" will mean metal, concrete, glass, wood, asphalt, insulation,
brick, mortar, wire, conduit, pipes, plumbing and lighting fixtures, other fixtures, any
combustible and noncombustible waste, and any and all other materials normally handled in
construction operations, and will also include any substance which is defined by State law or
regulation to be hazardous waste.
Subd. 2. "Authorized disposal sites" will mean any disposal site which is licensed by the
State of Minnesota to receive demolition waste.
Subd. 3. "Clean fill" will mean clean sand, gravel, earth, rocks, sod, and boulders.
Section 1090:20. Prohibited Acts. There will be no disposal of demolition waste within the City.
Demolition waste will not include clean fill.
Section 1090:30. Enforcement. The Health Director and any duly authorized county or state health
officers, City Police Officer and any other duly authorized county or state officer, may enforce the
provisions of this ordinance. Such officers will have the power to inspect public and private
premises and take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance of
prohibited waste disposal.
Section 1090:40. Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance is guilty of a
misdemeanor and will also be responsible for all costs of prosecution, attorneys' fees, clean up, and
other damages which may occur to private or public property as a result of the offense.
SCHEDULE OF CIVIL FINES
FOR ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES UNDER
SECTION 1100 OF THE 2007 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE VIOLATIONS NOT LISTED:
Carry a presumptive fine of $250.00, unless issuing officer can document conditions
supporting a determination that the offense constitutes a major violation.
REPEAT VIOLATIONS WITHIN 24 MONTHS:
The fine for a second violation of the same type by the same person or entity is subject to
a fine that is double the amount of the scheduled fine for the previous violation up to a
maximum of $1,000.00.
CONSIDERATIONS FOR MAJOR VIOLATIONS
• Potentially critical impact on public health or the environment
• Potentially dangerous to human life or safety
• Continuing nature of the violation*
• Cost of restitution, repair or remediation exceeds $1,000.00
• Unlicensed Rental
Whenever a specifically listed violation meets one or more of the above criteria,
the presumptive fine is $750.00. However, the issuing officer must specify and
describe the conditions observed which support this determination.
*A fine for more than one day of a continuing violation may be imposed only by a
hearing officer based upon a finding that (1) the violation caused a serious threat of
harm to the public health, safety or welfare, or (2) the violator intentionally and
unreasonably refused to comply with the code requirement.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSE FINE
Structural Stormwater BMP Violations (Land Development Code Article 19.12)
Specifically:
Failed to perform proper maintenance of structural
Stormwater BMP
Minor Violations $250.00
Major Violations $500.00
Removal and/or alterations to a structural stormwater
BMP or easement
Minor Violations $250.00
Major Violations $500.00
Failure to submit required easement and/or maintenance $250.00
agreement.
Failure to submit maintenance records $100.00
Illicit Discharges and Connections (Section 365:30)
Illicit Discharge to Stormwater System
Major Violations $1,000.00
Minor Violations $500.00
Illicit Connection to Stormwater System
Major Violations $1,000.00
Minor Violations $500.00
Failure to Provide Adequate Preventative Measures to Prevent an
Illicit Discharge
Major Violations $500.00
Minor Violations $250.00
Failure to Report a Spill $250.00
Failure to Cleanup a Spill $250.00
Failure to Respond to a Notice of Violation $100.00
Land Disturbing Activities (Section 365:40)
Generally (per each distinct violation):
Minor Violations $250.00
Major Violations $500.00
Animal Control Violations (Section 1040)
Generally (per each distinct violation):
Minor Violations $250.00
Major Violations $750.00
Specifically:
Animal at Large (1040:40) $100.00
No Rabies Immunization (1040:60) $100.00
Unlicensed Dog (1040:10) $100.00
Public Nuisances Affecting Health, Safety and General Welfare (1005)
Generally:
Minor Violations $300.00
Major Violations $750.00
Specifically:
Obstructing a Health Official (1005:10) $750.00
Rental Dwelling License Violations (445)
Generally:
Minor Violations $250.00
Major Violations $750.00
Specifically:
License required (445:30) $750.00
Provisional licenses (445:60) $750.00
Non-Property Related Offenses
Alcohol on the Street or Sidewalk (600:05) $250.00
Keg Permit Violation (817.35) $250.00
Urinating in Public (940:00) $500.00
Obstructing the Street or Sidewalk (1000:05) $250.00
Unreasonable Acceleration (1000:15) $250.00
Noise Violation (1050:05) $250.00
Illegal Discharge of a Firearm (1060:00) $1,000.00
History: Resolution #2009-10-168, dated 10-28-09.; dated 09/10/12; Ord. 2537 9-10-12; Ord. 2594 6-9-14; Ord. 2599
8-11-14; Ord. 2614 2-9-15; Ord. 2663 6-6-16; Ord. 2712 5-22-17
Section 1100 – Administrative Hearing Process
Section 1100. Administrative Hearing Process.
Subd. 1. Purpose. Pursuant to City Charter, Section 14.84, the City council enacts Section 1100
of the City Code to provide an administrative hearing process for the resolution of violations of
the City Code. The Council finds that an administrative hearing process will facilitate
compliance with certain City Code provisions, avoid unnecessary delay in the enforcement of the
City Code, and help to alleviate pressure on a burgeoning criminal caseload in District Court.
Subd. 2. Alternative Methods of Enforcement. This administrative enforcement procedure seeks
to gain compliance with the City Code of Ordinances prior to any formal criminal or civil court
action. The administrative hearing process provided for in Section 1100 shall be in addition to
any other legal or equitable remedy available to the City for City code violations, except that if a
determination is made by the mediator or hearing officer, pursuant to the hearing process
detailed in Subd. 9, that a violation did not occur, the City may not then proceed with criminal
prosecution for the same act or conduct.
Subd. 3. City Code Violations. A violation of the following provisions of the City Code, or
successor ordinances, shall be an administrative offense that may be subject to the administrative
hearing process of Section 1100. Ordinance violations are categorized as property violations,
non-property violations or parking violations.
(a). Property Violations.
1. Section 244 – Refuse and Garbage Collection and Disposal
2. Section 300:00 - Building Code
3. Section 300:10 - Plumbing Code
4. Section 300:20 – Mechanical Code
5. Section 300:30 – Electrical Code
6. Section 300:40 – Rental Dwelling Licensing
7. Section 300:41 – International Property Maintenance Code of St. Cloud
8. Section 300:50 – Fire Code
9. Section 310 – Vacant Building Registration
10. Section 355 – Ordinance No. 634, as amended, The Land Devolopment Code
11. Section 360 – Sewer Use Code
12. Section 365- Stormwater System Use Code
13. Section 370 – Heritage Preservation
14. Section 400 - General Provision for Issuance of Licenses and Permits
15. Section 440 – Food Establishments
16. Section 441- Lodging Establishments
17. Section 447- Massage Facilities
18. Section 449-Tattooing, Body Piercing, Branding, and Scarification
19. Section 470-Swimming Pools, Public, State Regulations Adopted by Reference
20. Section 1000 – Nuisances Generally defined, enumerated and made unlawful
21. Section 1005 – Public Nuisances Affecting Health and Safety
(b). Parking Violations. Parking violations include any violation of Section 700 of the Code
of Ordinances. Pursuant to Minnesota Statute § 169.346, handicapped parking violations
will be enforced in the same manner as other parking ordinances and are therefore subject to
this administrative process.
(c). Non-Property Violations. Non-Property Violations include all other Code violations
not specifically designated as Property or Parking Violations.
Subd. 4. Property Violations. Upon the reasonable belief that a property related administrative
offense detailed in Subd. 3 of this Section has occurred, the City officials listed in this section
shall serve on the violator an order to correct the violation. If compliance is not achieved by
virtue of an order to correct, the official is authorized to issue an administrative citation. An
administrative citation shall be presented in person or by mail to the person responsible for the
violation. The citation shall state the date, time and nature of the offense, the name of the
official issuing the citation, the amount of the scheduled civil fine, and the manner for paying the
fine or appealing the citation by requesting a hearing.
Pursuant to Minn. Statute §626.862, the Community Development Director, Health Director
and/or their designees and representatives including the Chief Building Official, Assistant
Health Director, Senior Planner; Planning Technician, Environmental Health Specialist,
Environmental Health Technician, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Electrical Inspector,
Heating Inspector, Fire Chief, Deputy Chief of Operations, Fire Marshal, Community
Development Aide, Stormwater Compliance Specialist and Environmental Compliance
Specialist are authorized to issue a citation for ordinance violations.
Subd. 5. Parking Violations. Upon reasonable belief that a parking violation has occurred, a
parking ticket will be issued pursuant to Section 700:50 of this Code of Ordinances.
Subd. 6. Non-Property Offenses; Administrative Citations. Upon reasonable belief that a nonproperty
code violation has occurred, an administrative citation may be issued and served upon
the person responsible for the violation. The administrative citation may be issued by a police
officer or by an official designated in Subd. 4 of this Section. Service shall be in person or by
mail. The citation shall state the date, time and nature of the offense, the name of the official
issuing the citation, the amount of the scheduled civil fine, and the manner for paying the fine or
appealing the citation by requesting an administrative hearing.
Subd. 7. Civil Fines. The administrative offenses detailed in Subd. 3-6 may be subject to a civil
fine. The amount of a civil fine may not exceed the amount of the maximum fine allowed if the
ordinance violation had been prosecuted as a misdemeanor. Civil Fines may not be imposed for
ordinance violations that prohibit the same conduct that is classified as a crime of petty
misdemeanor in Minnesota statutes, Chapters 168, 168A, 169, 169A, 170, 171, and 609.
Subd. 8. Schedule of Civil Fines. The City shall adopt by resolution a schedule of civil fines for
administrative offenses for which a citation has been issued. City officials shall adhere to this
schedule of fines in issuing administrative citations pursuant to this section.
Subd. 9. Payment of Civil Fine; Request for Administrative Hearing. The person responsible for
the violation shall either pay the scheduled civil fine or request a hearing within 20 days after
issuance of the administrative citation. During that period, only the City Attorney or an Assistant
City Attorney has authority to dismiss the citation and/or waive the scheduled civil fine. Upon
payment of the fine, the right to appeal is waived.
Subd. 10. Fee for Late Payment of Civil Fine.
(a) A late payment fee of ten percent of the civil fine amount for property and non-property
related violations shall be imposed if the person responsible for the violation fails to pay
the civil fine within 20 days after issuance of the administrative citation or fails to timely
request a mediation and hearing pursuant to this Article. A late payment fee of shall be
imposed for late parking fines. The late fee will be designated by the City Council in
Section 500 of this Code.
(b) If a civil fine is not paid within the time specified and no request for a hearing is timely
received, the nonpayment of the civil fine shall constitute a personal obligation of the
violator. A personal obligation may be collected by the City by any appropriate legal
means. Unpaid fines that are referred to collections will be assessed a collection fee in
addition to the late fee. The collection fee will be set by resolution. If the fine was
imposed for a property-related violation, the City may assess the applicable property
pursuant to Subd. 14 of this Code.
Subd. 11. Mediation. After a violator has made a request for an administrative hearing the
matter will be scheduled for a mediation. The mediation will be conducted by the City
Attorney’s Office. Notice of the date, time and location of the mediation will be mailed to the
violator. The Parking Violations Bureau may provide oral notice of mediation to parking
violators. The mediator shall have the authority to:
(a) mediate and enforce a settlement of the dispute;
(b) determine whether a violation occurred;
(c) reduce, stay, or waive a scheduled fine either unconditionally or upon compliance with
appropriate conditions.
If the dispute is not resolved through mediation then the matter will be scheduled for an
administrative hearing.
Subd. 12. Administrative Hearing Procedures.
(a) Hearing Officers. The City Administrator shall periodically approve a list of lawyers,
from which the City Administrator shall randomly select as a hearing officer to hear a
matter for which a hearing is requested. The person requesting a hearing shall have the
right to request, no later than five days before the date of the hearing, that the assigned
hearing officer be removed from the case. One such request for each case will be granted
automatically by the City Administrator. A subsequent request shall be directed to the
assigned /hearing officer, who will decide whether he or she cannot fairly and objectively
review the case. If such a finding is made, the hearing officer shall remove himself or
herself from the case, and the City Administrator shall assign another hearing officer.
The hearing officer is not a judicial officer, but is a public officer as defined by
Minnesota Statutes, Section 609.415. The hearing officer shall not be a current or former
City employee.
(b) Notice of Hearing. Notice of the hearing must be served in person or by mail on the
person responsible for the violation at least ten days in advance of the scheduled hearing,
unless a shorter time is accepted by all parties.
(c) Prepayment for Cost of Hearing. An administrative hearing fee of $75 shall be payable
to the City at the time of the request for hearing is made. However, in no event will the
amount of the administrative hearing fee exceed the total amount of the civil fine. A
request for hearing is not valid until the administrative hearing fee is paid. The City has
authority to reduce the requesting person’s share of the costs where that person can
demonstrate indigency by clear and convincing evidence. Proof of indigency can be
demonstrated by the person’s receipt of means tested governmental benefits or a
demonstrated lack of assets or current income. Such proof shall be presented to the City
Attorney’s Office for determination of the amount of the prepayment in advance of the
hearing. In all cases, where the person requesting an administrative hearing is unable to
attend and fails to request a continuance of the hearing at least 48 hours in advance of the
scheduled hearing, all costs incurred by the City attributable to the requested hearing
shall be charged to the requesting party and deducted from any prepayment made. The
administrative hearing fee may be refunded if the administrative hearing officer
determines that no violation occurred. In the event that the hearing officer determines
that a violation occurred then the administrative hearing fee will be applied toward any
civil fine imposed.
(d) Hearing Procedures. At the hearing, the parties shall have the opportunity to present
testimony and question any witnesses, but strict rules of evidence shall not apply. The
hearing officer shall tape record the hearing and receive testimony and exhibits and the
full record of the hearing shall be kept. The hearing officer shall receive and give weight
to evidence, including hearsay evidence, which possesses probative value commonly
accepted by reasonable and prudent people in the conduct of their affairs.
(e) Authority of Hearing Officer. The hearing officer shall have the authority to:
(1) determine whether a violation occurred;
(2) dismiss the administrative citation;
(3) impose the scheduled fine; or
(4) reduce, stay or waive a scheduled fine either unconditionally or upon compliance
with appropriate conditions.
(5) waive all or part of the administrative hearing application fee
(f) Imposition of Civil Fine by Hearing Officer. When imposing a fine for a violation, the
hearing officer may consider any or all of the following factors but in no case shall the
fine exceed $1,000.00.
(1) the duration of the violation;
(2) the frequency or reoccurrence of the violation;
(3) the seriousness of the violation;
(4) the history of the violation;
(5) the violator’s conduct after issuance of the notice of hearing;
(6) the good faith effort by the violator to comply;
(7) the economic impact of the fine on the violator;
(8) the impact of the violation upon the community;
(9) prior record of city code violations; or
(10) any other factors appropriate to a just result.
(g) Fines for Continuing Violations. The hearing officer may exercise discretion to impose a
fine for more than one day of a continuing violation but only upon a finding that:
(1) the violation caused a serous threat of harm to the public health, safety, or
welfare; or
(2) the accused intentionally and unreasonably refused to comply with the code
requirement. The hearing officer’s decision and supporting reasons for
continuing violations must be in writing.
(h) Written Report of Hearing Officer. The decision of the hearing officer shall be in writing
and contain findings of fact and conclusions of law. The written report shall be served on
the parties by mail within 20 days of the last date of the hearing.
(i) Finality of Decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final without any further
right of administrative appeal.
Subd. 13. Judicial Review. An aggrieved party may obtain judicial review of the decision of the
hearing officer by petitioning the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a writ of certiorari pursuant to
Minnesota Statute Section 606.01.
Subd. 14. Assessment of Civil Fines for Property-Related Violations.
(a) Civil Fines Subject to Assessment. In accordance with Section 14.85 of the City Charter,
unpaid civil fines imposed for property-related violations may be assessed against:
(1) property which was the subject matter or related to the subject matter of the civil
fine; or
(2) property which was the location of an activity, proposed use, delivery of city
services or other circumstances which resulted in the civil fine.
(b) Prior Voluntary Payment. Prior to any assessment for unpaid fines, the City
Administrator or the City Administrator’s designate shall seek voluntary payment of the
fines by notifying the owner of the property in writing of the fine imposed.
(c) Assessment Procedure. On or before the first day of October of each year, the unpaid
civil fine and late fees, including the administrative charge due under subdivision (d) of
this Section, together with interest thereon at the maximum lawful rate permitted under
Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 429, against said lot or parcel of land, together with a
description of the premises and the name of the supposed owner, shall be certified to the
County Auditor and shall be collected in the same manner as taxes and/or special
assessments against the premises. The charge shall be a perpetual lien on the premises
until paid. Prior to the certification to the County Auditor, the owner shall be given
written notice of the proposed assessment and be provided an opportunity to be heard
before the City Council.
(d) Certification fee: A $50.00 charge will be added to all accounts certified to the County
Auditor’s office for collection. This fee is to be considered separate and distinct from any penalty
or interest that may be charged by the County as a result of the certification.
History: Ord. 2340 2-26-07; 2429 7-13-09; Ord. 2593 6-9-14; Ord. 2676 9-12-16

City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Table of Contents
Land Development Code i
City of St. Cloud: Land Development Code
Table of Contents
Article # - Page #
ARTICLE 1. TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT .................................................................................... 1-1
1.1 TITLE ...................................................................................................................................... 1-1
1.2 PURPOSE AND INTENT ....................................................................................................... 1-1
1.3 APPLICABILITY .................................................................................................................... 1-2
A. Territorial Application ................................................................................................ 1-2
B. General Interpretation and Application ............................................................... 1-2
C. Private Agreements ................................................................................................... 1-2
D. Other Laws and Regulations ................................................................................... 1-2
1.4 TRANSITION RULES ............................................................................................................. 1-2
A. Existing Unlawful Uses and Structures ..................................................................... 1-2
B. Existing Permitted Uses .............................................................................................. 1-3
C. Uses Rendered Nonconforming .............................................................................. 1-3
D. Structures and Lots Rendered Nonconforming ................................................... 1-3
E. Previously Issued Building Permits ............................................................................ 1-3
F. Previously Granted Conditional Uses and Variances ......................................... 1-3
G. Pending Applications ................................................................................................ 1-4
1.5 SEVERABILITY ...................................................................................................................... 1-4
1.6 EFFECTIVE DATE ................................................................................................................. 1-4
1.7 REPEAL OF PREVIOUS ORDINANCES .............................................................................. 1-4
ARTICLE 2. CODE ADMINISTRATION ......................................................................................... 2-1
2.1 PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................. 2-1
2.2 CITY COUNCIL ................................................................................................................... 2-1
2.3 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS ......................................................................................... 2-1
A. Powers .......................................................................................................................... 2-1
B. Membership ................................................................................................................ 2-1
2.4 PLANNING COMMISSION ................................................................................................ 2-2
2.5 HERITAGE PRESERVATION COMMISSION ...................................................................... 2-2
A. Powers .......................................................................................................................... 2-2
B. Membership ................................................................................................................ 2-3
C. Meetings and Procedures ........................................................................................ 2-4
2.6 ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT TEAM ................................................................... 2-5
A. Powers .......................................................................................................................... 2-5
B. Membership ................................................................................................................ 2-5
2.7 MINNESOTA COMMISSIONER OF NATURAL RESOURCES ............................................ 2-6
2.8 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR ................................................................................................ 2-6
2.9 CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL ................................................................................................ 2-7
ARTICLE 3. APPLICATION PROCEDURES ................................................................................... 3-1
3.1 PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................. 3-1
3.2 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS ......................................................................................... 3-1
A. Authorization ............................................................................................................... 3-1
B. Filing .............................................................................................................................. 3-1
C. Completeness ............................................................................................................ 3-1
D. Fees ............................................................................................................................... 3-1
E. Withdrawal of Application ....................................................................................... 3-1
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Table of Contents
Land Development Code ii
Article # - Page #
F. Successive Applications ........................................................................................... 3-2
3.3 PUBLIC NOTICE .................................................................................................................. 3-2
A. Timeframe ................................................................................................................... 3-2
B. Required Notice ......................................................................................................... 3-2
C. Published Notices ....................................................................................................... 3-3
D. Mailed Notice ............................................................................................................. 3-3
E. Posted Notice ............................................................................................................. 3-4
F. Public Examination and Copying of Applications and Other Documents .... 3-4
3.4 PUBLIC HEARING ............................................................................................................... 3-4
ARTICLE 4. LAND USE APPLICATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT .................................................... 4-1
4.1 TEXT AMENDMENT, REZONING, DEVELOPMENT PLAN AMENDMENTS AND
MEDICAL DISTRICT AMENDMENTS ................................................................................... 4-1
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 4-1
B. Initiation ....................................................................................................................... 4-1
C. Authority ...................................................................................................................... 4-1
D. Procedure ................................................................................................................... 4-2
E. Findings of Fact .......................................................................................................... 4-3
F. Retention of Zoning Power ....................................................................................... 4-3
4.2 VARIANCE .......................................................................................................................... 4-3
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 4-3
B. Initiation ....................................................................................................................... 4-4
C. Authority ...................................................................................................................... 4-4
D. Procedure ................................................................................................................... 4-4
E. Findings of Fact .......................................................................................................... 4-6
F. Limitations on Variances .......................................................................................... 4-7
G. Term of Variance ....................................................................................................... 4-8
4.3 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT ............................................................................................... 4-8
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 4-8
B. Initiation ....................................................................................................................... 4-8
C. Authority ...................................................................................................................... 4-8
D. Procedure ................................................................................................................... 4-8
E. Conditional Use Permits Within All Flood Plain Districts ........................................ 4-10
F. Findings of Fact .......................................................................................................... 4-11
G. Term of Conditional Use Permit ............................................................................... 4-13
4.4 ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS SITE PLAN REVIEW ........................................... 4-13
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 4-13
B. Applicability ................................................................................................................ 4-14
C. Procedure ................................................................................................................... 4-15
4.5 HERITAGE PRESERVATION LOCAL PROPERTY DESIGNATION FORM ......................... 4-21
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 4-21
B. Initiation ....................................................................................................................... 4-22
C. Authority ...................................................................................................................... 4-22
D. Procedure for Designation ....................................................................................... 4-22
E. Designation Criteria ................................................................................................... 4-23
F. Recording of Heritage Preservation Properties .................................................... 4-24
G. Natural Register or State Application .................................................................... 4-24
H. Repository for Documents ........................................................................................ 4-24
I. Retention of Designating Ordinance and
Heritage Preservation Ordinance Power .............................................................. 4-24
4.6 HERITAGE PRESERVATION PROPERTY
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS ............................................................................... 4-24
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Table of Contents
Land Development Code iii
Article # - Page #
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 4-24
B. Authority ...................................................................................................................... 4-24
C. Procedure ................................................................................................................... 4-25
D. Emergency Repairs ................................................................................................... 4-26
4.7 SCENIC RIVERS CERTIFICATION OF APPROVAL…………………………………………….. 4-26
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 4-26
B. Applicability ................................................................................................................ 4-26
C. Authority ...................................................................................................................... 4-27
D. Procedure ................................................................................................................... 4-27
E. Appeals ....................................................................................................................... 4-27
4.8 SCENIC RIVERS CONSTRUCTION SITE PERMIT ................................................................ 4-27
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 4-27
B. Applicability ................................................................................................................ 4-27
C. Authority ...................................................................................................................... 4-28
D. Procedure ................................................................................................................... 4-28
4.9 FLOODPLAIN PERMIT AND CERTIFICATE OF FINISHED FLOOR ELEVATION ............... 4-28
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 4-28
B. Applicability ................................................................................................................ 4-28
C. Authority ...................................................................................................................... 4-29
D. Procedure ................................................................................................................... 4-29
E. Authorization ............................................................................................................... 4-29
F. Records ........................................................................................................................ 4-29
G. Notifications for Watercourse Alterations………………………………………….. 4-30
H. Notification to FEMA…………………………………………………………………… 4-30
4.10 SHORELAND PERMIT .......................................................................................................... 4-30
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 4-30
B. Applicability ................................................................................................................ 4-30
C. Authority ...................................................................................................................... 4-30
D. Procedure ................................................................................................................... 4-30
E. Authorization ............................................................................................................... 4-31
4.11 SIGN PERMIT ....................................................................................................................... 4-31
A. Applicability ................................................................................................................ 4-31
B. Authority ...................................................................................................................... 4-31
C. Permit Issuance .......................................................................................................... 4-31
D. Approval of Electrified Signs .................................................................................... 4-31
E. License and Bond Insurance Requirements ......................................................... 4-31
F. Inspection .................................................................................................................... 4-32
G. Revocation of Permit ................................................................................................ 4-32
H. Expiration ..................................................................................................................... 4-32
4.12 BUILDING PERMIT ............................................................................................................... 4-32
4.13 TEMPORARY EXCAVATION PERMIT ................................................................................ 4-33
4.14 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY ....................................................................................... 4-33
4.15 APPEALS .............................................................................................................................. 4-34
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 4-34
B. Initiation ....................................................................................................................... 4-34
C. Authority ...................................................................................................................... 4-34
D. Procedure ................................................................................................................... 4-34
E. Findings of Fact .......................................................................................................... 4-35
F. Limitations on Appeals .............................................................................................. 4-35
4.16 ENFORCEMENT .................................................................................................................. 4-35
4.17 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS PERMIT ........................................................................................... 4-37
A. Purpose ......................................................................................................................... 4-37
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Table of Contents
Land Development Code iv
Article # - Page #
B. Initiation ........................................................................................................................ 4-37
C. Authority ....................................................................................................................... 4-37
D. Procedure..................................................................................................................... 4-37
E. Findings of Fact ........................................................................................................... 4-38
ARTICLE 5. SUBDIVISION APPLICATION AND APPROVAL ....................................................... 5-1
5.1 PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................. 5-1
5.2 APPLICABILITY .................................................................................................................... 5-1
5.3 CONVEYANCES SUBJECT TO SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ......................................... 5-1
5.4 OVERVIEW OF SUBDIVISION CLASSIFICATIONS ............................................................ 5-2
A. Major Subdivision ....................................................................................................... 5-2
B. Administrative Subdivision ........................................................................................ 5-2
5.5 PROCEDURE ....................................................................................................................... 5-2
A. Review of Plat Submittals ......................................................................................... 5-2
B. Sketch Plat ................................................................................................................... 5-3
C. Action on Preliminary Plat ........................................................................................ 5-3
D. Action on Final Plat .................................................................................................... 5-3
E. Simultaneous Submittals ........................................................................................... 5-4
F. Effect on Previously Approved Subdivision ........................................................... 5-4
5.6 PRELIMINARY PLAT ............................................................................................................ 5-4
A. Submission Requirements ......................................................................................... 5-4
B. Preliminary Plat Requirements ................................................................................. 5-5
C. Preliminary Plat Review Standards ......................................................................... 5-6
5.7 FINAL PLAT .......................................................................................................................... 5-7
A. Submission Requirements ......................................................................................... 5-7
B. Final Plat Requirements ............................................................................................ 5-7
C. Subdivision Agreements ........................................................................................... 5-8
5.8 ADMINISTRATIVE PLAT ....................................................................................................... 5-9
B. Review of Administrative Plat .................................................................................. 5-9
B. Action on Administrative Plat .................................................................................. 5-9
5.9 DEVIATIONS ........................................................................................................................ 5-9
5.10 CIC PLATS FOR LOTS HELD IN SEPARATE OWNERSHIP .................................................. 5-9
5.11 ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS ............................................................. 5-10
A. Shoreland Overlay District ........................................................................................ 5-10
B. Scenic Rivers District .................................................................................................. 5-11
C. Floodplain Overlay District ....................................................................................... 5-11
ARTICLE 6. ZONING DISTRICTS .................................................................................................. 6-1
6.1 PURPOSE ................................................................................................................................... 6-1
6.2 DISTRICT CLASSIFICATION ................................................................................................ 6-1
A. Agricultural .................................................................................................................. 6-1
B. Residential ................................................................................................................... 6-1
C. Commercial ................................................................................................................ 6-1
D. Industrial ....................................................................................................................... 6-1
E. Special Purpose .......................................................................................................... 6-2
F. Overlay Districts and Designated Areas ............................................................... 6-2
6.3 ZONING MAP ..................................................................................................................... 6-2
6.4 ANNEXATIONS .................................................................................................................... 6-2
6.5 ZONING OF STREETS, ALLEYS, PUBLIC WAYS AND
RAILROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY ............................................................................................. 6-2
6.6 BOUNDARY LINES .............................................................................................................. 6-2
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Table of Contents
Land Development Code v
Article # - Page #
ARTICLE 7. AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS ....................................................................................... 7-1
7.1 PURPOSE OF THE AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT ................................................................... 7-1
7.2 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES ............................................................................. 7-1
7.3 BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS ................................................................................ 7-2
7.4 GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY ..................................................................... 7-3
A. Accessory Structures and Uses ................................................................................ 7-3
B. Temporary Uses .......................................................................................................... 7-3
C. On-Site Development Standards ............................................................................ 7-3
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading .............................................................................. 7-3
E. Landscaping and Screening .................................................................................... 7-3
F. Signs .............................................................................................................................. 7-3
ARTICLE 8. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS ............................................................................................ 8-1
8.1 PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................. 8-1
A. Purpose of RR Rural Residential District .................................................................. 8-1
B. Purpose of R-1 Single-Family Residential District .................................................. 8-1
C. Purpose of R-1A Single-Family Residential District ............................................... 8-1
D. Purpose of R-2 Single-Family and Two-Family Residential District ..................... 8-1
E. Purpose of R-3 Lodging House, Fraternity and Sorority House
Residential District ...................................................................................................... 8-1
F. R-3A General Residential and Lodging House District ....................................... 8-2
G. Purpose of R-4 Townhouse Residential District ..................................................... 8-2
H. Purpose of R-5 General Multi-Family Residential District .................................... 8-2
I. Purpose of R-6 Multi-Family Residential District .................................................... 8-2
J. Purpose of R-7 High Rise Multi-Family Residential District ................................... 8-2
8.2 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES ............................................................................. 8-2
8.3 BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS ................................................................................ 8-5
8.4 ADDITIONAL SETBACK REQUIREMENTS .......................................................................... 8-12
A. Front Setback ............................................................................................................. 8-12
B. Street Side Setback ................................................................................................... 8-13
C. Interior Side Setback ................................................................................................. 8-14
D. Rear Setback .............................................................................................................. 8-15
E. Pipeline Setback ........................................................................................................ 8-15
8.5 GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY ..................................................................... 8-15
A. Accessory Structures and Uses ................................................................................ 8-15
B. Temporary Uses .......................................................................................................... 8-15
C. On-Site Development Standards ............................................................................ 8-15
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading .............................................................................. 8-16
E. Landscaping and Screening ................................................................................... 8-16
F. Signs .............................................................................................................................. 8-16
ARTICLE 9. COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS ........................................................................................ 9-1
9.1 PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................. 9-1
A. Purpose of C-1 Business Office District ................................................................... 9-1
B. Purpose of C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District ........................................... 9-1
C. Purpose of C-3 Central Business District ................................................................. 9-1
D. Purpose of C-4 Fringe Central Business District ..................................................... 9-1
E. Purpose of C-5 Highway Commercial District ...................................................... 9-1
9.2 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES ............................................................................. 9-1
9.3 BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS ................................................................................ 9-3
9.4 GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY ..................................................................... 9-4
A. Accessory Structures and Uses ................................................................................ 9-4
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Table of Contents
Land Development Code vi
Article # - Page #
B. Temporary Uses .......................................................................................................... 9-4
C. On-Site Development Standards ............................................................................ 9-4
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading .............................................................................. 9-4
E. Landscaping and Screening ................................................................................... 9-5
F. Signs .............................................................................................................................. 9-5
ARTICLE 10. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS ........................................................................................... 10-1
10.1 PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................. 10-1
A. Purpose of I-1 Light Industrial District ...................................................................... 10-1
B. Purpose of I-2 General Industrial District ................................................................ 10-1
C. Purpose of I-3 Planned Industrial District ................................................................ 10-1
10.2 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES ............................................................................. 10-1
10.3 BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS ................................................................................ 10-3
10.4 GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY ..................................................................... 10-4
A. Accessory Structures and Uses ................................................................................ 10-4
B. Temporary Uses .......................................................................................................... 10-4
C. On-Site Development Standards ............................................................................ 10-4
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading .............................................................................. 10-4
E. Landscaping and Screening ................................................................................... 10-4
F. Signs .............................................................................................................................. 10-4
ARTICLE 11. SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS ................................................................................ 11-1
11.1 MEDICAL SERVICE DISTRICT ............................................................................................. 11-1
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 11-1
B. Permitted Uses ............................................................................................................ 11-1
C. Bulk and Setback Regulations ................................................................................. 11-1
D. Medical Service District General Development Plan ......................................... 11-2
11.2 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT ........................................................................ 11-3
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 11-3
B. General Standards .................................................................................................... 11-4
C. Exceptions From District Regulations ...................................................................... 11-5
D. Procedure ................................................................................................................... 11-7
E. Post-Approval ............................................................................................................. 11-8
F. Additional Procedures and Standards .................................................................. 11-9
ARTICLE 12. OVERLAY DISTRICTS AND DESIGNATED AREAS .................................................. 12-1
12.1 FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT .................................................................................... 12-1
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 12-1
B. Designation ................................................................................................................. 12-1
C. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability ........................................................................ 12-2
D. Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation .................................................................. 12-2
E. Certification ................................................................................................................ 12-2
F. Floodplain Overlay District Sub-Districts ................................................................. 12-2
12.2 SHORELAND OVERLAY DISTRICT ..................................................................................... 12-14
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 12-14
B. Applicability ................................................................................................................ 12-14
C. Designation ................................................................................................................. 12-14
D. Permitted and Conditional Uses ............................................................................. 12-14
E. Bulk and Setback Regulations ................................................................................. 12-17
F. Land Development Restrictions .............................................................................. 12-18
G. Shoreland Alterations ................................................................................................ 12-20
H. Placement and Design of Roads, Driveways and Parking Areas .................... 12-22
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Table of Contents
Land Development Code vii
Article # - Page #
I. Stormwater Management ....................................................................................... 12-23
12.3 SCENIC RIVERS OVERLAY DISTRICT ................................................................................. 12-23
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 12-23
B. Designation ................................................................................................................. 12-24
C. Permitted and Conditional Uses ............................................................................. 12-24
D. Bulk and Setback Regulations ................................................................................. 12-25
E. Land Development Restrictions .............................................................................. 12-26
12.4 ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS ............................................................................ 12-27
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 12-27
B. Rationale for Protecting Environmentally Sensitive Areas ................................. 12-27
C. Use and Bulk and Setback Regulations ................................................................. 12-28
D. Identification of Environmentally Sensitive Areas ................................................ 12-28
E. Criteria for Designating ESA ..................................................................................... 12-29
F. Determination of Location of ESA .......................................................................... 12-29
G. Annexations ................................................................................................................ 12-30
H. Criteria for Prioritization of ESA ................................................................................. 12-30
12.5 HISTORIC DISTRICT OVERLAY DISTRICT ........................................................................... 12-31
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 12-31
B. Permitted and Conditional Uses ............................................................................. 12-31
C. Bulk and Setback Regulations ................................................................................. 12-31
D. Design Guidelines ...................................................................................................... 12-31
E. Approval Processes ................................................................................................... 12-31
ARTICLE 13. DESIGN STANDARDS ............................................................................................. 13-1
13.1 RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL DISTRICT GENERAL BUILDING DESIGN ................ 13-1
A. Applicability ................................................................................................................ 13-1
B. Design Standards ....................................................................................................... 13-1
13.2 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS GENERAL BUILDING DESIGN ..................................................... 13-1
A. Applicability ................................................................................................................ 13-1
B. Design Standards ....................................................................................................... 13-2
13.3 RESIDENTIAL HISTORIC DISTRICT PRESERVATION DESIGN GUIDELINES ....................... 13-2
A. Applicability ................................................................................................................ 13-2
B. Design Guidelines for Restoration and Rehabilitation ......................................... 13-2
C. Design Guidelines for New Construction ............................................................... 13-7
13.4 COMMERCIAL HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGN GUIDELINES ............................................. 13-9
A. Applicability ................................................................................................................ 13-9
B. Design Guidelines ....................................................................................................... 13-10
ARTICLE 14. USE STANDARDS .................................................................................................... 14-1
14.1 PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................. 14-1
14.2 USE OF LAND AND STRUCTURES ...................................................................................... 14-1
14.3 USE STANDARDS ................................................................................................................ 14-1
A. Adult Use ...................................................................................................................... 14-1
B. Amusement Center ................................................................................................... 14-2
C. Bed and Breakfast Facility ........................................................................................ 14-2
D. Car Wash ..................................................................................................................... 14-3
E. Cemetery .................................................................................................................... 14-3
F. Commercial Kennel .................................................................................................. 14-3
G. Drive-In Establishment ............................................................................................... 14-3
H. Dwelling Unit ............................................................................................................... 14-3
I. Essential Services and Essential Service Structures .............................................. 14-4
J. Homeless Day Center ............................................................................................... 14-4
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Table of Contents
Land Development Code viii
Article # - Page #
K. Grading and Filling Activity ...................................................................................... 14-4
L. Hotel/Motel ................................................................................................................. 14-5
M. Industrial Farm ............................................................................................................. 14-5
N. Lodging House ........................................................................................................... 14-5
O. Manufactured Home and Manufactured Housing Park ................................... 14-5
P. Micro-Brewery ............................................................................................................. 14-7
Q. Office ........................................................................................................................... 14-7
R. On-Site Rental Office ................................................................................................ 14-7
S. Place of Worship ........................................................................................................ 14-8
T. Residential Facility ..................................................................................................... 14-8
U. Service Station ............................................................................................................ 14-8
V. Temporary Shelter Facility ........................................................................................ 14-9
W. Transmission Services ................................................................................................. 14-10
X. Utilities ........................................................................................................................... 14-10
Y. Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS)…………………………………………. 14-11
14.4 TEMPORARY USES...………………………………………………………………………….. 14-15
A. Temporary Uses in the C-3, C-4 and C-5 Districts ................................................ 14-15
B. Temporary Real Estate Offices in the R-1, R-1A and R-2 Districts ...................... 14-15
C. Temporary Contractor Trailers ................................................................................. 14-15
D. Temporary Storage Trailers ....................................................................................... 14-15
ARTICLE 15. ON-SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ................................................................... 15-1
15.1 PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................. 15-1
15.2 USE OF LAND AND BUILDINGS ........................................................................................ 15-1
A. Number of Buildings on a Lot .................................................................................. 15-1
B. Applicability of Bulk Requirements ......................................................................... 15-1
C. Required Yards ........................................................................................................... 15-1
D. Open Space Requirements ..................................................................................... 15-1
E. Building Height Appurtenances .............................................................................. 15-1
F. View Obstruction ....................................................................................................... 15-2
G. Applicability of Use Restrictions ............................................................................... 15-2
H. Different Uses .............................................................................................................. 15-2
I. All Activities within an Enclosed Building ............................................................... 15-2
J. Street Closure ............................................................................................................. 15-3
K. Areas Underwater ...................................................................................................... 15-3
15.3 LOT CONFIGURATION ....................................................................................................... 15-3
A. Frontage on a Public or Private Street ................................................................... 15-3
B. Lot Size and Dimensions ........................................................................................... 15-3
15.4 EXTERIOR LIGHTING ........................................................................................................... 15-4
A. Light Trespass .............................................................................................................. 15-4
B. Unshielded Lighting ................................................................................................... 15-4
C. Light Pole Heights ....................................................................................................... 15-4
15.5 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES ............................................................................. 15-5
A. Accessory Structure ................................................................................................... 15-5
B. Fences and Hedges .................................................................................................. 15-7
C. Home Occupations ................................................................................................... 15-8
D. Gazebo ........................................................................................................................ 15-8
E. Outdoor Storage ........................................................................................................ 15-9
F. Satellite Dish Antennas .............................................................................................. 15-9
G. Swimming Pools and Spas ........................................................................................ 15-10
H. Water Features and Man-Made Ponds ................................................................. 15-11
I. Wireless Telecommunications ................................................................................. 15-11
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Table of Contents
Land Development Code ix
Article # - Page #
15.6 PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS .............................................................................................. 15-15
15.7 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS ........................................................................................... 15-17
A. Landscaping ............................................................................................................... 15-18
B. Noise ............................................................................................................................. 15-18
C. Vibration ...................................................................................................................... 15-18
D. Wastes .......................................................................................................................... 15-18
E. Air Pollution .................................................................................................................. 15-18
ARTICLE 16. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING .................................................................. 16-1
16.1 PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................. 16-1
16.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS ..................................................................................................... 16-1
A. Existing Facilities .......................................................................................................... 16-1
B. Damage or Destruction ............................................................................................ 16-1
C. Change in Land Use .................................................................................................. 16-2
D. Change in Intensity of Use ....................................................................................... 16-2
E. Provision of Additional Spaces ................................................................................ 16-2
F. Limitations on Use ...................................................................................................... 16-2
G. Site Plan ............................................................................................................................. 16-2
16.3 COMPUTATION .................................................................................................................. 16-2
16.4 COLLECTIVE PROVISIONS ................................................................................................ 16-3
16.5 LAND BANKED FUTURE PARKING .................................................................................... 16-4
16.6 EXEMPTION FROM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS .......................................... 16-4
16.7 LOCATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES ............................................................... 16-4
16.8 DESIGN STANDARDS .............................................................................................................. 16-6
A. Dimensions .................................................................................................................. 16-6
B. Construction of Parking Area .................................................................................. 16-6
C. Striping ......................................................................................................................... 16-6
D. Landscaping and Screening ................................................................................... 16-6
E. Bumper/Tire Barriers ................................................................................................... 16-6
16.9 OFF-STREET PARKING ACCESS ........................................................................................ 16-6
16.10 ACCESSIBLE PARKING ...................................................................................................... 16-8
A. Required Number of Spaces ................................................................................... 16-8
B. Dimensions and Design ............................................................................................ 16-9
16.11 STACKING SPACES FOR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES .................................................. 16-9
A. Design .......................................................................................................................... 16-9
B. Required Spaces ........................................................................................................ 16-10
C. Reduction of Required Stacking Spaces .............................................................. 16-10
16.12 PARKING AND STORAGE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND OVERSIZED
VEHICLES .............................................................................................................................. 16-10
A. Storage in all Zoning Districts. .................................................................................... 16-10
B. Storage in Residential Zoning Districts ...................................................................... 16-11
C. Prohibited Vehicles in Residential Districts ............................................................. 16-12
D. Oversized Vehicles Allowed in Residential Districts .............................................. 16-12
16.13 REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES ...................................................................... 16-13
16.14 DESIGN OF OFF-STREET LOADING .................................................................................. 16-15
A. Location ....................................................................................................................... 16-15
B. Access .......................................................................................................................... 16-15
C. Surfacing ...................................................................................................................... 16-15
D. Design .......................................................................................................................... 16-15
16.15 REQUIRED OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES ..................................................................... 16-15
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Table of Contents
Land Development Code x
Article # - Page #
ARTICLE 17. LANDSCAPING, SCREENING AND BUFFERING .................................................... 17-1
17.1 PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................. 17-1
17.2 ENFORCEMENT .................................................................................................................. 17-1
17.3 LANDSCAPING ................................................................................................................... 17-1
A. Landscaping Requirements for Yards ..................................................................... 17-1
17.4 SCREENING…………………………………………………………………………………… 17-2
A. Commercial and Industrial Screening……………………………………………… 17-2
B. Refuse Screening…………………………………………………………………………17-2
C. Residential Parking Screening………………………………………………………….17-2
D. I1 District Storage Screening Requirements……..…………………………………..17-2
E. I2 District Storage Screening Requirements…..……………………………………...17-2
F. I3 District Storage Screening Requirements………………………………………….17-3
ARTICLE 18. SIGNS ..................................................................................................................... 18-1
18.1 PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................. 18-1
18.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS ..................................................................................................... 18-1
18.3 SIGNS IN AGRICULTURAL AND RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS ................................................ 18-4
18.4 SIGNS IN C-1 AND C-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS AND MD MEDICAL DISTRICT ....... 18-6
18.5 SIGNS IN THE C-3 AND C-4 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS .................................................. 18-7
18.6 SIGNS IN THE C-5 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT, I-1, I-2, AND I-3 INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICTS ........................................................................................................................... 18-7
18.7 LICENSES AND PERMIT FEES .............................................................................................. 18-8
ARTICLE 19. OFF-SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ................................................................... 19-1
19.1 PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................. 19-1
19.2 STREETS ................................................................................................................................ 19-1
19.3 STREET IMPROVEMENTS .................................................................................................... 19-3
19.4 SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS ............................................................................................... 19-3
19.5 GRADING ........................................................................................................................... 19-4
A. Street Grades .............................................................................................................. 19-4
B. Lot Grading Plan ........................................................................................................ 19-4
C. Slope of Driveways .................................................................................................... 19-4
19.6 EASEMENTS ......................................................................................................................... 19-5
19.7 BLOCK STANDARDS .......................................................................................................... 19-5
19.8 LOT STANDARDS ................................................................................................................ 19-5
19.9 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES .................................................................................... 19-5
19.10 SANITARY SEWER ............................................................................................................... 19-6
19.11 WATER SUPPLY .................................................................................................................... 19-7
19.12 DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS ............................................................................................ 19-7
19.13 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL .............................................................................. 19-12
19.14 PUBLIC UTILITIES .................................................................................................................. 19-12
19.15 STREET TREES ....................................................................................................................... 19-13
ARTICLE 20. NONCONFORMITIES ............................................................................................. 20-1
20.1 PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................. 20-1
20.2 GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY ..................................................................... 20-1
A. Authority to Continue ................................................................................................ 20-1
B. Burden on Property Owner to Establish Legality .................................................. 20-1
C. Safety Regulations ..................................................................................................... 20-1
D. Exceptions to Nonconformity Regulations ............................................................ 20-1
20.3 NONCONFORMING USE .................................................................................................. 20-2
A. Definition of Nonconforming Use ............................................................................ 20-2
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Table of Contents
Land Development Code xi
Article # - Page #
B. Ordinary Repairs and Maintenance ...................................................................... 20-2
C. Structural Alterations ................................................................................................. 20-2
D. Expansion of Use ........................................................................................................ 20-2
E. Change of Use ........................................................................................................... 20-3
F. Discontinuation or Abandonment ......................................................................... 20-4
G. Damage or Destruction ............................................................................................ 20-4
20.4 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES ................................................................................... 20-4
A. Definition of Nonconforming Structure .................................................................. 20-4
B. Ordinary Repairs and Maintenance ...................................................................... 20-4
C. Structural Alterations ................................................................................................. 20-5
D. Additions and Enlargements ................................................................................... 20-5
E. Relocation ................................................................................................................... 20-5
F. Damage or Destruction ............................................................................................ 20-5
G. Nonconforming Structures Within the Floodplain and/or Floodway………… 20-5
20.5 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD ......................................................................... 20-6
20.6 NONCONFORMING SIGNS .............................................................................................. 20-7
ARTICLE 21. DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................................... 21-1
21.1 PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................. 21-1
21.2 INTERPRETATION ................................................................................................................ 21-1
21.3 USE DEFINITION RULES OF INTERPRETATION .................................................................. 21-1
21.4 USE DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................................ 21-1
21.5 GENERAL TERMS DEFINITIONS ......................................................................................... 21-14
APPENDIX A-1 – ESA INFORMATION ........................................................................................ A-1-1
Section 1: Description of Environmentally Sensitive Resources and
Rationale for Protection .......................................................................................................... A-1-2
Section 2: Best Management Practices .................................................................................... A-1-5
Section 3: Tools for Protection ...................................................................................................... A-1-10
Section 4: Qualifications of Scientific Members ....................................................................... A-1-14
Section 5: References .................................................................................................................... A-1-15
Section 6: Resources ...................................................................................................................... A-1-16
Section 7: Development Process - Flowchart ........................................................................... A-1-17
APPENDIX A-2 – ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS MAP ................................................ A-2-1
APPENDIX A-3 – ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS INVENTORY TABLE........................... A-3-1
APPENDIX B – SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS ............................................................................. B-1
Rezoning Application .................................................................................................................... B-1
PUD General Development Plan Application ........................................................................... B-2
Create or Amend a Medical Service District Zoning District Application ............................ B-3
Temporary Excavation Permit Application ................................................................................ B-4
Variance Application ..................................................................................................................... B-5
Conditional Use Permit Application............................................................................................. B-6
Special Exceptions Permit Application ....................................................................................... B-8
Land Use Change Permit Application ........................................................................................ B-9
Sign Permit Application .................................................................................................................. B-10
Floodway and Flood Fringe District Determinations within
the General Floodplain District .............................................................................................. B-11
APPENDIX C – HISTORIC DISTRICTS .......................................................................................... C-1
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Table of Contents
Land Development Code xii
Article # - Page #
APPENDIX D – SIGN AREA CALCULATIONS .............................................................................. D-1
APPENDIX E – PLANT LIST ........................................................................................................... E-1
APPENDIX F – PERMANENT STORMWATER DESIGN CHECKLIST ............................................... F-1
APPENDIX G – ALTERNATIVE STORMWATER TREATMENT OPTIONS.......................................... G-1
APPENDIX H – STORMWATER EASEMENT & MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT DOCUMENTS ........ H-1
TABLES
Table 3-1: Application and Approval Notice ........................................................................... 3-2
Table 7-1: Agricultural Districts Permitted and Conditional Uses ........................................... 7-1
Table 7-2: Agricultural Districts Bulk and Setback Regulations .............................................. 7-2
Table 8-1: Residential Districts Permitted and Conditional Uses ............................................ 8-2
Table 8-2: Residential Districts Bulk and Setback Regulations ............................................... 8-5
Table 9-1: Commercial Districts Permitted and Conditional Uses ......................................... 9-2
Table 9-2: Commercial Districts Bulk and Setback Regulations ............................................ 9-3
Table 10-1: Industrial Districts Permitted and Conditional Uses ............................................. 10-1
Table 10-2: Industrial Districts Bulk and Setback Regulations ................................................. 10-3
Table 11-1: Medical Service District Permitted Uses ................................................................ 11-1
Table 11-2: Medical Service District Bulk and Setback Regulations ..................................... 11-2
Table 11-3: Commercial Planned Unit Development Floor Area Ratios ............................. 11-12
Table 11-4: Allowable Dwelling Unit or Dwelling Site Density Increases ............................... 11-13
Table 12-1: Shoreland Overlay District Bulk and Setback Regulations ................................ 12-18
Table 12-2: Scenic Rivers Overlay District Permitted and Conditional Uses ........................ 12-24
Table 12-3: Scenic River District Bulk and Setback Regulations ............................................ 12-25
Table 14-1: Standards for Building Mounted WECS .................................................................. 14-12
Table 14-2: Specific Standards for Freestanding WECS ........................................................... 14-12
Table 15-1: Maximum Accessory Structure Size ......................................................................... 15-5
Table 15-2: Detached Accessory Structure Setback .............................................................. 15-6
Table 15-3: Fence Height in Residential Districts ........................................................................ 15-7
Table 15-4: Siting Requirements for Wireless Telecommunications Towers ......................... 15-11
Table 15-5: Permitted Obstructions ............................................................................................. 15-15
Table 16-1: Driveway and Curb Cut Size ................................................................................... 16-6
Table 16-2: Ratio of Accessible Spaces ..................................................................................... 16-9
Table 16-3: Required Off-Street Parking ..................................................................................... 16-13
Table 16-4: Off-Street Loading Requirements ........................................................................... 16-16
Table 19-1: Right-of-Way Widths .................................................................................................. 19-2
Table 19-2: Limiting Factors .......................................................................................................... 19-7
Table 19-3: Volume Control Requirements ................................................................................. 19-8
Table 20-1: Single-Family Lot Coverage on Nonconforming Lots of Record ...................... 20-7
FIGURES
Figure 8-1: Front Setback Averaging .......................................................................................... 8-13
Figure 8-2: Established Front Setback ......................................................................................... 8-13
Figure 8-3: Street Side Setback – Reverse Corner Lot ............................................................. 8-14
Figure 8-4: Street Side Setback – Side Street Garage Access ............................................... 8-14
Figure 15-1: View Obstruction ...................................................................................................... 15-2
Figure 16-1: Residential Driveway Setback ............................................................................... 16-5
Figure 16-2: Off-Street Parking Dimensions ................................................................................ 16-7
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Table of Contents
Land Development Code xiii
Article # - Page #
Figure 16-3: Channelizing Island .................................................................................................. 16-8
Figure 16-4: Measurement of Drive-Through ............................................................................. 16-9
Figure 16-5: Stacking Spaces ....................................................................................................... 16-10
Figure 21-1: Townhouse Dwelling ................................................................................................ 21-6
Figure 21-2: Accessory Structure ................................................................................................. 21-13
Figure 21-3: Awning ........................................................................................................................ 21-14
Figure 21-4: Basement ................................................................................................................... 21-14
Figure 21-5: Bay Window ............................................................................................................... 21-15
Figure 21-6: Blockface ................................................................................................................... 21-15
Figure 21-7: Building Height .......................................................................................................... 21-17
Figure 21-8: Height Measured from Grade ............................................................................... 21-17
Figure 21-9: Canopy ...................................................................................................................... 21-18
Figure 21-10: Cellar ......................................................................................................................... 21-19
Figure 21-11: Corner and Interior Lots ......................................................................................... 21-24
Figure 21-12: Lot Coverage .......................................................................................................... 21-25
Figure 21-13: Lot Depth and Width ............................................................................................. 21-25
Figure 21-14: Through Lot .............................................................................................................. 21-26
Figure 21-15: Parapet Wall ............................................................................................................ 21-28
Figure 21-16: Setback .......................................................................................................................... 21-33
Figure 21-17: A-Frame Sign ........................................................................................................... 21-34
Figure 21-18: Cabinet Sign ............................................................................................................ 21-34
Figure 21-19: Cabinet Box Sign .................................................................................................... 21-35
Figure 21-20: Electronic Display Screen ..................................................................................... 21-35
Figure 21-21: Electronic Message Sign ....................................................................................... 21-36
Figure 21-22: Ground Monument Sign ....................................................................................... 21-36
Figure 21-23: Ground Pole Sign .................................................................................................... 21-37
Figure 21-24: Projecting Sign ........................................................................................................ 21-38
Figure 21-25: Wall Sign ................................................................................................................... 21-38
Figure 21-26: Permanent Window Sign ...................................................................................... 21-39
Figure 21-27: Temporary Window Sign ....................................................................................... 21-39
Figure 21-28: Stoop ......................................................................................................................... 21-40
Figure 21-29: Tower Hierarchy ...................................................................................................... 21-42
Figure 21-30: Yards ......................................................................................................................... 21-44
AMENDMENTS AND MODIFICATIONS
Ordinance
No.
City Council
Adoption
Date
Article Number(s) Description
2420 2/9/2009 7, 8
Maximum building area for AG permitted & conditional uses. Maximum
building area for RR permitted & conditional uses.
2421 2/9/2009 - Adopt 2009 parcel based zoning map
2422 2/23/2009 18, 7 Adoption of Article 18: Signs. Repeal Article 7: Signs
*2422 3/23/2009 18 Revised Article 18 & readopted
2424 4/6/2009 4 Revising timeline for submission of appeals to the ZBA & CC
2425 4/6/2009 16, 21
Parking & storage of Recreational Oversized Vehicles. Definitions:
recreational vehicles
2437 9/14/2009 9
Permitted & Conditional Uses: change motor vehicle sales from a prohibited
use to a conditional use in C4
2446 12/21/2009 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 21 Wind energy conversion systems
2460 4/5/2010 19 Off-Side Development Standards: Drainage improvements
2479 10/25/2010 8, 9, 10, 14, 15, 16, 17, 21
Add on-site rental office as permitted use in R3A. Permitted Uses removed:
retail goods establishment from C1; Permitted Uses added: convenience
store to C2-C5, massage facility to C1 & C2, print shops in C2 and removed
plate width limitation. Industrial District: print shops redefined. Uses
Standards: expanding service station definition. On-Site Design Standards:
permitted obstructions. Off-Street Parking & Loading: changes 'churches' to
'place of worship'; parking requirement for accessory office spaces. Adopt
Landscaping, Screening and Buffering requirements. Definitions: add and
modify.
*2479 11/15/2010 17.4, Appendix F
Remove 17.4 Screening Requirements. Adopt Permanent Store Water Design
Checklist
2505 7/11/2011 3, 4, 5, 6, 12, 20, 21 Floodplains & floodways
2510 10/10/2011 15 Wireless Communications Towers
2511 10/10/2011 12 Flood Plain Map amendments
2515 11/7/2011 16 Reduce off-street parking required in C4
2516 11/21/2011 4, 21 Variances: changes in State law
2519 12/5/2011 14 Increase length of stay for TSF
2527 3/26/2012 17
Increase screening/buffering requirements between residential & nonresidential
land uses
2540 11/19/2012 4 Administrative CUP processes
2552 4/8/2013 19 Land Disturbance Permit process
2554 5/6/2013 4, 15
Administrative variance for window wells & Accessory Structure Size &
Materials
2559 7/15/2013 19
Create a comprehensive and fully interconnected public pedestrian system
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and Complete Streets Policy
2573 12/2/2013 4, 11 Clarify the past practice regarding amendments to overlay districts
2574 12/16/2013 14
Removes the sunset provision allowing a temporary shelter facility to extend
the maximum length of stay from 45 days to 90 days for no more than 10% of
its occupants at any given time
2596 7/14/2014 14 Increase the production volume standards of micro-breweries
2610 1/26/2015 15
Require land use permits for all detached accessory structures between 100
and 200 square feet in gross floor area
2611 2/9/2015
4, 19 & 21;
Appendices F, G & H
Change the post construction stormwater standards and the land
disturbance permit review process
2626 7/13/2015 7, 8
Eliminate two family dwellings, living quarters for more than 6 persons
employed on premises, and manufactured home (temporary) for farming
operations from the AG and RR districts and include assisted living facility and
independent living facility to the R4 thru R7 zoning districts
2684 10/10/2016 5, 9, 15 & 21
Change action on final plat period to one year; add escape room to list of
permitted and conditional uses; allow 10’ fences surrounding swimming pools
for multiple family properties; add definition of ‘Escape Room’; change
wording in ‘Land Disturbing Activity’ definition
2733 11/20/2017 18
Change clarifying the regulations regarding temporary business signs;
addition of provisions for electronic signs
2754 6/4/18 15 & 16
Change to include the ability to have up to three times the total lot
coverage of the principal structure if the lot is five acres or greater in area in
an AG District; change the warehousing, wholesale, and distribution parking
requirements to progressively reduce the number of off-street parking spaces
based on the size of the space
2766 12/3/18 9, 14 & 21
Add motor vehicle rental/leasing facility as a conditional use in the C5
district; amend the use standards of a dwelling unit; amend use definition of
amusement centers and add definition for motor vehicle rental/leasing
facility
2777 4/29/19 15
Allow the use of automatic pool cover in-lieu of safety fencing and further
define safety fencing requirements
2780 6/3/19 3, 4 & 20 Re-enact Special Exceptions Permits
2787 9/9/19 18
Revised sign regulations for institutional uses located within the City’s
residential districts
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 1:
Land Development Code Article 1 - Page 1 Title, Purpose and Intent
Article 1. Title, Purpose and Intent
1.1 TITLE
1.2 PURPOSE AND INTENT
1.3 APPLICABILITY
1.4 TRANSITION RULES
1.5 SEVERABILITY
1.6 EFFECTIVE DATE
1.7 REPEAL OF PREVIOUS ORDINANCES
1.1 TITLE
This Land Development Code of the City of St. Cloud is known as the “Land
Development Code” of the City of St. Cloud, Minnesota, and is known, cited and
referred to herein as this “Code.”
1.2 PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Code is enacted for the following purposes:
A. To promote the general public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of
the inhabitants of the City of St. Cloud, Minnesota.
B. To divide the City into districts as to the use, location, construction, reconstruction,
alteration and use of land and structures for residential, commercial and industrial
purposes.
C. To prohibit the use of buildings, structures and lands incompatible with the intended
use or development of lands within the specified districts.
D. To promote the character and preserve and enhance the stability of properties and
areas within the City.
E. Preserve, protect, perpetuate and use areas, places, structures and other objects
having special historical interest and value to the City.
F. To promote the proper use of land and structures and to determine the proper
spacing of buildings.
G. To provide adequate light, air, privacy and safety of transportation and access to
property.
H. To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of population.
I. To fix reasonable standards to which structures and land must conform for the benefit
of all.
J. To facilitate adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewage, storm drainage,
schools, parks, playgrounds, and other public services and facilities.
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 1:
Land Development Code Article 1 - Page 2 Title, Purpose and Intent
K. To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public health and welfare by
providing for the off-street parking of vehicles and vehicle loading areas.
L. To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes, pollution of the environment and
other hazards in the interest of public health, comfort and general welfare.
M. To define the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies provided
for herein.
1.3 APPLICABILITY
A. Territorial Application
From and after the effective date of this Code, the use of all land and every building
or portion of a building erected, altered, added to and/or relocated, and every
principal or accessory use in the City of St. Cloud must be in conformity with the
provisions of this Code. Any existing structure, and any existing use of properties not in
conformity with these regulations, will be regarded as a nonconforming property or
use.
B. General Interpretation and Application
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Code, these provisions will be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and
welfare.
C. Private Agreements
This Code is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private
agreement provided that where the regulations of this Code are more restrictive or
impose higher standards or requirements than such easements, covenants or other
private agreements, the requirements of this Code will govern.
D. Other Laws and Regulations
Where the provisions of this Code impose greater restrictions than those of any
statute, ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this Code will control. Where the
provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions
than this Code, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or regulation will control.
1.4 TRANSITION RULES
In determining the applicability of this Code, with respect to the previously applicable
regulations, the following rules apply.
A. Existing Unlawful Uses and Structures
A structure or use not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this Code must
be deemed lawful as of the effective date of this Code if it conforms with all
requirements of this Code. If such structure or use does not conform with all of the
requirements of this Code, then the structure or use must remain unlawful.
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 1:
Land Development Code Article 1 - Page 3 Title, Purpose and Intent
B. Existing Permitted Uses
When a lot is used for a purpose that was classified as a permitted use prior to the
effective date of this Code, and such use is classified as a conditional use by this
Code, that use is hereby deemed a lawful conditional use for the purpose of this
Code. Any addition, enlargement or expansion of such use must conform to the
requirements for conditional uses within this Code.
C. Uses Rendered Nonconforming
When a lot is used for a purpose that was a lawful use before the effective date of
this Code, and this Code, or any amendment thereto, no longer classifies the use as
either a permitted or conditional use in the zoning district in which it is located, that
use is deemed a legal nonconforming use and is controlled by the provisions of
Article 21 (Nonconformities).
D. Structures and Lots Rendered Nonconforming
Where any lawful structure or lot existing on the effective date of this Code does not
meet all standards set forth in this Code, or any amendment thereto, that structure or
lot is deemed nonconforming and is controlled by the provisions of Article 21
(Nonconformities).
E. Previously Issued Building Permits
Where construction has lawfully begun prior to the effective date of this Code, or
subsequent amendment thereto, such construction is permitted, provided:
1. A complete building or sign permit application is received, which contains all
requested and required information, prior to City Council action adopting or
amending this Code.
2. Actual construction is begun within thirty (30) days after City Council action to
adopt or amend this Code and is diligently prosecuted to completion. Actual
building construction means the placing of construction materials in a permanent
position and fastened in a permanent manner, and does not include the
demolition or removal of an existing building.
F. Previously Granted Conditional Uses and Variances
All conditional uses and variances granted prior to the effective date of this Code will
remain in full force and effect. The recipient of the conditional use or variance may
develop the property in accordance with the approved plans, including any
applicable conditions. However, if the recipient has failed to act on the conditional
use or variance before the approval expires, including any periods of extension
granted, the provisions of this Code will govern.
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 1:
Land Development Code Article 1 - Page 4 Title, Purpose and Intent
G. Pending Applications
Where a complete application is pending on the effective date of the Code, the
provisions of the Code in effect at the time the application was deemed complete
will govern the application.
1.5 SEVERABILITY
If any court of competent jurisdiction adjudges any provisions of this Code to be invalid,
such judgment will not affect the validity and continued enforcement of any other
provisions of this Code. If any court of competent jurisdiction adjudges the application of
any provision of this Code to any property, structure or use to be invalid, such judgment
will not affect the application of that provision to any other property, structure or use not
specifically included in that judgment.
1.6 EFFECTIVE DATE
The effective date of this Code is ninety (90) days from the date of adoption, this date
February 15, 2009.
1.7 REPEAL OF PREVIOUS ORDINANCES
After the effective date of this Code, all provisions, as amended from time to time, of the:
Zoning Ordinance of the City of St. Cloud adopted on May 24, 1999; Subdivision
Ordinance of the City of St. Cloud adopted on January 12, 1998; Heritage Preservation
Ordinance of the City of St. Cloud adopted on October 9, 2006; Scenic Rivers Ordinance
of the City of St. Cloud adopted on September 20, 1998; Flood Plain Management
Ordinance of the City of St. Cloud adopted on June 11, 1990; Shoreland Management
Ordinance of the City of St. Cloud adopted on December 16, 1992; and Environmentally
Sensitive Areas Ordinance of the City of St. Cloud adopted on August 24, 1998, are
expressly repealed in their entirety. Nothing contained in this Code is deemed to repeal
or amend any ordinances requiring a permit and/or license to cover any business.
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 2:
Land Development Code Article 2 - Page 1 Code Administration
Article 2. Code Administration
2.1 PURPOSE
2.2 CITY COUNCIL
2.3 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
2.4 PLANNING COMMISSION
2.5 HERITAGE PRESERVATION COMMISSION
2.6 ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT TEAM
2.7 MINNESOTA COMMISSIONER OF NATURAL RESOURCES
2.8 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
2.9 CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL
2.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Article is to outline the specific powers of the different commissions,
boards and officials as they relate to this Code.
2.2 CITY COUNCIL
The City Council has the following powers, pursuant to this Code:
A. To review, hear and approve a text amendment or rezoning.
B. To review and approve preliminary and final plats.
C. To review and approve a temporary excavation permit.
D. To review and hear zoning appeals of decisions of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
2.3 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
A. Powers
The Zoning Board of Appeals has the following powers, pursuant to this Code:
1. To review, hear and approve a major variance.
2. To review, hear and approve a conditional use permit.
3. To review and hear zoning appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator.
B. Membership
1. The Zoning Board of Appeals consists of seven (7) citizens of the City.
2. The seven (7) citizens will be appointed by the Mayor, with approval of the City
Council, in April of each year, to serve for three (3) years beginning on the first
day of May in the same year, provided that appointments for the first year will be
for a period of one (1), two (2) and three (3) years, respectively, so as to provide
for the appointment of an equal number of members each year thereafter.
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 2:
Land Development Code Article 2 - Page 2 Code Administration
Vacancies will be filled as they occur in the same manner as regular
appointments.
3. All members will serve without compensation, but are entitled to reimbursements
for expenses incurred while performing their duties. The Zoning Board of Appeals
will elect from its membership a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Secretary. All
members are restricted to serving no more than two (2) consecutive terms.
2.4 PLANNING COMMISSION
In accord with Article 6 of the Home Rule Charter of the City of St. Cloud, the Planning
Commission has the following powers, pursuant to this Code:
A. To review and make recommendations on a text amendment or rezoning.
B. To review and approve sketch plats, and to review and make recommendations on
preliminary and final plats.
C. To review and make recommendations on temporary excavation permits.
2.5 HERITAGE PRESERVATION COMMISSION
A. Powers
The Heritage Preservation Commission has the following powers, pursuant to this
Code:
1. With the assistance of the Planning and Zoning Department and in cooperation
with other City departments and appropriate historical societies, prepare studies
that catalogue buildings, land, areas, properties or other objects to be
considered for designation as Historic Districts. Such catalogues, and any
additions or deletions thereto, will be adopted by resolution by the Heritage
Preservation Commission.
2. Determine if any area, place, building, structure, land, property or other object
should be recommended for designation as a Historic District in accordance with
designation criteria provided for in this ordinance.
3. Develop design review guidelines for properties located in Historic Districts. The
guidelines are the basis for review of alteration permit requests for properties
within Historic Districts.
a. The Design Review Guidelines for the St. Cloud Commercial Historic District are
published in the City of St. Cloud Downtown Preservation Design Manual.
b. The Design Review Guidelines for St. Cloud’s Residential Historic Districts are
published in the City of St. Cloud Residential Historic District Preservation
Design Manual.
4. Issue a Heritage Preservation Property Certificate of Appropriateness.
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 2:
Land Development Code Article 2 - Page 3 Code Administration
5. Conduct continuing surveys of all areas, places, buildings, structures or objects in
the City of St. Cloud which the Heritage Preservation Commission, on the basis of
information available or presented to it, has reason to believe are significant to
the cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history of the City.
6. Act in a resource and advisory capacity to owners of historically significant
properties regarding the properties preservation, restoration, and rehabilitation.
7. Work for the continuing education of the citizens of the City of St. Cloud with
respect to the civic and architectural heritage of the City.
8. Assist City staff in preparation of applications for grant funds to be made through
the City for the purpose of heritage preservation. Any contribution or gifts will be
expended for historic preservation in the manner provided through the fiscal
policy of the City.
9. Collect and review certain City planning and development records, documents,
studies, models, maps, plans, and drawings for possible submission to a local
county historical society as a permanent record of City history and development,
subject to Minnesota Statute 138.17.
10. Recommend to the Planning Commission and City Council that certain property
eligible for designation as a Heritage Preservation Property be acquired by gift,
negotiation or other legal means as provided in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 117.
11. Hear and decide on appeals alleging an error in any order, requirement, decision
or determination made by an administrative officer of the City in the
enforcement of this ordinance or ordinances designating a Historic District.
12. No City capital improvement activity, including but not limited to new roadway
construction, roadway widening, new sidewalks, and street lighting, which may
adversely impact the exterior appearance of a designated Heritage Preservation
Property will be approved or performed without first being presented to the
Heritage Preservation Commission for review and recommendations. Within thirtyfive
(35) days of receiving notice of the proposed improvement, the Heritage
Preservation Commission may provide any comments or recommendations to the
Planning Commission and City Council. If the Heritage Preservation Commission
does not provide a recommendation within the thirty-five (35) day time period,
the proposed capital improvement activity may be approved.
13. Work to identify economic resources that may be available to assist property
owners with historic preservation improvements. The Heritage Preservation
Commission will support community organization’s fundraising efforts for historic
preservation improvements.
B. Membership
1. The Heritage Preservation Commission consists of seven (7) voting members, two
(2) ex-officio, non-voting members who are appointed by the Mayor and
approved by the City Council, and a City Council representative to the Heritage
Preservation Commission. The Mayor may remove any member of the Heritage
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 2:
Land Development Code Article 2 - Page 4 Code Administration
Preservation Commission whenever, at the Mayor’s discretion, the best interests of
the City will be served.
2. The term of each member will be for three (3) years and until a successor is
appointed and approved. No person may be appointed to more than two (2)
successive terms as a Heritage Preservation Commission member. Upon serving
two (2) successive terms, a Heritage Preservation Commission member may be
appointed and approved to a new term after a period of one (1) year between
the completion of the past term and beginning of the new term.
3. If the office of any Heritage Preservation Commission member becomes vacant,
the vacancy will be filled in the same manner in which the last regular
appointment was made for the unexpired portion of the term.
4. All Heritage Preservation Commission members will serve without compensation.
All voting members, with the exception of the Historical Society nominee, will be
residents of the City of St. Cloud. All members must have a demonstrated interest,
competence and knowledge in history, historic preservation, architecture or
urban design. Appointments to the Heritage Preservation Commission will
represent the following interests:
a. Historical Society Nominee. At least one (1) member will be an individual
nominated by a local county historical society.
b. Preservation-Related Professional. At least one (1) member will be an
individual of one (1) of the following preservation-related professions: history,
architectural history, archaeology or a registered architect.
c. Real Estate Professional. At least one (1) member will be an individual from the
real estate profession.
d. City Planning Commission. One (1) ex-officio member, selected by the St.
Cloud Planning Commission, will be a voting member of the Heritage
Preservation Commission.
e. Housing and Redevelopment Authority. One (1) non-voting, ex-officio
member, selected by the St. Cloud Housing and Redevelopment Authority
Board, will be requested from the St. Cloud Housing and Redevelopment
Authority.
f. St. Cloud State University. One (1) non-voting, ex-officio member, selected by
the St. Cloud State University President, will be requested from St. Cloud State
University.
C. Meetings and Procedures
1. The Heritage Preservation Commission will meet monthly upon a regular schedule
adopted by it, and may meet additionally at the call of the Chairperson or by
consent of a majority of the members. Such meetings and notice thereof will
comply with applicable laws.
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 2:
Land Development Code Article 2 - Page 5 Code Administration
2. The Heritage Preservation Commission will, at its first meeting in January of each
year, elect a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson. No person will serve more than
two (2) consecutive terms as Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson. The Mayor will
provide a recording secretary for the Commission.
a. The Chairperson will preside and maintain order at all Commission meetings.
b. The Vice-Chairperson will fulfill the duties of the Chairperson in the absence of
the Chair.
c. The Secretary will be responsible for the minutes of all official meetings of the
Commission.
3. The Heritage Preservation Commission may establish and appoint from its
members, on a majority vote of its members, standing committees. Generally,
Heritage Preservation Commission business will be conducted in accordance with
Roberts Rules of Parliamentary Procedure, except as Roberts Rules may be in
conflict with this Code in which case this Code will govern. The Heritage
Preservation Commission may adopt additional rules of procedure, subject to City
Council review and approval, as it may deem advisable and necessary for the
conduct of its affairs, for the purpose of carrying out the intent of this Code, which
are not inconsistent with the laws of the City and the State of Minnesota.
4. The Heritage Preservation Commission will present an annual report containing a
statement of its activities to the Mayor, City Council, Planning Commission, St.
Cloud Housing and Redevelopment Authority, Minnesota Historical Society, and
local county historical societies.
2.6 ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT TEAM
The Environment and Development Team (EDT) will work together sharing perspectives
on how development might proceed on Environmentally Sensitive Area designated
property to accommodate development and stewardship of the Environmentally
Sensitive Areas. Staff and scientific members will work in an advisory capacity to the
owner and/or developer regarding the Environmentally Sensitive Areas Site Plan Review
and development of a Natural Resource Management Plan. The EDT may discuss various
tools and incentives for protection.
A. Powers
The EDT has the following powers, pursuant to this Code:
1. To review and approve an Environmentally Sensitive Areas site plan and
subsequent Natural Resource Management Plan.
B. Membership
The EDT will be comprised of the following members:
1. The owner and/or developer.
2. Another designated person of the owner’s and/or developer’s choice.
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 2:
Land Development Code Article 2 - Page 6 Code Administration
3. Staff representative of each: Planning and Zoning Department, Engineering
Department and Park Department.
4. Two (2) volunteers with scientific expertise in natural resources. See Appendix A –
ESA Information for qualification requirements of these members.
5. Scientific members, according to the following:
a. The Mayor will appoint a group of volunteers with training and experience in
one (1) or more of the following areas: natural history, ecology, geology,
hydrology, wildlife biology or botany. The City Council will be advised of these
appointments.
b. The Zoning Administrator will select two (2) persons from the group who have
expertise appropriate to the natural resources on the proposed project to
serve as members of the Environment and Development Team for that
specific proposal.
c. Residency in the City of St. Cloud is not required when residents with
appropriate scientific expertise are not available within the City.
2.7 MINNESOTA COMMISSIONER OF NATURAL RESOURCES
The Minnesota Commissioner of Natural Resources has the following powers, pursuant to
this Code:
A. To review and approve rezonings that remove land from the Floodplain Overlay
District.
B. To review and approve a Scenic Rivers Certificate of Approval.
C. To certify variances to the regulations of the Shoreland and Floodplain Overlay
Districts
2.8 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
For the purposes of this Code, the Planning Director, or his/her designee, will be
considered the Zoning Administrator, and has the following powers, pursuant to this
Code:
A. To review and approve administrative variances.
B. To make interpretations of the provisions of this Code.
C. To review and approve a Heritage Preservation Property Certificate of
Appropriateness for minor work.
D. To review and approve a Floodplain Permit and Certificate of Finished Floor
Elevation.
E. To review and approve Shoreland Permit.
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 2:
Land Development Code Article 2 - Page 7 Code Administration
F. To review and approve a Scenic Rivers Construction Site Permit.
G. Periodically inspect structures and uses of land to determine compliance with the
terms of this Code. In regard to performance standards, the Zoning Administrator
may require the services of a testing laboratory to determine compliance. The cost of
employing said laboratory will be paid by the owner if he/she is in violation of this
Code; otherwise, such costs will be paid by the City.
H. Notify, in writing, any person responsible for violating a provision of this Code,
indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it.
I. Order discontinuance of the illegal use of land or structures, order removal of illegal
structures, additions or alterations, order discontinuance of illegal work being done,
or take any other action authorized by this Code to ensure compliance with or to
prevent violation of its provisions.
J. Maintain records of all nonconformities.
K. Maintain a current file of all permits, certificates and copies of notices of violation,
discontinuance, or removal for such time as necessary to ensure a continuous
compliance with the provisions of this Code and, on request, provide information to
any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in any specific property.
L. Maintain permanent and current records of this Code, including all maps,
amendments, conditional uses and variances.
M. Provide clerical and technical assistance to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
2.9 CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL
The Chief Building Official has the following powers, pursuant to this Code:
A. To review and approve a building permit.
B. To review and approve a certificate of occupancy.
C. To review and approve a sign permit.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 3:
Land Development Code Article 3 - Page 1 Application Procedures
Article 3. Application Procedures
3.1 PURPOSE
3.2 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
3.3 PUBLIC NOTICE
3.4 PUBLIC HEARING
3.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Article is to outline the general application, notice and public hearing
procedures for the zoning applications and approvals found within this Code.
3.2 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
A. Authorization
An application for any land use application or approval may be filed by those
persons or councils, boards, commissions and officials indicated in Article 4 (Land Use
Applications and Enforcement) or other sections of this Code for each application or
approval.
B. Filing
1. All applications are to be filed with the Zoning Administrator.
2. The application will be on forms provided by the City and filed in such number as
the instructions provide. All plans must be at a scale sufficient to permit a clear
and precise understanding of the proposal. The application must include the
information, plans and data as specified in Appendix B - Submission Requirements
and sufficient to determine whether the application conforms to the
requirements of this Code.
C. Completeness
The Zoning Administrator will determine whether the application is complete. If the
application is not complete, the Zoning Administrator will notify the applicant of any
deficiencies and take no steps to process the application until the deficiencies are
remedied. Once the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is
complete, the application will be scheduled for consideration and for a public
hearing, where applicable.
D. Fees
Every application must be accompanied by the required filing fee as established and
modified, from time to time, by the City Council. The failure to pay such fee when
due is grounds for refusal to process the application, and for denying or revoking any
permit or approval for the subject property.
E. Withdrawal of Application
An applicant has the right to withdraw an application at any time prior to the
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 3:
Land Development Code Article 3 - Page 2 Application Procedures
decision on the application by a City official, commission or board. Such withdrawal
must be in writing.
F. Successive Applications
Within one (1) year of the date of denial, a subsequent application cannot be reviewed or
heard unless there is substantial new evidence available, or if a significant mistake of law or
of fact affected the prior denial. Such subsequent application must include a detailed
statement of the grounds justifying its consideration. The Zoning Administrator will make a
determination as to whether the subsequent application is making essentially the same
request. If the Zoning Administrator finds that there are no grounds for consideration of the
subsequent application, he/she will summarily, and without hearing, deny the request.
3.3 PUBLIC NOTICE
A. Timeframe
All notice timeframes are measured in calendar days.
B. Required Notice
Table 3-1: Application and Approval Notice indicates which type of notice is
applicable for each type of land use application and approval:
TABLE 3-1: APPLICATION AND APPROVAL NOTICE
APPLICATION
PUBLISHED NOTICE
See Section 3.3.C
MAILED NOTICE
See Section 3.3.D
POSTED
NOTICE
See Section
3.3.E
Planning
Commission/
Zoning Board of
Appeals/Heritage
Preservation
Commission
City Council
Planning
Commission/
Zoning Board of
Appeals/Heritage
Preservation
Commission
City Council
Text Amendment X X
Rezoning X X X X X
Vacation X X
Major Variance X X X
Administrative Variance X X X
Major Conditional Use
Permit
X X X
Administrative Conditional
Use Permit
X X X
Special Exceptions Permit X X X
Heritage Preservation
Property Local Designation
Form
X X X X X
Appeals of Zoning
Administrator Determination
X
Appeals of Zoning Board of
Appeals Determination
X
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 3:
Land Development Code Article 3 - Page 3 Application Procedures
C. Published Notices
For applications that require a published notice in accord with Table 3-1, the City will
publish notice in the official newspaper of the City of St. Cloud. The notice must
include the date, time, place and purpose of such hearing, the name of the
applicant, and the address of the subject property. Such notice must be published
no less than ten (10) days, nor more than thirty (30) days, in advance of the
scheduled hearing date.
D. Mailed Notice
For applications that require a mailed notice in accord with Table 3-1:
1. Written notice for public hearings must be mailed to the owners of all properties
located within five-hundred (500) feet from the property line of the subject
property at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing or the nearest twenty
(20) property owners, whichever will provide notice to the greatest number of
owners.
2. Copies of all notices to consider a text amendment or variance to the regulations
of, a rezoning of land to, or for a conditional use permit within the Floodplain or
Shoreland Overlay District and all notices to consider a text amendment or
variance to the regulations of the Scenic Rivers Overlay District must be sent to
the Minnesota Commissioner of Natural Resources and postmarked at least ten
(10) days before the public hearing. A copy of any approved amendment,
rezoning, variance, and conditional use permit must be sent to the Minnesota
Commissioner of Natural Resources and postmarked within ten (10) days of final
action.
3. For administrative variances, which do not require a public hearing, notification
must be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date of Zoning Administrator
decision to the owner(s) of all properties adjacent to the subject property, as well
as property located directly across the street.
4. The five-hundred (500) feet is measured in all directions from the perimeter of the
subject property.
5. The giving of notice pursuant to this section does not prevent the applicant from
giving such additional notice as he/she may deem appropriate.
6. For the purpose of giving mailed notice, the person responsible for mailing the
notice may use any appropriate records to determine the names and addresses
of owners, including the current City Assessor tax records. A copy of the notice
and a list of the owners and addresses to which the notice was sent must be
attested to by the responsible person.
7. The body conducting the hearing will hear no application unless the applicant
complies in all respects with the requirements herein. The failure to give mailed
notice to individual property owners, or defects in the notice, does not invalidate
the proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt to comply with this requirement
has been made.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 3:
Land Development Code Article 3 - Page 4 Application Procedures
E. Posted Notice
A public notice sign must be posted for applications for zoning map amendments,
conditional use permits, administrative and major variances, and other actions for
which a public hearing is required. The following standards are required for
placement of public notice signs:
1. The Planning and Zoning Department will provide public notice sign(s) to the
applicant for posting on the subject property.
2. All sign(s) must be picked up from the Planning and Zoning Department on the
Friday prior to the final posting date before 4:30 PM.
3. Sign(s) must be in place at least ten (10) days prior to the date of public hearing.
4. Sign(s) must be removed by the applicant within forty-eight (48) hours of the
public hearing.
5. The intent of the public notice sign is to notify the public of the proposed action.
Therefore, the sign must be located and installed so it will be readily visible. It must
be located so that no information on the sign is obscured from public view due to
blockage by vegetation, fencing or other structures.
6. Failure to post may result in delay of permit processing and postponement of
public hearing.
7. Public notice signs are exempt from the requirements of Article 18 (Signs) of this
Code.
F. Public Examination and Copying of Applications and Other Documents
During normal business hours, any person may examine the application and material
submitted in support of, or in opposition to, the application, subject to the exceptions
set forth in the Freedom of Information Act. Upon reasonable request, any person is
entitled to copies of the application and related documents. The Zoning
Administrator will make copies of such materials available for a fee as specified by
the City.
3.4 PUBLIC HEARING
All public hearings will be conducted in accord with the rules and procedures of the
body conducting the hearing.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 1 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
Article 4. Land Use Applications and
Enforcement
4.1 TEXT AMENDMENT, REZONING, DEVELOPMENT PLAN AMENDMENTS, AND MEDICAL
DISTRICT AMENDMENTS
4.2 VARIANCE
4.3 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
4.4 ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS SITE PLAN REVIEW
4.5 HERITAGE PRESERVATION PROPERTY LOCAL DESIGNATION FORM
4.6 HERITAGE PRESERVATION PROPERTY CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS
4.7 SCENIC RIVERS CERTIFICATION OF APPROVAL
4.8 SCENIC RIVERS CONSTRUCTION SITE PERMIT
4.9 FLOODPLAIN PERMIT AND CERTIFICATE OF FINISHED FLOOR ELEVATION
4.10 SHORELAND PERMIT
4.11 SIGN PERMIT
4.12 BUILDING PERMIT
4.13 TEMPORARY EXCAVATION PERMIT
4.14 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
4.15 APPEALS
4.16 ENFORCEMENT
4.17 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS PERMIT
4.1 TEXT AMENDMENT, REZONING, DEVELOPMENT PLAN AMENDMENTS, AND MEDICAL
DISTRICT AMENDMENTS
A. Purpose
The regulations imposed, and the districts created, by this Code may be amended
from time to time in the manner herein provided. This process for amending the Land
Development Code text or the Zoning Map is intended to permit modifications in
response to changed conditions or changes in City policy. Text amendments and
rezonings are not intended to relieve particular hardships or confer special privileges
or rights upon any person or party.
B. Initiation
The City Council, Planning Commission or owner of property within the City may
propose a text amendment or rezoning.
C. Authority
1. The City Council, after receiving a recommendation from the Planning
Commission, will take formal action on requests for a text amendment or
rezoning.
2. When an amendment is proposed for areas designated as Environmentally
Sensitive Areas, or for regulations related to Environmentally Sensitive Areas, the
City Council, after receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission,
may approve the following types of amendments:
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 2 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
a. Remove land from Environmentally Sensitive Area designation if it is found that
an error was made and if that property fails to meet the criteria for
Environmentally Sensitive Area designation.
b. Add land to Environmentally Sensitive Area designation if it is found that the
land meets the criteria for Environmentally Sensitive Area designation.
c. Change regulations or requirements for Environmentally Sensitive Areas.
3. Changes to the Floodplain Overlay District must meet the Federal Emergency
Management Agency’s (FEMA) Technical Conditions and Criteria and must
receive prior FEMA approval before adoption. The Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) may remove land from the Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRM) and consequently the Floodplain Overlay District designation. An
applicant must follow the FEMA-established administrative procedures to change
the designation of these properties either through a Letter of Map Amendment
(LOMA) process and/or the Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) process
to remove land from the FIRM.
The flood plain designation on the Official Zoning Map shall not be removed from
flood plain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error or that the
area has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory flood protection
elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the flood plain. Special exceptions
to this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner of Natural Resources if he
determines that, through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the
intended use.
D. Procedure
All applications for a text amendment, rezoning, development plan amendment or
medical district amendment must be filed with the Zoning Administrator in
accordance with the requirements in Section 3.2 (Application). Within an
Environmentally Sensitive Area, rezoning to an Environmental Planned Unit
Development (EPUD) must be in accord with the requirements and procedure of
Section 4.4.C.6 (Review Process: Environmental Planned Unit Development (EPUD)).
1. Acceptance of Application by Zoning Administrator
Upon receipt of an application, the Zoning Administrator will review the
application for completeness. The Zoning Administrator will schedule a complete
application for an upcoming Planning Commission agenda for consideration.
2. Action by the Planning Commission
The Planning Commission will consider the application and hold a public hearing
in accordance with Section 3.4 (Public Hearing). Notice for the public hearing
must be in accordance with Section 3.3 (Public Notice). The Planning Commission
must then transmit to the City Council its conclusions and recommendation
concerning the proposed amendment, based upon the standards of Paragraph E
(Findings of Fact) below.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 3 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
3. Action by the City Council
a. After receiving the recommendation from the Planning Commission, the City
Council will consider the application and hold a public hearing in
accordance with Section 3.4 (Public Hearing). Notice for the public hearing
must be in accordance with Section 3.3 (Public Notice).
b. The City Council will take action in the form of approval, approval with
conditions, or denial on applications for text amendments, and approval or
denial on applications for rezonings. The City Council may also refer the
matter back to the Planning Commission for further consideration without an
additional public hearing at the Planning Commission.
c. When an amendment is proposed for regulations related to the Scenic Rivers
Overlay District, a Scenic Rivers Certification of Approval (Section 4.7) is
required in addition to City Council approval.
d. No amendment to this Code or Zoning Map may be adopted on less than an
affirmative majority vote of the City Council, unless a rezoning changes all, or
part, of the existing classification of a zoning district from residential to either
commercial or industrial. Such rezoning must be adopted by a two-thirds (2/3)
affirmative majority vote of the City Council.
4. Timeline
All application procedures must follow the timelines required by Minnesota
Statutes Section 15.99 (Time Deadline for Agency Action).
E. Findings of Fact
The Planning Commission, in making recommendation, and the City Council, in
granting approval or denial, must consider the following standards:
1. Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan.
2. Conservation of property values and rights, and whether the amendment will
have an adverse effect on adjacent properties.
3. Effect of the change upon existing uses of property and the zoning district(s).
F. Retention of Zoning Power
No amendment adopted to rezone property, upon petition of its owner(s), prohibits
the City Council from subsequently rezoning the same property.
4.2 VARIANCE
A. Purpose
The variance process is intended to provide a circumscribed means by which relief is
granted from unforeseen applications of this Code that create practical difficulties.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 4 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
B. Initiation
An owner of any property in the City may request a variance.
C. Authority
1. Major variances, in accordance with the standards of, and as defined by,
Paragraph 3 (Procedure for Major Variance) below, may be authorized only after a
public hearing, when the Zoning Board of Appeals has made findings of fact in
accordance with Paragraph E (Findings of Fact), that owing to special conditions,
a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Code would result in practical
difficulties or particular hardship for the owner of a structure or land.
2. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to grant certain administrative variances, in
accordance with the standards of, and as defined by, Paragraph 2 (Procedure for
Administrative Variance) below, and only after making findings of fact in
accordance with Paragraph E (Findings of Fact) below, that owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Code would result in
practical difficulties or particular hardship for the owner of a structure or land.
D. Procedure
All applications for a variance must be filed with the Zoning Administrator in
accordance with the requirements of Section 3.2 (Application). Prior to processing an
application for a variance to the Floodplain Overlay District regulations, the Zoning
Administrator must determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary state
and federal permits.
1. Acceptance of Application by Zoning Administrator
a. Upon receipt of an application, the Zoning Administrator will review the
application for completeness. Once it is determined that the application is
complete, the Zoning Administrator will make a determination whether the
application is for an administrative variance or a major variance. In the case
of a major variance, the Zoning Administrator will forward a copy of the
application to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
b. When a variance to the Floodplain Overlay District regulations is proposed,
the Zoning Administrator must notify the applicant that the issuance of a
variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twentyfive
dollars ($25) or one-hundred dollars ($100) of insurance coverage, and
such construction below the one-hundred (100) year or regional flood level
increases risks to life and property. Such notification will be maintained with a
record of all variance actions. A community shall maintain a record of all
variance actions, including their justification for their issuance, and report such
variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the Administrator
of the National Flood Insurance Program.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 5 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
2. Procedure for Administrative Variance
a. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to render final decisions on applications
for variances from the regulations of this Code in the following instances and no
others:
i. Development on a nonconforming lot of record, where the lot area or lot
width requirements is at least ninety percent (90%) of the required
minimum lot area and width for the district, provided all other bulk
requirements are met.
ii. Reduction in required setbacks provided the reduction is no more than
ten percent (10%) or two (2) feet, whichever is less.
iii. Increase in permitted maximum lot coverage by no more than five
percent (5%).
iv. Reduction in the required number of off-street parking spaces, by no more
than ten percent (10%) of the number of spaces required.
v. Allow variances to the façade articulation design guidelines for the
Gateway Overlay District.
vi. Approve the increased projection of a wall sign over twelve (12) inches
when mounted on a slanted wall surface.
vii. Approve accessory structures within the AG District that exceed the
maximum building height.
viii. Variances to required setbacks for window wells in residential districts.
b. Any variances proposed to the Floodplain, Shoreland or Scenic Rivers Overlay
Districts must be considered a major variance.
c. Notice for administrative variances must be in accordance with Section 3.3
(Public Notice). The Zoning Administrator will review the application and make
findings of fact in accordance with Paragraph E (Findings of Fact) below, and
will approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request. The Zoning
Administrator may also, at his/her discretion, determine that, because of its
nature, an administrative variance application must be resubmitted in
accordance with the procedures for a major variance, as described in
Paragraph 3 (Procedure for Major Variance) below.
d. If any noticed property owner objects to the administrative variance
application in writing, prior to the date the Zoning Administrator is scheduled
to render a decision, the application must be resubmitted to the Zoning Board
of Appeals as a major variance. Major variance application, notice and
public hearing requirements will be required.
e. If the Zoning Administrator denies the application for an administrative
variance, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Zoning Board of
Appeals. Appeals must be filed within ten (10) days of the Zoning
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 6 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
Administrator’s denial in accordance with Section 4.15 (Appeals).
3. Procedure for Major Variance
a. The Zoning Board of Appeals will consider the application and hold a public
hearing in accordance with Section 3.4 (Public Hearing). Notice for the public
hearing must be in accordance with Section 3.3 (Public Notice).
b. The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose such conditions and restrictions
upon the variance as necessary to reduce or minimize the effect of such
variance upon other properties in the neighborhood, and to better carry out
the intent of the Code and the Comprehensive Plan. Violation of such
conditions and restrictions, when made a part of variance approval, is
deemed a violation of the Code.
c. The Zoning Board of Appeals must provide for a record of its proceedings
including the minutes of the meeting, its findings, and the action taken on
each matter heard by it, including its final order. Within fourteen (14) days of
the close of the public hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals must make its
determination and mail a copy of the determination to the applicant,
petitioner and Mayor or his/her representative.
d. When a variance is proposed for regulations related to the Scenic Rivers
Overlay District, a Scenic Rivers Certification of Approval (Section 4.7) is
required in addition to Zoning Board of Appeals approval.
4. Timeline
All application procedures must follow the timelines required by Minnesota
Statutes Section 15.99 (Time Deadline for Agency Action).
E. Findings of Fact
No variance from the provisions of this Code will be granted unless the Zoning Board
of Appeals makes specific findings of fact based directly on the standards and
conditions imposed by this section. These standards are as follows:
1. Because of the particular physical surrounding, shape or topography conditions
of the specific parcel of land involved, practical difficulties to the owner would
result if the strict letter of the law were carried out.
2. There are exceptional circumstances or conditions that are unique and
applicable to the property or building that do not apply generally to other
properties or buildings in the same zone or neighborhood and that were not
created by the property owner.
3. The granting of the variance is a reasonable request and will not be materially
detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to the property or
improvements in the zone or neighborhood in which the property is located.
4. The proposed variance will not be contrary to the essential character of the
neighborhood nor the intent of this Code or the Comprehensive Plan.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 7 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
5. When considering a variance to the Scenic Rivers District regulations, setbacks,
excluding those not within a floodway, where development exists on both sides of
the proposed building site, water and road setback may be varied to conform to
the existing established setbacks.
6. When considering a variance to the Shoreland Overlay District regulations, the
Zoning Board of Appeals must also consider whether the property owner has
reasonable use of the land without the variance, whether the property is used
seasonally or year-round, whether the variance is being requested solely on the
basis of economic considerations, and the characteristics of development on
adjacent properties.
7. For existing developments within the Shoreland Overlay District, the application
for variance must clearly demonstrate whether a conforming sewage treatment
system is available for the intended use of the property. The variance, if issued,
must require reconstruction of a nonconforming sewage treatment system.
8. The following additional variance criteria of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency must be satisfied:
a. Variances shall not be issued by a community within any designated
regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
b. Variances shall only be issued by a community upon:
i. A showing of good and sufficient cause.
ii. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant, and
iii. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public,
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
c. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
F. Limitations on Variances
1. No variance to the Floodplain or Shoreland Overlay District regulations may
permit uses prohibited in the district in which the property is located.
2. No variance to the Floodplain Overlay District regulations may permit a lower
degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation for the
particular area, or permit standards lower than those required by state law.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 8 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
G. Term of Variance
No variance will be valid for a period longer than one (1) year, unless the erection of
the structure or alteration of the land as permitted has begun within that period or an
extension of time has been granted by the City Council.
4.3 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
A. Purpose
The principal objective of this Code is to provide for an orderly arrangement of
compatible building and land uses, and for the proper location of all types of uses
required in the social and economic welfare of the City. To accomplish this objective,
each type and kind of use is classified as permitted in one (1) or more of the various
districts established by this Code. However, in addition to those uses specifically
classified and permitted in each district, there are certain additional uses, which it
may be desirable to allow because of their unusual characteristics or the service they
provide the public. These conditional uses require particular consideration as to their
proper location in relation to adjacent established or intended uses, or to the
planned development of the community. The conditions controlling the location and
operation of such conditional uses are established by the conditional use permit
approval process of this section.
B. Initiation
An owner of any property in the City may request a conditional use permit.
C. Authority
The Zoning Board of Appeals may permit and/or amend the conditional uses of land
or structures, or both, listed in the district regulations of this Code, if the Zoning Board
of Appeals finds that the proposed location and establishment of any such use will
be desirable and/or necessary to the public convenience or welfare, and will be
harmonious and compatible with other uses adjacent to and in the vicinity of the
selected site(s), and will not cause undue congestion in the public street or hazard in
the area, based upon the standards of Paragraph E (Findings of Fact) below.
D. Procedure
All applications for a conditional use permit will be filed with the Zoning Administrator
in accordance with the requirements in Section 3.2 (Application). Prior to processing
an application for a conditional use permit within the Floodplain Overlay District, the
Zoning Administrator must determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary
state and federal permits.
1. Acceptance of Application by Zoning Administrator
Upon receipt of an application, the Zoning Administrator will review the
application for completeness. Once it is determined that the application is
complete, the Zoning Administrator will make a determination whether the
application is for an administrative conditional use permit or a major conditional
use permit. In the case of a major conditional use permit, the Zoning Administrator
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 9 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
will schedule a complete application for a public hearing before the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
2. Procedure for Administrative Conditional Use Permit
a. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to render final decisions on applications
for conditional use permit from the regulations of this Code in the following
instances and no others:
i. All administrative conditional use permits must have a previously
approved major conditional use permit.
ii. Small adjustments or deviations from the approved site plan, including but
not limited to building setbacks, parking setbacks, parking lot design and
landscaping plans.
iii. Building and parking lot additions that are consistent with the approved
major conditional use permit.
b. Any conditional use permits proposed within the Floodplain, Shoreland, or
Scenic Rivers Overlay Districts must be considered a major conditional use
permit.
c. Notice for administrative conditional use permits must be in accordance with
Section 3.3 (Public Notice). The Zoning Administrator will review the
application and make findings of fact in accordance with Paragraph F
(Findings of Fact) below, and will approve, approve with conditions, or deny
the request. The Zoning Administrator may also, at his/her discretion,
determine that, because of its nature, an administrative conditional use
permit application must be resubmitted in accordance with the procedures
for a major conditional use permit, as described in Paragraph 3 (Procedure for
Major Conditional Use Permit) below.
d. If any noticed property owner objects to the administrative conditional use
permit application in writing, prior to the date the Zoning Administrator is
scheduled to render a decision, the application must be resubmitted to the
Zoning Board of Appeals as a regular conditional use permit. Major
conditional use permit application, notice and public hearing requirements
will be required.
e. The Zoning Administrator may impose conditions and safeguards upon the
premises benefited by a conditional use permit as may be necessary to
prevent injurious effects on the other property in the neighborhood. Violation
of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the conditional use
permit, are deemed a violation of this Code and the conditional use permit
will be revoked.
f. If the Zoning Administrator denies the application for an administrative
conditional use permit, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Zoning
Board of Appeals. Appeals must be filed within ten (10) days of the Zoning
Administrator’s denial in accordance with Section 4.15 (Appeals).
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 10 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
3. Procedure for Major Conditional Use Permit
a. The Zoning Board of Appeals will consider the application and hold a public
hearing in accordance with Section 3.4 (Public Hearing). Notice for the public
hearing must be in accordance with Section 3.3 (Public Notice).
b. Within fourteen (14) days of the close of the public hearing, the Zoning Board
of Appeals will make its determination and mail a copy of the determination
to the applicant.
c. The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose conditions and safeguards upon
the premises benefited by a conditional use permit as may be necessary to
prevent injurious effects on the other property in the neighborhood. Violation
of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the conditional use
permit, are deemed a violation of this Code and the conditional use permit
will be revoked.
4. Timeline
All application procedures must follow the timelines required by Minnesota
Statutes Section 15.99 (Time Deadline for Agency Action).
E. Conditional Use Permits within all Flood Plain Districts
A copy of all decisions granting conditional use permits shall be forwarded by mail to
the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten (10) days of such action.
1. Procedures for Conditional use Permits within Flood Plain Districts
a. The applicant is required to provide the following information for determining
the suitability of the proposed use on a particular site:
i. A site plan drawn at a standard engineering scale that shows the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevation of the lot, existing and proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, flood proofing measures, and the
relationship of the above to the location of the stream channel; and,
ii. Building and construction materials, flood proofing, filling, dredging,
grading, channel improvement, storage of materials, water supply and
sanitary facility specifications; and,
iii. Any other information deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator.
b. A copy of the information listed above to a designated engineer or other
expert person or agency for technical assistance, where necessary, in
evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, the
seriousness of flood damage to the use, the adequacy of the plans for
protection and other technical matters.
c. Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated engineer or expert,
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine the specific flood hazard at the
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 11 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
site and evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in relation to the flood
hazard.
2. Potential Conditions to be attached to Conditional Use Permits - The Zoning Board
of Appeals may include some or all of the following potential conditions, but are
not limited to the following:
a. Modifications of waste treatment and water supply facilities.
b. Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation.
c. Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
d. Requirements for construction of channel modifications, compensatory
storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures.
e. Flood proofing measures, in accordance with the State Building Code and
the Land Development Code. The applicant shall submit a plan or document
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood
proofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection
elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.
F. Findings of Fact
No conditional use permit will be approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals unless it
has made findings of fact, based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing,
to support the following conclusions:
1. That the proposed use at that particular location requested is necessary or
desirable to provide a service or a facility which is in the interest of public
convenience and will contribute to the general welfare of the neighborhood or
community.
2. That such use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be
detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons residing or working
in the vicinity, or injurious to property values or improvements in the vicinity.
3. That the proposed use will comply with the regulations specified in this Code for
the district in which the proposed use is to be located.
4. That the use is listed as a conditional use in the district in which it is to be located.
5. For conditional uses within the Scenic Rivers Overlay District, the following must
also be evaluated:
a. The maintenance of safe and healthful conditions.
b. The prevention and control of water pollution, including sedimentation.
c. Existing topographic and drainage features and vegetative cover on the site.
d. The location of the site with respect to floodplains and floodways of rivers or
streams.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 12 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
e. The erosion potential of the site based upon degree and direction of slope,
soil type and vegetative cover.
f. The location of the site with respect to existing or future access roads.
g. The need of the proposed use for a shoreland location.
h. The compatibility with uses on adjacent land.
i. The amount of liquid wastes to be generated and the adequacy of the
proposed disposal system.
j. Locational factors under which:
i. Domestic uses are generally preferred.
ii. Uses that are not inherently a source of pollution within an area are
preferred over locations that tend to increase that possibility.
6. For conditional uses within the Floodplain Overlay District, the following must also
be evaluated:
a. The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities
caused by encroachments.
b. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to
the injury of others, or they may block bridges, culverts or other hydraulic
structures.
c. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems, and the ability of these
systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions.
d. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage
and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
e. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community.
f. The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
g. The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the
proposed use.
h. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the future.
i. The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and
floodplain management program for the area.
j. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 13 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
k. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport
of the flood waters expected at the site.
l. Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this Code.
7. For conditional uses within the Shoreland Overlay District, the following must also
be evaluated:
a. A thorough evaluation of the waterbody and the topography, vegetation
and soil condition on the site must be made to ensure:
i. The prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of public waters,
both during and after construction.
ii. The visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed from public
waters is limited.
iii. The site is adequate for water supply and on-site sewage treatment.
iv. The types, uses, and numbers of watercraft that the project will
generate are compatible in relation to the suitability of public waters
to safely accommodate these watercraft.
b. The Zoning Board of Appeals, upon consideration of the criteria listed above,
may attach such conditions to the issuance of the conditional use permits as
it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of the Shoreland Overlay District
regulations. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to:
i. Increased setbacks from the ordinary high water level.
ii. Limitations on the natural vegetation to be removed or the
requirement that additional vegetation be planted.
iii. Special provisions for the location, design and use of structures,
sewage treatment systems, watercraft launching and docking areas,
and vehicle parking areas.
G. Term of Conditional Use Permit
No conditional use will be valid for a period longer than one (1) year, unless the
erection of the structure or alteration of the land as permitted has begun within that
period or an extension of time has been granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
4.4 ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS SITE PLAN REVIEW
A. Purpose
The intent of the Environmentally Sensitive Areas Site Plan Review process is to
protect, conserve and enhance Environmentally Sensitive Areas (ESA) and to provide
for equitable economic return in consideration of protection and preservation of ESA.
Allowing flexibility in the development design is crucial and will be determined on a
case-by-case basis for the property under consideration. The historic differences in
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 14 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
development and use of land, based on the underlying zoning district, will be
considered in the process. Furthermore, it is the intent of the ESA designation to
discourage requests for rezoning purely for the purpose of evading compliance to
the goals, standards and requirements of this Code.
B. Applicability
1. The following activities within an ESA and its impact zone (see Paragraph 2
below) require an Environmentally Sensitive Areas Site Plan Review:
a. Subdivision of land.
b. Any new construction or building additions within the boundaries of an ESA
and its impact zone.
c. The following land alterations within the boundaries of an ESA and its impact
zone: clear cutting, removal of native vegetation, fills and excavations,
grading, and modification of drainage patterns or other alteration having a
negative impact on the viability or survival of the ESA.
d. New roads, bridges, road expansion projects and/or public or private utilities
above or below ground.
2. For purposes of this Code, impact zones extend the following distances outward
from the boundaries of the ESA:
a. Minnesota Department of Natural Resources (DNR) Protected Waters,
Riparian Corridors, Rock Outcrops and Native Prairies: One-hundred (100) feet
b. Natural Heritage Sites, High Priority Natural Resource Sites and all Wetlands:
One-hundred (100) feet
c. Medium and Low Priority Natural Resource Sites: Fifty (50) feet
3. The following activities within an ESA and its impact zone are exempt from an
Environmentally Sensitive Areas Site Plan Review:
a. That portion of property located within and subject to the regulations of the
Floodplain, Shoreland or Scenic Rivers Overlay District. However, the owner
and/or developer may request to include such property within the
Environmentally Sensitive Areas Site Plan Review.
b. Activities regulated by the following acts: Minnesota Wetland Conservation
Act and Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, not including contiguous impact
zones. However, the owner and/or developer may request to include such
property within the Environmentally Sensitive Areas Site Plan Review.
c. Public right-of-way dedication and improvement projects that are subject to
the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) of 1969 and/or the Minnesota
Environmental Review Program (MERP) and comply with the Comprehensive
Plan.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 15 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
d. Stormwater retention, groundwater recharge and discharge, groundwater
monitoring, water purification, nutrient retention and removal, and pollution
control facilities that have been approved for installation by county, state
and/or federal regulatory agencies.
e. Customary dredging and channel maintenance of existing drainage facilities.
This includes vegetative maintenance for access and stormwater and/or
flood control purposes within, and adjacent to, drainageways.
f. Activities associated with the repair, maintenance or replacement of pipeline
and utility lines within an existing utility right-of-way, and public highways,
roads, trails and bridges within existing street rights-of-way.
g. Activities associated with the routine maintenance of an existing public road,
utility and pipeline right-of-way. This exemption is for the maintenance, but
not the expansion, of right-of-way in which roads and utilities are located.
h. Temporary emergency procedures necessary for the safety or protection of
property.
i. Single utility poles required to provide service to the local area.
j. Ongoing customary agricultural operations.
k. Unplatted property that is two (2) acres or less in size, in its entirety, that is
occupied by a single-family dwelling unit prior to the original date of
adoption of the Environmentally Sensitive Areas Ordinance.
C. Procedure
In developing and reviewing plans for a property within an ESA, the Zoning
Administrator and City staff, the Environment and Development Team (EDT), Planning
Commission and City Council must take into account the defined hierarchy of
protection in Paragraph 10 (Hierarchy of ESA Protection) below and the
development guidelines in Paragraph 9 (ESA Development Guidelines) below.
1. Activation of the Environment and Development Team
a. If the Zoning Administrator and Engineering Department determine that a
proposed development will occur within an ESA or its impact zone, then the
Zoning Administrator will activate the EDT.
b. The Zoning Administrator will convene the initial meeting of the EDT and
provide to all material pertinent to the proposal as it becomes available. The
following information will be prepared for the initial meeting with the EDT, and
for the development of the Concept Plan and Natural Resource
Management Plan.
i. A contour map based, at least, upon topographical maps published by
the U.S. Geological Survey.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 16 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
ii. The location of severely constraining elements, such as wetlands,
watercourses, intermittent streams and one-hundred (100) year
floodplains, and existing or proposed rights-of-way and easements.
iii. The location of features such as woodlands, tree lines, prairies, wildlife
habitat, open and/or active fields or meadows, watershed divides and
drainage ways, fences or stone walls, rock outcrops, and existing
structures, roads, tracks and trails.
c. The EDT may elect to conduct on-site visit(s) to familiarize themselves with the
property.
2. Verification of ESA
a. Scientific members of the EDT will help determine more accurately the
boundaries of the ESA, connections of the natural communities present on
and adjacent to the property, and the quality and significance of the
identified ESA.
b. Major development that would require a substantial amount of work/time for
the scientific members may require the owner/developer to hire a consultant.
c. Scientific members of the EDT will report their findings to the entire EDT.
3. Concept Plan
A Concept Plan is a non-engineered plan for a property proposed for
development. The Concept Plan will provide information in sufficient detail to
analyze the proposed development and its relation to the ESA located on the
property. This plan may be required to be completed prior to any development
or alteration of the property.
a. Staff and scientific members will work in an advisory capacity to the owner
and/or developer proposing the project regarding the development of a
Concept Plan and Natural Resource Management Plan.
b. The owner and/or developer will prepare the Concept Plan and submit it to
the Zoning Administrator, who will forward it to other members of the EDT.
c. The owner and/or developer will present the Concept Plan to other members
of the EDT for discussion.
4. Natural Resource Management Plan
a. In conjunction with, or following, the Concept Plan, the Planning and Zoning
Department, with help from the EDT, will provide for a Natural Resource
Management Plan to help protect the composition, structure and function of
the natural communities and wildlife habitat within the ESA which is to be
protected within the project and, if appropriate, adjacent buffer areas.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 17 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
b. The Natural Resource Management Plan outlines specific management and
protection measures and how they will be accomplished for the ESA and, if
appropriate, for the buffer areas. See suggested guidelines in Appendix A –
ESA Information.
c. The Natural Resource Management Plan outlines by whom and how
implementation takes place. If platting is required, this Natural Resource
Management Plan, upon approval by the City Council, is included in the
subdivision agreement and/or the deed, if appropriate.
5. Review Process: Requiring Platting (Excludes EPUD)
The development process for a project which includes an ESA, but does not
require rezoning or where the owner and/or developer does not request a
rezoning to an EPUD (see Paragraph 6 (Review Process: Environmental Planned
Unit Development (EPUD)) below), will follow the process outlined in Paragraphs 1
through 4 above and the following:
a. The owner and/or developer will prepare a preliminary plat in accordance
with the Concept Plan requirements and submit it to the Zoning Administrator,
along with a Natural Resource Management Plan. The Zoning Administrator
will forward these to members of the EDT.
b. Scientific members of the EDT will assess the effects of the preliminary plat and
Natural Resource Management Plan on the ESA(s) included in the project
and submit report to the Zoning Administrator, who will forward the report to
other members of the EDT.
c. The Zoning Administrator will present his/her findings and recommendation, in
consideration of EDT analysis, on the preliminary plat and Natural Resource
Management Plan to the Planning Commission.
d. A final plat will be submitted.
e. Recommendation from the Planning Commission regarding the Natural
Resource Management Plan, preliminary plat and final plat will be reviewed
and approved by the City Council.
f. Conditions of the plat approval will be included in the subdivision agreement
for the final plat. The Natural Resource Management Plan, upon approval by
the City Council, may be included in the subdivision agreement, if
appropriate.
g. As part of approval, incentives, in accordance with Paragraph 8 (Incentives)
below, may be granted. However, incentives that increase impact pressures
on other ESA should be avoided.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 18 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
6. Review Process: Environmental Planned Unit Development (EPUD)
a. Purpose
The purpose of the Environmental Planned Unit Development (EPUD) is to offer
an alternative to residential, commercial, industrial and agricultural zoning, as
outlined in this Code, for development of parcels containing ESA. The EPUD is
similar in intent to a PUD, except that it pertains only to parcels containing ESA
and it follows the planning and review process outlined in this section.
b. General Standards
Deviation from the definitive and precise requirements of the zoning districts
may be permitted within an EPUD if the particular areas to be developed can
offer greater value to the community and better meet the community’s
health, welfare and safety requirements and the goals of this Code. The EPUD
may contain a mix of land uses (residential, commercial and industrial) as
appropriate.
c. Procedure
The procedure for EPUD will follow the process outlined in Paragraphs 1
through 4 above and the following:
i. The owner and/or developer will request EPUD zoning.
ii. The Planning and Zoning Department will prepare a preliminary plat in
accordance with the Concept Plan requirements and submit it to the
Zoning Administrator, along with a Natural Resource Management Plan.
The Zoning Administrator will forward these to the EDT.
iii. Scientific members of the EDT assess the effects of the EPUD on the ESA,
preliminary plat and Natural Resource Management Plan, and submit a
report to the Zoning Administrator, who will forward the report to the other
members of the EDT.
iv. The Zoning Administrator presents his/her findings and recommendation,
in consideration of the EDT analysis, on the EPUD, preliminary plat and
Natural Resource Management Plan to the Planning Commission.
v. The Planning Commission will hold a public hearing and review the EPUD,
preliminary plat, Natural Resource Management Plan and, if appropriate,
the final plat, and make a recommendation to the City Council.
vi. The City Council will approve the EPUD as a rezoning, in accord with the
procedures of Section 4.1 (Text Amendment and Rezoning).
vii. Conditions of the approval will be included in the EPUD. The final plat must
be consistent with the EPUD.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 19 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
7. Review Process: Not Requiring Platting
The review process for activities occurring on property where platting is not
required will follow the process outlined in Paragraphs 1 through 4 above and the
following.
a. The owner and/or developer will provide information to the Zoning
Administrator detailing what activities are proposed for the property.
b. If the EDT is activated, the EDT may visit the property.
c. The EDT may work on developing a Concept Plan, and if appropriate, a
Natural Resource Management Plan for the property.
d. The Zoning Administrator will give final approval of the Concept Plan and
Natural Resource Management Plan.
e. Any activities on the property must follow the Concept Plan and Natural
Resource Management Plan.
f. As part of approval, incentives, in accordance with Paragraph 8 (Incentives)
below, may be granted. However, incentives that increase impact pressures
on other ESA should be avoided.
8. Incentives
To provide for equitable economic return in consideration of protection and
preservation of ESA covered by this Code, incentives include, but are not limited
to:
a. Exceptions from subdivision regulations, such as allowing narrower public
right-of-way, reduced sidewalk requirements, and reduced street widths.
b. Reduced setback requirements.
c. Acceptance of donation of an ESA in-lieu of park dedication.
d. Preservation of an ESA through conservation easement or Natural Resource
Management Plan, in-lieu of park dedication.
e. Assessment on storm drain to exclude the square footage that is in the
protected area.
f. Use of wetlands as a storm drain alternative.
g. Allowance for wetlands; if incentives are given for a wetland on property that
has other ESA, development should occur outside of such other ESA.
h. Other assessment relief.
i. Allowance of increased density and smaller lot size.
j. Clustering of development outside the ESA.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 20 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
k. Exception from lot coverage regulations.
l. Waiver of application fees.
m. Land swaps.
n. In the commercial and industrial districts, additional incentives include, but
are not limited to:
i. Reduction of the required area for paved parking.
ii. Exception from standard height restrictions.
iii. Exception from standard setback requirements.
iv. Exception from landscaping requirements.
v. Use of unpaved, dust-free parking surfaces.
9. ESA Development Guidelines
The following development guidelines apply within ESA. Every development must:
a. Maximize the protection of the ESA.
b. Provide for an equitable economic return for the development.
c. Maintain viable riparian and wildlife corridors, rare species and connections
between ESA.
d. Keep undeveloped ESA large enough to maximize sustainability and minimize
fragmentation.
e. Maintain a buffer adequate to the health and viability of the ESA.
f. Minimize adverse construction impacts on the ESA.
10. Hierarchy of ESA Protection
The hierarchy of protection defined in this section is listed in descending order
from the highest to the lowest level of protection. In general, higher priority areas
should receive more protection than lower priority areas. The preservation of rare
species, riparian and wildlife corridors and complexes of the ESA will receive
priority treatment in each category.
a. Natural Heritage Areas and Rare Species
The goal is that any development and alterations take place outside these areas.
b. Natural Resource Areas
i. High Priority Areas: Level I
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 21 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
High priority areas are natural resource areas in a complex, which are
slightly disturbed by human activity, uncommon state-wide and/or very
rare or unique locally. The goal is to protect these areas and avoid any
deterioration.
ii. Medium Priority Areas: Level II
Medium priority areas are natural resource areas in a complex with
moderate to severe human disturbance, or natural resource areas that
are not in a complex with only slight human disturbance. Although
common state-wide, many are experiencing widespread threats and are
of poor quality while others are more secure. The goal is to conserve the
quality of these areas while allowing minor encroachment or disturbance.
iii. Low Priority Areas: Level III
Low priority areas are natural resource areas with moderate to severe
human disturbances that are not part of a complex. The goal is that
design, placement and construction techniques used in these areas will
enhance the general ambiance and character of the natural resource
area.
4.5 HERITAGE PRESERVATION LOCAL PROPERTY DESIGNATION FORM
A. Purpose
The purpose of the Heritage Preservation Property Local Designation Form is to
identify, preserve, protect, enhance, perpetuate and use areas, places, buildings,
structures and other objects having special historical interest and value in the City of
St. Cloud, which are in the public interest and desired in the interest of the health,
education, safety, welfare and prosperity of the people for the following purposes:
1. Safeguard the heritage of the City by preserving properties which reflect
significant elements of the City’s cultural, social, economic, political, visual and/or
architectural history.
2. Protect and enhance the City’s appeal to residents, visitors and tourists, and serve
as a support and stimulus to business and industry.
3. Enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity and interest of the City.
4. Foster civic pride in the beauty and notable accomplishments of the past and
present.
5. Promote the preservation and continued use of significant historic properties for
the education and general welfare of the people of the City.
6. Encourage new design and construction that complements the City’s historical
buildings.
7. Protect property values within the City.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 22 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
8. Identify, as early as possible, and resolve conflicts between preservation of
historical buildings and alternative land uses.
B. Initiation
Nomination of a property(s) to be considered for designation as a Historic District
must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on an approved City nomination
application and must be accompanied by all required support information. A
nomination application may be submitted by the following:
1. Heritage Preservation Commission
2. City Council
3. The Mayor
4. Any person with a legal equitable interest in the subject property.
C. Authority
Historic districts will be designated by the City Council upon the recommendation of
the Planning Commission and the Heritage Preservation Commission.
D. Procedure for Designation
1. Upon receipt of a complete nomination application, the Heritage Preservation
Commission will determine if the nomination potentially meets any of the
designation criteria of Paragraph E (Designation Criteria) and is worthy of
designation, in which case, the Heritage Preservation Commission will prepare a
historic district designation study.
2. Upon completion of a historic district designation study, the Heritage Preservation
Commission will hold a public hearing in accordance with Section 3.4 (Public
Hearing). Notice for the public hearing must be in accordance with Section 3.3
(Public Notice).
3. After the public hearing, the Heritage Preservation Commission will forward a
recommendation to the Planning Commission, in writing, of either approval, in
whole or part, or denial of the proposed Historic District with the details of the
proposed historic district. A simple majority vote of the Heritage Preservation
Commission for approval, in whole or part, is required. The minutes of the public
hearing will be provided to the Planning Commission.
4. A copy of the Heritage Preservation Commission recommendation for the
proposed designation of a Historic District, including boundaries, will be sent to
the Minnesota Historical Society in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Section
471:193, Subd. 6, which provides for a sixty (60) day review period. The historical
society’s comments will be sent to the City Council for consideration.
5. Upon receipt of a recommendation from the Heritage Preservation Commission,
the Planning Commission will review the proposed Historic District for consistency
with the Comprehensive Plan, the effect of the proposed Historic District upon the
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 23 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
surrounding neighborhood, and any other planning consideration that may be
relevant to the proposed Historic District. The Planning Commission will forward its
recommendation, as well as the public records of its proceedings, to the City
Council.
6. Upon receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendation and expiration of
the Minnesota Historical Society’s review period, the City Council will schedule a
public hearing in accordance with Section 3.4 (Public Hearing). Notice for the
public hearing must be in accordance with Section 3.3 (Public Notice). The City
Council will conduct a public hearing and take final action on the proposed
historic district within thirty (30) days of the date of the City Council public
hearing.
7. Failure to send any notice by mail to any property owner(s) where the address of
such owner(s) is not a matter of public record will not invalidate any proceeding
in connection with the proposed historic district.
8. The City Council may adopt an interim ordinance, in accordance with Minnesota
Statute 462.355, prohibiting the issuance of a permit to construct, demolish, or
alter any structure within the proposed designation area being studied by the
Heritage Preservation Commission for historic district designation.
9. A Heritage Preservation Property(s) may be removed from a historic district
following the same manner and procedure that was followed in the designation
of the property(s).
E. Designation Criteria
While considering the nomination of a historic district, the Heritage Preservation
Commission will apply one (1) or more of the following criteria:
1. The property has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
prehistory or history.
2. The property is associated with significant events or with an important pattern of
cultural, political, economic or social history.
3. The property has distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type, period,
form or treatment which is not adequately represented elsewhere in the City.
4. The property exemplifies work of a master builder, engineer, designer, artist,
craftsman or architect.
5. The property contains or is associated with distinctive elements of the City’s
identity.
6. The property has distinguishing characteristics of significance that are for the most
part original and intact or capable of restoration.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 24 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
F. Recording of Heritage Preservation Properties
The Office of the City Clerk will record with the respective County Register of Deeds
the legal description of all buildings, lands or areas designated as a Historic District by
the City Council and will transmit a copy of said legal description to the Chief
Building Official.
G. National Register or State Application
The Heritage Preservation Commission will make no application to the National
Register or to the State of Minnesota for the designation of a historic district without
the consent of the City Council after review and comment by the Planning
Commission. Property owner(s) will be sent mailed notice at least ten (10) days prior
to any City Council action to consent to such application submission by the City.
H. Repository for Documents
Planning and Zoning Department will keep a record of heritage preservation
documents available for public review.
I. Retention of Designating Ordinance and Heritage Preservation Ordinance Power
No amendment adopted to change or revoke a historic district designation, in whole
or part, upon petition of its owner or owners will prohibit the City Council from
subsequently amending the designating ordinance to re-designate the same
property.
4.6 HERITAGE PRESERVATION PROPERTY CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS
A. Purpose
A Heritage Preservation Property Certificate of Appropriateness is required for
demolition, in whole or part, subject to Minnesota Statute Chapter 463,
reconstruction or repairs or erection of exterior signs, moving of buildings, new
construction and exterior alterations, within the City’s Historic Districts. Actions
pursuant to Paragraph D (Emergency Repairs) below regarding emergency work is
exempt from permit requirements.
B. Authority
1. The Zoning Administrator may issue a Heritage Preservation Property Certificate of
Appropriateness for minor alterations.
2. The Heritage Preservation Commission may issue a Heritage Preservation Property
Certificate of Appropriateness for major alterations. However, the Zoning
Administrator, after consultation with the Heritage Preservation Commission Chair,
may issue a Heritage Preservation Property Certificate of Appropriateness for
major alterations that are in clear conformance with the applicable design
review guidelines.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 25 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
C. Procedure
Demolition, in whole or part, subject to Minnesota Statute Chapter 463,
reconstruction or repairs or erection of exterior signs, moving of buildings, new
construction and exterior alterations, within the City’s historic districts are subject to
review and approval as provided for in Paragraphs 1 (Minor Alteration) or 2 (Major
Alteration) below, as applicable. The application must include detailed plans
including a site plan, building elevations, and design details and materials as
necessary to evaluate the request. The Zoning Administrator will review the alteration
application and if complete, forward the application to the Heritage Preservation
Commission at their next available meeting.
1. Minor Alteration
a. Applications for minor alterations will be approved by the Zoning
Administrator when the work is in conformance with the design review
guidelines for the St. Cloud commercial historic district published in the “City
of St. Cloud Downtown Preservation Design Manual,” and the design review
guidelines for St. Cloud’s residential historic districts published in the “City of St.
Cloud Residential Historic District Preservation Design Manual.”
b. A Certificate of Appropriateness will be issued by the Zoning Administrator,
and the Heritage Preservation Commission will be notified of the certificate
issuance. The Zoning Administrator, at his/her discretion, may require
applications for minor alterations to be classified as major alterations and
thereby subject to Paragraph 2 (Major Alteration) below.
2. Major Alteration
a. Applications for major alterations that are clearly in conformance with the
design review guidelines for the St. Cloud commercial historic district
published in the “City of St. Cloud Downtown Preservation Design Manual”
and the design review guidelines for St. Cloud’s residential historic districts
published in the “City of St. Cloud Residential Historic District Preservation
Design Manual” may be approved by the Zoning Administrator after
consultation with, and approval by the Heritage Preservation Commission
Chair. With approval of major alterations by the Zoning Administrator, a
Certificate of Appropriateness will be issued, and the Heritage Preservation
Commission will be notified of the certificate issuance.
b. Applications for all other major alterations must be reviewed and approved
by the Heritage Preservation Commission. The Heritage Preservation
Commission will determine, within forty (40) days of receipt of an application
for major alteration, if the work to be performed pursuant to the permit
application and plans are contrary to the design review guidelines for the St.
Cloud commercial historic district published in the “City of St. Cloud
Downtown Preservation Design Manual” and the design review guidelines for
St. Cloud’s residential historic districts published in the “City of St. Cloud
Residential Historic District Preservation Design Manual.”
c. If it is determined that the alteration permit application will not have an
adverse effect on the historic district and conforms to the applicable design
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 26 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
review guidelines, the application will be approved, and the applicant will be
notified in writing of the approval through a Certificate of Appropriateness. If
it is determined that the permit application will have an adverse effect on the
historic district and/or does not conform to the applicable design review
guidelines, the Heritage Preservation Commission will notify the applicant in
writing of its findings and advise the applicant of their right to appeal to the
City Council.
d. If the Heritage Preservation Property Certificate of Appropriateness is denied
or modified by the Heritage Preservation Commission, the applicant may,
within ten (10) days of the date of the decision, have a right to appeal such
order and decision to the City Council. An appeal will be deemed complete
upon receipt by the Planning and Zoning Department of two (2) copies of a
notice to appeal and statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. One
(1) copy of the notice of appeal and statement will be sent to the Heritage
Preservation Commission and one (1) copy to the City Council. The City
Council will hold a public hearing in accordance with Section 3.4 (Public
Hearing). Notice for the public hearing must be in accordance with Section
3.3 (Public Notice). The City Council will render a decision on the appeal
within thirty (30) days of the date of the public hearing or it will be considered
denied.
D. Emergency Repairs
In emergency situations where immediate repair is needed to protect the safety of
the structure and its inhabitants, and where such repair is in conflict with the
approved design review guidelines, the Chief Building Official may approve the
repair without prior Heritage Preservation Commission action. In the case of a permit
issued pursuant to this section, the Chief Building Official will notify the Heritage
Preservation Commission of its action and specify the facts or conditions constituting
the emergency situation.
4.7 SCENIC RIVERS CERTIFICATION OF APPROVAL
A. Purpose
The Scenic Rivers Certification of Approval ensures that decisions that affect the land
use regulations of the Scenic Rivers Overlay District are consistent with the intent and
regulations of the Scenic Rivers Overlay District.
B. Applicability
The following actions and approvals must obtain a Scenic Rivers Certification of
Approval:
1. Amendments to Scenic Rivers Overlay District regulations.
2. Variances from Scenic Rivers Overlay District regulations.
3. Approval of a plat that is inconsistent with Scenic Rivers Overlay District
regulations.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 27 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
C. Authority
The Minnesota Commissioner of Natural Resources may issue a Scenic Rivers
Certification of Approval.
D. Procedure
Action taken by the City on amendments, variances or plat approvals become
effective upon any of the following:
1. The final decision by the City has previously received a Scenic Rivers Certification
of Approval.
2. The City receives a Scenic Rivers Certification of Approval.
3. Thirty (30) days have elapsed from the day the Minnesota Commissioner of
Natural Resources received notice of the final decision and the City has received
neither notice of approval nor notice of non-approval.
4. The Minnesota Commissioner of Natural Resources certifies approval within thirty
(30) days after conducting a public hearing.
E. Appeals
1. In cases where the Minnesota Commissioner of Natural Resources gives notice of
non-approval of an amendment, variance or inconsistent plat, either the
applicant or the City may, within thirty (30) days, file with the Minnesota
Commissioner of Natural Resources a demand for hearing.
2. If the demand for hearing is not filed within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice,
the notice of non-approval becomes final.
3. The Minnesota Commissioner of Natural Resources is responsible for the conduct
of the public hearing, in accordance with NR 81.
4.8 SCENIC RIVERS CONSTRUCTION SITE PERMIT
A. Purpose
The Scenic Rivers Construction Site Permit is intended to ensure compliance of new
construction with the Scenic Rivers Overlay District regulations.
B. Applicability
Within the Scenic Rivers Overlay District, no person, firm or corporation may perform
work requiring a construction site permit, conditional use permit or variance unless a
Scenic Rivers Construction Site Permit has been issued and posted on the premises
verifying the accuracy of setbacks. Any person performing such work is criminally
liable to the same extent as the property owner to comply with the setback
distances.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 28 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
C. Authority
The Zoning Administrator may issue a Scenic Rivers Construction Site Permit.
D. Procedure
1. No person may erect, make alterations, additions or move any structure, or part
thereof, without first securing a Scenic Rivers Construction Site Permit.
2. Application for a Scenic Rivers Construction Site Permit is made to the Zoning
Administrator on forms furnished by the City. Each application for a permit to
construct or alter a building must be accompanied by a plan drawn to scale
showing the dimensions of the lot to be built upon, and the size and location of
the building and accessory buildings to be erected.
3. Applications must contain such other information as deemed necessary for the
proper enforcement of the Scenic Rivers Overlay District and this Code, or any
other ordinance.
4. In addition, the Zoning Administrator may issue the Scenic Rivers Construction Site
Permit only after determining that the building plan, together with the
application, comply with the planning of future road construction. Such
information will be furnished by the City.
4.9 FLOODPLAIN PERMIT AND CERTIFICATE OF FINISHED FLOOR ELEVATION
A. Purpose
A Floodplain Permit and Certificate of Finished Floor Elevation is intended to ensure
compliance with the Floodplain Overlay District regulations of this Code.
B. Applicability
A Floodplain Permit and Certificate of Finished Floor Elevation is required prior to the
following actions within the Floodplain Overlay District:
1. The erection, addition, alteration, modification, or rehabilitation (including
normal maintenance and repair) of any structure or portion thereof.
2. The use or change of use of a structure or land.
3. The change or extension of a nonconforming use.
4. The placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of materials or
equipment within the floodplain.
5. The construction of a dam, fence, or on-site septic system.
6. Prior to the repair of a structure that has been damaged by fire, flood, tornado or
any other source.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 29 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
C. Authority
The Zoning Administrator may issue the Floodplain Permit and Certificate of Finished
Floor Elevation.
D. Procedure
1. Application for a Floodplain Permit is made, in duplicate, to the Zoning
Administrator on forms furnished by the City, and must include the following:
a. Plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations
of the lot.
b. All existing and/or proposed structures.
c. Fill or storage of materials.
d. The location of the above in relation to the stream channel.
2. The applicant is required to submit certification by a registered professional
engineer, registered architect or registered land surveyor that the finished fill and
building elevations were accomplished in compliance with Floodplain Overlay
District regulations. Flood-proofing measures must be certified by a registered
professional engineer or registered architect.
3. Prior to granting a Floodplain Permit, the Zoning Administrator must determine
that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal permits.
4. The Zoning Administrator must issue a Floodplain Permit for each activity requiring
a permit as specified in Paragraph B (Applicability) above. This permit will specify
that the use of land conforms to the requirements of the Floodplain Overlay
District regulations. Any use, arrangement or construction not authorized by the
permit is deemed a violation of this Code.
E. Authorization
Floodplain Permits issued on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize
only the use, arrangement and construction set forth in such approved plans and
applications, and no other use, arrangement or construction is permitted. Any use,
arrangement or construction not authorized by the permit is deemed a violation of
the Code.
F. Records
1. The Zoning Administrator will maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest
floor, including basement, of all new structures and alterations or additions to
existing structures in the Floodplain Overlay District.
2. The Zoning Administrator will issue Certificate of Finished Floor Elevation for all new
structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the Floodplain
Overlay District and maintain a record of the elevation to which structures and
alterations or additions to structures are flood-proofed.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 30 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
G. Notifications for Watercourse Alterations
The Zoning Administrator shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities
and the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources prior to the
community authorizing any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. If the applicant
has applied for a permit to work in the beds of public waters pursuant to Minnesota
Statute, Chapter 103G, this shall suffice as adequate notice to the Commissioner of
Natural Resources. A copy of said notification shall also be submitted to the Chicago
Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
H. Notification to FEMA
Notification to FEMA when physical changes increase or decrease the 100-year flood
elevation. As soon as practicable, but no later than six (6) months after the date
such supporting information becomes available, the Zoning Administrator shall notify
the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes by submitting a copy of said
technical scientific data.
4.10 SHORELAND PERMIT
A. Purpose
A Shoreland Permit is intended to ensure compliance with the Shoreland Overlay
District regulations of this Code.
B. Applicability
A Shoreland Permit is required for the following activities within the Shoreland Overlay
District:
1. The construction of buildings, building additions, accessory structures and signs.
2. The installation and/or alteration of County-approved sewage treatment systems.
3. Grading and filling activities not exempted by Shoreland Overlay District
regulations.
C. Authority
The Zoning Administrator may issue the Shoreland Permit.
D. Procedure
1. Application for a Shoreland Permit is made to the Zoning Administrator on the
forms provided by the City. The application must include all necessary
information required by the Zoning Administrator to determine the site's suitability
for the intended use and that a compliant sewage treatment system will be
provided.
2. A Shoreland Permit authorizing an addition to an existing structure must stipulate
that an identified nonconforming sewage treatment system will be reconstructed
or replaced in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 31 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
3. The Zoning Administrator must issue a Shoreland Permit for each activity requiring
a permit as specified in Paragraph B (Applicability) above. This permit will specify
that the use of land conforms to the requirements of the Shoreland Overlay
District regulations.
E. Authorization
Shoreland Permits issued on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize
only the use, arrangement and construction set forth in such approved plans and
applications, and no other use, arrangement or construction is permitted. Any use,
arrangement or construction not authorized by the permit is deemed a violation of
the Code.
4.11 SIGN PERMIT
A. Applicability
No sign, except those identified as exempt in Section 18.6 (Information and Activities
Exempt From Sign Permit), may be erected, constructed, altered or relocated without
first obtaining a sign permit.
B. Authority
The Chief Building Official is responsible for determining compliance with this Code
and issuing a sign permit.
C. Permit Issuance
The Chief Building Official, upon receipt of an application for a sign permit, will
examine the plans, specifications and other data, and the premises where the sign is
proposed to be erected. If the proposed structure is in compliance with all the
requirements of the sign regulations of this Code, and all other laws and ordinances
of the City, the Chief Building Official will issue a permit.
D. Approval of Electrified Signs
The application for a sign permit for the erection of a sign in which electrical wiring
and connections are to be used will be submitted to the Chief Building Official, who
will forward the specifications regarding all wiring and connections to the Electrical
Inspector, who will examine the plans and specifications to determine compliance
with the Electrical Code of the City as a condition of granting the permit.
E. License and Bond Insurance Requirements
No person will engage in the business of erecting signs, nor be entitled to a permit to
erect a sign under this Code unless licensed to do so by the City Council. A license
may be granted by the City Council on written application filed with the City Clerk in
such form as prescribed and accompanied by the required annual license fee. No
license will take effect until the licensee files with the City Clerk a copy of the
licensee's liability insurance policy in a form approved by the City Attorney. The
application will be accompanied by a surety bond, executed by the licensee as
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 32 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
principal, and by a corporate surety, authorized to execute a bond under the laws of
the State of Minnesota, in the penal sum of ten-thousand dollars ($10,000), approved
by the City Attorney and conditioned that the licensee will pay all permit fees
required under this Code, pay any fines imposed upon him for violation of the Code,
conform to all of the provisions of this Code, and will indemnify and hold the City, its
officers and agents, harmless from any damage or claim resulting from or related to
the erection or maintenance of any sign in the City by the licensee.
The application will also be accompanied by a copy of the licensee's general policy
of liability and property damage insurance, which will provide a penal sum of not less
than one-hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) for injuries to or death of one (1)
person, not less than three-hundred thousand dollars ($300,000) on account of one
accident, and not less than one-hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) for property
damage. The bond required herein will be effective for the period from January 1
through December 31 of the license year. The bond and insurance policy will provide
that the bond or insurance policy will not be cancelled for any cause by the
principal, the insured, or the surety or insurance company without first giving ten (10)
days notice to the City, in writing, of the intention to cancel. The notice will be
addressed to the City Clerk by registered mail or will be delivered to the City Clerk
personally. Annual licenses will expire the 31st of December of each year. License
fees will not be pro-rated or refundable.
F. Inspection
The Chief Building Official may inspect, at such times as deemed appropriate, each
sign or other advertising structure regulated by this Code. The purpose of the
inspection is to ascertain whether the structure is secure or insecure, whether in need
of repair or removal, or not in conformance with the permit application or otherwise
in violation of the provisions of this Code.
G. Revocation of Permit
Upon the termination or revocation of the sign permit, the licensee must remove the
sign or other advertising structure without cost or expense of any kind to the City. In
the event of the failure, neglect or refusal on the part of the licensee to do so, the
City may proceed to remove the same and charge the expense to the licensee.
H. Expiration
If the work authorized under a sign permit has not been completed within six (6)
months after the date of issuance, the permit will expire.
4.12 BUILDING PERMIT
A. No person or corporation may erect, construct, enlarge, repair, move, improve,
convert, or demolish any structure in the City, or cause the same to be done without
first obtaining a separate building permit for each such structure from the Chief
Building Official.
B. No building permit will be issued unless such building is designed and arranged to
conform to the provisions of this Code.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 33 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
C. Every application for building permit which involves new or altered use of land must
be accompanied by two (2) site plans, one (1) of which will be given to the Zoning
Administrator. All plans must be drawn to scale showing:
1. Actual dimensions of the lot(s) to be built upon.
2. Location and size of the structure.
3. Improvement or use to be erected, altered or placed.
4. Location of required off-street parking and loading areas, size of yards and open
spaces, existing and proposed streets and alleys adjoining or within the lot.
5. Any other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of
regulations.
6. In the case of flood land areas, elevations and locations of the following must be
shown: lot, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of material and stream
channel.
7. Scenic Rivers Site Construction Permit approval, if applicable.
4.13 TEMPORARY EXCAVATION PERMIT
A. The use of land for the removal of topsoil, sand or gravel, and other material from the
land is not permitted except by the granting of a temporary excavation permit by
the City Council upon recommendation by the Planning Commission. Permits will be
issued for a maximum period of one (1) year and are subject to review and rehearing
at that time.
B. The applicant must submit a plan of intent as to the future use of the property being
excavated, as well as development plans showing proposed elevations, drainage
and access routes to be used in hauling to and/or from the site, and daily hours
intended for operation and projected period of excavation.
C. If, during the excavation work, it becomes necessary for the applicant excavating to
create a condition of grade or drainage dangerous to public health or safety, it will
become the applicant’s duty to immediately correct the dangerous situation
created, as well as fence the area from the general public during the period of
danger.
D. It is necessary for the applicant securing a temporary excavation permit to present
adequate proof of bonding to the City in the form of a performance bond, sufficient
in value to cover the expense of the completion of the development plan or to bring
such portion of the completed project to a safe grade and elevation to ensure
public health and safety, and to provide safe and adequate drainage of the site.
4.14 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
A. No land may be occupied or used, and no structure erected, reconstructed or
structurally altered may be occupied or changed in use, in whole or in part, for any
purpose unless, a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Chief Building
Official.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 34 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
B. Every application for residential building permit is deemed an application for a
certificate of occupancy.
4.15 APPEALS
A. Purpose
The zoning appeals process for review of decisions of the Zoning Administrator or the
Zoning Board of Appeals is intended to provide appropriate checks and balances on
administrative authority.
B. Initiation
A person has standing to appeal a Zoning Administrator or Zoning Board of Appeals
decision if the person has a specific personal and legal interest in the subject of the
appeal. The applicant must provide evidence that demonstrates a unique and
unusual adverse effect the decision has or will have on the reasonable use,
enjoyment and value of the applicant’s property.
C. Authority
1. The Zoning Board of Appeals may review the determinations of the Zoning
Administrator which result from requests made pursuant to this Code. Other
decisions and actions of the Zoning Administrator cannot be appealed under this
process.
2. The City Council may review the decisions of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
D. Procedure
All applications for an appeal will be filed with the Zoning Administrator in
accordance with the requirements in Section 3.2 (Application).
1. Acceptance of Application by Zoning Administrator
Upon receipt of an application, the Zoning Administrator will review the
application for completeness. The Zoning Administrator will schedule a complete
application for a public hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals.
2. Appeal of Zoning Administrator Decision
a. The Zoning Board of Appeals must consider the application and hold a public
hearing in accordance with Section 3.4 (Public Hearing). Notice for the public
hearing must be in accordance with Section 3.3 (Public Notice).
b. After receipt of a complete application from the Zoning Administrator, the
Zoning Board of Appeals will hold a public hearing on the application and
make its determination within fourteen (14) days of the close of the public
hearing. A copy of the determination will be mailed to the applicant and
Mayor or his/her representative.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 35 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
c. The Zoning Board of Appeals may, based upon the standards of Paragraph E
(Findings of Fact) below, and so long as such action is in conformity with the
provisions of this Code, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator.
d. The Zoning Board of Appeals must provide a record of its proceedings which
includes the minutes of the meeting, its findings, and the action taken on
each matter heard by it, including its final order.
3. Appeal of Zoning Board of Appeals Decision
The applicant, Mayor or Planning Commission may file an appeal to the City
Council from any decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals. Additionally, the City
Council may, within ten (10) days of the Board’s determination, choose to review
a decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals upon a simple majority vote. The
decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals, upon appeal or review, may be
reversed by the City Council upon a vote by two-thirds (2/3) of the Council, based
upon the standards of Paragraph E (Findings of Fact) below, and so long as such
action is in conformity with the provisions of this Code, reverse or affirm, wholly or
in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
E. Findings of Fact
No determination of the Zoning Administrator or Zoning Board of Appeals may be
overturned unless it finds one (1) or both of the following:
1. The determination is not clearly supported by the text of the appropriate
section(s) of this Code.
2. The determination is contrary to the intent of this Code and the Comprehensive
Plan.
F. Limitations on Appeals
A decision of either the Zoning Administrator or Zoning Board of Appeals may only be
appealed if an application is filed within ten (10) days of that decision.
4.16 ENFORCEMENT
A. This Code is administered and enforced by the Zoning Administrator, who is
designated the enforcing officer, except Article 19, Section 19.12 which is
administered and enforced by the Public Utilities Director or designee.
1. Exception: The provisions of Article 4, Section 4.16 do not apply to enforcement
pursuant to Article 19, Section 19.12. Violations of Article 19, section 19.12 will be
enforced pursuant to the administrative procedures outlined in St. Cloud City
Ordinance Section 1100 and as referenced in Article 19, Section 19.12.
B. The owner of a building or premise in or upon which a violation of any provision of this
Code has been committed or exists, or the lessee of the entire building or the entire
premise in or upon which violation has been committed or exists, or the owner or
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 36 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
lessee of any part of the building or premise in or upon which violation has been
committed or exists, will be served with an order to remove said violation. If the
violator has not complied with said order within ten (10) days after being served, the
violator is guilty of a penal offense, which is punishable as a misdemeanor.
C. After a conviction becomes final, the continued violation of such provision
constitutes a separate offense for each day such violation continues, with the
exception of subdivision regulations. Anyone violating any of the subdivision
regulations of Article 19 (Off-Site Development Standards) of this Code is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and each month such violation continues constitutes a separate
offense.
D. An owner or occupant of any area, place, structure or other object within a duly
designated Heritage Preservation Property who violates the provisions of this Code, or
an ordinance designating a Heritage Preservation Property, is guilty of a
misdemeanor. A Heritage Preservation Property on which there exists any
remodeling, repair, construction or a building moved in violation of this Code or an
ordinance designating a Heritage Preservation Property, is hereby declared a
nuisance, and the imposition of penalties prescribed does not prevent the City from
instituting an appropriate action or proceeding to prevent an unlawful remodeling,
repair, construction, building, building moving or demolition or to restrain, correct or
abate a violation.
E. In the Floodplain Overlay District, nothing will prevent the City from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation of Floodplain Overlay
District regulations. Such actions include, but are not limited to:
1. In response to a suspected violation, the Zoning Administrator and local
government may utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it
including, but not limited to, prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact
permits, orders of corrective measures, or a request to the National Flood
Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance availability to the guilty party. The
community must act in good faith to enforce these official controls and to
correct violations to the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
2. When an ordinance violation is either discovered by or brought to the attention
of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator will immediately investigate
the situation and document the nature and extent of the violation. As soon as is
reasonably possible, this information will be submitted to the appropriate
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) Regional Office along with the community’s plan of action to
correct the violation to the degree possible.
3. The Zoning Administrator must notify the suspected party of the requirements of
this Code and all other official controls, and the nature and extent of the
suspected violation of these controls. If the structure and/or use is under
construction or development, the Zoning Administrator may order the
construction or development immediately halted until a proper permit or
approval is granted. If the construction or development is already completed,
then the Zoning Administrator may either issue an order identifying the corrective
actions that must be made within a specified time period to bring the use or
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 37 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
structure into compliance with the official controls, or notify the responsible party
to apply for an after-the-fact permit/development approval within a specified
period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days.
4.17 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS PERMIT
A. Purpose
Special Exceptions Permits are intended to foster continued investment and
maintenance of properties containing non-conforming uses by allowing orderly and
compatible expansions and/or changes in use.
B. Initiation
An owner of any property in the City or their authorized agent may request a special
exceptions permit.
C. Authority
The Zoning Board of Appeals may approve and/or amend a special exceptions
permit, if the proposed expansion or change of a non-conforming use will be
desirable and/or necessary to the public convenience or welfare, and will be
harmonious and compatible with other uses adjacent to and in the vicinity, and will
not cause undue congestion in the public street or hazard in the area, based upon
the standards of Paragraph E (Findings of Fact) below.
D. Procedure
All applications for a special exceptions permit will be filed with the Zoning
Administrator in accordance with the requirements in Section 3.2 (Application).
1. Acceptance of Application by Zoning Administrator
Upon receipt of an application, the Zoning Administrator will review the
application for completeness. Once it is determined that the application is
complete, the Zoning Administrator will schedule a public hearing before the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
2. Procedure for a Special Exceptions Permit
a. The Zoning Board of Appeals will consider the application and hold a public
hearing in accordance with Section 3.4 (Public Hearing). Notice for the public
hearing must be in accordance with Section 3.3 (Public Notice).
b. Within fourteen (14) days of the close of the public hearing, the Zoning Board
of Appeals will make its determination and mail a copy of the determination
to the applicant.
c. The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose conditions and safeguards upon a
special exceptions permit as may be necessary to prevent injurious effects on
other property in the neighborhood. Violation of the approved conditions of a
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 4:
Land Development Code Article 4 - Page 38 Land Use Applications and Enforcement
special exceptions permit is deemed a violation of this Code and the special
exceptions permit will be revoked.
3. Timeline
All application procedures must follow the timelines required by Minnesota
Statutes Section 15.99 (Time Deadline for Agency Action).
E. Findings of Fact
No special exceptions permit will be approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals unless it
has made findings of fact to support the following conclusions:
1. That the proposed use or expansion at that particular location requested is
necessary or desirable to provide a service or a facility which is in the interest of
public convenience and will contribute to the general welfare of the
neighborhood or community.
2. That such use or expansion will not, under the circumstances of the particular
case, be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons residing
or working in the vicinity, or injurious to property values or improvements in the
vicinity.
3. That such use is of the same nature or more conforming and potential adverse
effects on occupants and neighboring property will not be greater than if the
original nonconforming use continued.
4. That the proposed use or expansion will comply with the bulk regulations and
general standards specified in this Code for the district in which the proposed use
is to be located.
5. The following factors shall be weighed and evaluated by the Zoning Board of
Appeals in making a determination on a special exceptions permit:
a. The character and history of the use and of development in the surrounding
area.
b. The comparable degree of noise, vibration, dust, odor, fumes, glare, or smoke
detectable at the property line.
c. The comparative number and kinds of vehicular trips to the site.
d. The comparative amount and nature of outside storage, loading, and
parking.
e. The comparative visual appearance.
f. The comparative hours of operation.
g. The comparative effect on existing vegetation.
h. The comparative effect on water drainage.
i. Other factors which tend to reduce conflicts of incompatibility with the
character or needs of the area.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2016
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 5:
Land Development Code Article 5 - Page 1 Subdivision Application and Approval
Article 5. Subdivision Application and Approval
5.1 PURPOSE
5.2 APPLICABILITY
5.3 CONVEYANCES SUBJECT TO SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
5.4 OVERVIEW OF SUBDIVISION CLASSIFICATIONS
5.5 PROCEDURE
5.6 PRELIMINARY PLAT
5.7 FINAL PLAT
5.8 ADMINISTRATIVE PLAT
5.9 DEVIATIONS
5.10 CIC PLATS FOR LOTS HELD IN SEPARATE OWNERSHIP
5.11 ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS
5.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of the subdivision application and approval process is to provide a process
for the orderly and predictable subdivision of land within the City.
5.2 APPLICABILITY
These regulations governing plats and subdivision of lands apply within the corporate
limits of the City and as provided for in areas designated for orderly annexation, or where
otherwise provided for in Minnesota State Statute.
5.3 CONVEYANCES SUBJECT TO SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
A. The following land or parcel subdivisions or conveyances are subject to the major
subdivision requirements:
1. Any subdivision of unplatted property.
2. Lands which are to be divided into two (2) or more lots or parcels, any one of
which the resultant parcel is less than forty (40) acres in area.
3. Any unplatted land transferred from one zoning district to another at the request
of the property owner.
B. The following land or parcel subdivisions or conveyances are subject to the
administrative subdivision requirements:
1. Relocation of a common boundary.
2. Subdivision of an existing platted lot(s).
C. The provisions of this Code do not apply to conveyance and land division if the land
described:
1. Was or is a cemetery lot(s), as defined in Minnesota State Statute.
2. Resulted from a court order.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2016
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 5:
Land Development Code Article 5 - Page 2 Subdivision Application and Approval
3. Common Interest Community (CIC) Plats that do not meet the requirements of
Minnesota Statutes Chapter 505.
4. Within the Shoreland Overlay District, all subdivisions that create two (2) or more
lots or parcels that are twenty (20) acres or less in size will be processed as a plat
in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 505, and this Code. No permit
for construction of buildings or sewage treatment systems will be issued unless the
lot was approved as part of a formal subdivision.
5.4 OVERVIEW OF SUBDIVISION CLASSIFICATIONS
Before any land is subdivided, the owner of the property proposed to be subdivided, or
authorized agent, must apply for and secure approval of the proposed subdivision in
accordance with the following procedures:
A. Major Subdivision
A “major subdivision” is the division of a lot, parcel or tract of land into two (2) or
more lots, or the consolidation of two (2) or more lots. Relocation of a common
boundary or subdivision of an existing platted lot(s) is considered an administrative
subdivision as defined in Paragraph B (Administrative Subdivision) below. A major
subdivision application requires submittal of the following:
1. Sketch Plat
2. Preliminary Plat
3. Final Plat
B. Administrative Subdivision
An “administrative subdivision” involves relocation of a common boundary or
subdivision of an existing platted lot(s), and may be approved or denied by the
Zoning Administrator without review by the Planning Commission or City Council. An
administrative subdivision application requires submittal of the following:
1. Administrative Plat
5.5 PROCEDURE
No conveyance of land, which is subject to this Code, may be filed or recorded if
provisions of this Code are not met. If a parcel is transferred or conveyed contrary to the
provisions of this Code, the City may deny the issuance of building permits to any parcel.
A. Review of Plat Submittals
1. Before any plat submission is considered complete, the Zoning Administrator will,
within five (5) working days, review the plat to determine if it is complete and in
general compliance with provisions of this Article. When a plat is determined to
be incomplete or not in general compliance with provisions of this Code,
including a determination that the submission constitutes a premature plat, the
Zoning Administrator will notify the applicant within five (5) working days.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2016
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 5:
Land Development Code Article 5 - Page 3 Subdivision Application and Approval
2. Premature plats are not eligible for approval. Any proposed subdivision deemed
premature for development will not be approved by the City. The burden of
proof for items a through h listed below is the developer's responsibility. Subdivision
may be deemed premature by the Zoning Administrator if any of the
following exist:
a. Lack of adequate drainage or run-off control.
b. Lack of adequate water supply.
c. Lack of adequate streets to serve the subdivision.
d. Lack of adequate waste disposal systems.
e. Inconsistency with the Comprehensive Plan.
f. Lack of adequate public improvements.
g. Municipal utility services (water and sanitary sewer) are not available at the
boundary and have not been ordered for installation to the boundary of a
proposed residential plat. This excludes the Rural Residential District.
B. Sketch Plat
The Zoning Administrator may waive the sketch plat requirement. However, the
applicant may still elect to prepare a sketch plat to understand the procedural
requirements and minimum standards of this Article, and the requirements or
limitations imposed by other City ordinances or plans. Submission of a sketch plat,
drawn to scale, is not considered an application for subdivision.
C. Action on Preliminary Plat
1. Once an application for a preliminary plat is determined to be complete, the
Planning Commission must recommend approval or denial of the preliminary plat
within one-hundred twenty (120) days. Failure to approve or deny within the
review period is deemed approval. Upon demand of the applicant, the Zoning
Administrator may execute a certificate of approval for the preliminary plat.
2. The timeline may be extended before the end of the initial one-hundred twenty
(120) day period by providing written notice of extension to the applicant. The
notification must state the reasons for the extension and its anticipated length,
and cannot exceed sixty (60) days unless approved by the applicant.
3. After receiving the recommendation from the Planning Commission, the City
Council must approve or deny the preliminary plat.
D. Action on Final Plat
1. Once an application for a final plat has been determined to be complete, the
Planning Commission must recommend approval or denial of the final plat within
sixty (60) days by the Planning Commission. A final plat is considered complete
when the applicant has complied with all conditions and requirements of
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2016
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 5:
Land Development Code Article 5 - Page 4 Subdivision Application and Approval
preliminary approval either through assuring satisfactory performance or the
execution of appropriate agreements assuring satisfactory performance.
2. The timeline may be extended before the end of the initial sixty (60) day period
by providing written notice of the extension to the applicant. The notification
must state the reasons for the extension and its anticipated length, and cannot
exceed sixty (60) days unless approved by the applicant.
3. After receiving the recommendation from the Planning Commission, the City
Council must approve or deny the final plat. Failure to certify final approval within
sixty (60) days, if the applicant has complied with all conditions and requirements,
is deemed approval. Upon demand of the applicant, the City Clerk and the
Zoning Administrator may execute a certificate of approval for the final plat.
4. The owner of the subject property must record the final plat with the County
Recorder within one (1) year of final plat approval; otherwise, such approval will
become null and void. The City Council may confirm their prior approval without
the necessity of Planning Commission review if a plat is not recorded in one (1)
year and no changes have been made to the original approval.
E. Simultaneous Submittals
With approval of the Zoning Administrator, applicants may submit a final plat to the
Planning Commission and City Council at the same time as a preliminary plat.
F. Effect on Previously Approved Subdivision
For one (1) year following preliminary approval and for two (2) years following final
approval, unless the subdivider and the City agree otherwise, no amendment to the
Comprehensive Plan or development control will apply to or affect the use,
development density, lot size, lot layout, or dedication or platting required or
permitted by the approved application. Thereafter, pursuant to its regulations, the
City may extend the period by agreement with the subdivider and subject to all
applicable performance conditions and requirements, or it may require submission of
a new application unless substantial physical activity and investment has occurred in
reasonable reliance on the approved application and the subdivider will suffer
substantial financial damage as a consequence of a requirement to submit a new
application. In connection with a subdivision involving planned and staged
development, the City may by resolution or agreement grant the rights referred to
herein for such periods of time longer than two (2) years which it determines to be
reasonable and appropriate.
5.6 PRELIMINARY PLAT
A. Submission Requirements
The applicant must submit the following at least ten (10) working days before the next
regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting:
1. Six (6) full-size copies of the preliminary plat and one (1) eleven inch by seven
inch (11" x 17") copy.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2016
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 5:
Land Development Code Article 5 - Page 5 Subdivision Application and Approval
2. Supplemental material, necessary to address specific physical conditions of the
proposed subdivision.
3. The preliminary plat review fee as set out in the City Code.
B. Preliminary Plat Requirements
The preliminary plat must contain the following information:
1. Existing Conditions
a. Proposed name of subdivision, which name cannot duplicate the name of
any plat heretofore recorded in Benton, Sherburne and Stearns Counties.
Names must not be longer than thirty (30) characters in length, including
spaces.
b. Location by section, township and range, or other legal description.
c. Names and addresses of the owner and subdivider having control of the
lands included in the preliminary plat, the designer of the plat and the
surveyor.
d. Graphic scale, not less than one inch to one-hundred feet (1”:100’), unless a
larger scale is approved by the Zoning Administrator based upon site size.
e. North point, designated as true north.
f. Date of preparation.
g. Boundary line survey, including measured distances and angles, which must
close by latitude and departure with an error of closure not exceeding one
(1) foot in five-thousand (5,000) feet.
h. Total acreage of the preliminary plat computed to one-hundredth (1/100) of
an acre.
i. Location and names of existing or platted streets or other public ways, parks
and other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures,
easements and section and corporate lines within the tract and to a distance
of one-hundred (100) feet beyond the tract.
j. If the proposed subdivision is a rearrangement or replat of any former plat,
the lot and block arrangement of the original plat along with its original name
must be indicated by dotted or dashed lines. Any revised or vacated
roadways of the original plat must also be indicated.
k. Location and size of existing paved streets, curbs and curb cuts, driveways,
free-standing signs, railroads, sewers, water mains, storm drains, gas mains,
electric and telephone lines and utility poles, including utilities stubbed into
the property, quarries, gravel pits, culverts, or other underground facilities
within the tract and to a distance of one-hundred (100) feet beyond the
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2016
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 5:
Land Development Code Article 5 - Page 6 Subdivision Application and Approval
tract. Also, such data as grades, invert elevations and location of catch
basins, personnel access structures, and hydrants.
l. Boundary lines of adjoining platted or unplatted land and owners of all tracts
of land within one-hundred (100) feet. Adjoining addresses, as shown on the
County 911 system.
m. Complete topographic map with contour intervals not greater than two (2)
feet, water courses, marshes, wetlands, rock outcrops and other significant
features, all superimposed on at least one (1) print of the preliminary plat.
United States Geodetic Survey datum must be used for all topographic
mapping. High water elevation and date thereof if parts of plat are wet or
have been wet.
2. Proposed Features
a. Layout of streets, showing right-of-way widths and names of streets.
b. Locations and widths of alleys, pedestrian ways and utility easements.
c. Proposed centerline grades of streets and alleys, if any, and a complete set of
profiles showing both existing and proposed grade lines.
d. Street and lot grading plan.
e. Layout, lot and block numbers, and typical lot dimensions scaled to the
nearest foot. Square footage for each lot must be denoted.
f. Areas other than those mentioned above, intended to be dedicated for
public use, including area and dimensions scaled to the nearest foot.
g. Street names or numbers, in compliance with Resolution No. 2004-5-138 City
Policy No. 2004-1 (Resolution Establishing an Addressing and Roadway
Naming/Numbering Policy Within the City of St. Cloud).
C. Preliminary Plat Review Standards
1. The Planning Commission, in review of a preliminary plat, will take into consideration
the requirements of the community and the best use of the land being
subdivided. Particular attention will be given to the arrangement, location and
widths of streets, the general drainage situation, lot sizes and arrangement, as
well as master plan requirements such as parks, school sites, boulevards and
highways, but not limited to these.
2. The preliminary plat must cover all of the subdivider's contiguous land, though the
final plat may cover only a portion of the preliminary plat, provided it is in
conformance with an approved preliminary plat and other requirements herein.
3. When a tract is subdivided into larger than building lots or parcels, as set forth in
this Code, such lots or parcels must be arranged to permit the logical location
and openings of future streets and appropriate resubdivision, with provision for
adequate utility connections for such resubdivisions.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2016
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 5:
Land Development Code Article 5 - Page 7 Subdivision Application and Approval
4. Any residentially zoned lot, excluding the Rural Residential District, that is larger
than one-half (0.5) acre or has a street frontage in excess of one-hundred fifty
(150) feet that is intended to be initially served by a private septic system must
include a proposed “ghost plat1” within the preliminary plat for the lot that
depicts future subdivision of the property facilitated by the extension of municipal
utility services.
5. Subdivisions showing unplatted strips or private streets controlling access to public
ways will not be approved.
6. Deviations from standards may be approved by the Planning Commission and
the City Council when it is deemed necessary to satisfy or achieve an outcome
provided for in a City goal, policy or ordinance (e.g. affordable housing initiatives,
natural resource protection).
5.7 FINAL PLAT
A. Submission Requirements
The applicant must submit the following at least ten (10) working days before the next
regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting:
1. Six (6) full-size copies of the final plat and one (1) eleven inch by seventeen inch
(11" x 17") copy.
2. Supplemental material, necessary to address specific physical conditions of the
proposed subdivision.
3. The final plat fee as set out in the City Code.
B. Final Plat Requirements
1. The graphic scale of the plat must be one (1) inch equals one-hundred (100) feet,
unless a larger scale is approved by the Zoning Administrator based upon site size.
2. Square footage per lot, lot dimensions, delineation of wetlands, dedicated streets
and public sites and open spaces, and total platted land area must be
calculated and submitted with the final plat.
3. The name of the subdivision must be lettered in prominent print at the top of the
plat, together with the name of the City and County wherein the subdivision lies.
The name of the subdivision must be simple in nature, easy to pronounce, cannot
duplicate an exact name of any plat of record in the City, and must not exceed
thirty (30) characters in length, including spaces.
4. Notarized certification by owner, and any mortgage holder of record, of the
adoption of the plat and the dedication of public streets, sites and open spaces,
and other public areas.
1 A sketch plan of a subdivision of lots and public right-of-ways depicted with dashed or other distinguishing line
format.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2016
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 5:
Land Development Code Article 5 - Page 8 Subdivision Application and Approval
5. Certifications showing that all taxes and special assessments due on the property
have been paid in full.
6. Form of approval by the City Council as follows:
Approved by the City Council of St. Cloud, Minnesota, this ____day of ___, 20__.
Signed Attest
Mayor (or the Mayor’s designee) City Clerk
7. Form of approval of the Planning Commission as follows:
Approved by the Planning Commission of St. Cloud, Minnesota,
this ____day of ___, 20__.
Signed
Planning Director
8. Form of approval by County authorities as required by their standards.
9. All other information and requirements in accordance with Minnesota Statute
505.00.
C. Subdivision Agreement
1. When a final plat requires a subdivision agreement, before a final plat is
approved by the City Council, the owner and subdivider of the land covered by
the plat must execute and submit a subdivision agreement to the City Council
which is binding on his/her or their heirs’, personal representatives and assigns,
that he/she will cause no private construction to be made on said plat or file or
cause to be filed any application for building permits for such construction until all
improvements required under this Code have been made or arranged for in the
manner prescribed in this Code.
2. The subdivision agreement must provide that all of the required improvements will
be made in accordance with standards established by the City Engineer, and
must include adequate provisions in the form of escrow deposits or other form of
deposit acceptable to the City Council to insure that all improvements
accomplished by the applicant will comply with such standards.
3. If approved by the City Council, required improvements may be installed under
contract by the City after petition for same by the owner. The cost must be
assessed in accordance with the City assessment policy or as otherwise
determined by the City Council.
4. Approval of the final plat and subdivision agreement of the City Council is
contingent on the deposit of those sums to the City required by the agreement.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2016
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 5:
Land Development Code Article 5 - Page 9 Subdivision Application and Approval
No signatures indicating the City’s approval of the plat will be affixed to the plat
until such sums have been deposited with the City Clerk.
5. Subdivision agreement must be recorded concurrently with the final plat. All costs
associated with recording the final plat and subdivision agreement are the
responsibility of the applicant.
5.8 ADMINISTRATIVE PLAT
The procedure and submission requirements for an administrative plat are the same as
for a preliminary plat (Section 5.6), with the following exceptions:
A. Review of Administrative Plat
The Zoning Administrator will, within twenty (20) working days, review the
administrative plat to determine if it is in compliance with provisions of this Article. If
an administrative plat is determined to be incomplete or not in compliance with
provisions of this Code, then the Zoning Administrator will notify the applicant within
ten (10) working days.
B. Action on Administrative Plat
If an administrative plat is determined to be complete and in compliance with the
provisions of this Code, then it will be approved or denied by the Zoning Administrator
within ten (10) working days. The timeline may be extended before the end of the
initial ten (10) working day period by providing written notice of the extension to the
applicant. The notification must state the reasons for the extension and its
anticipated length, and cannot exceed thirty (30) working days unless approved by
the applicant.
5.9 DEVIATIONS
The Planning Commission and the City Council may acknowledge and approve
deviations from the standards as part of plat review.
5.10 CIC PLATS FOR LOTS HELD IN SEPARATE OWNERSHIP
1. A Common Interest Community (CIC) Plat is required for those lots held in separate
ownership, but considered one (1) zoning lot in order to fulfill Code requirements,
because common site elements are shared between the lots. The City is not
responsible for maintenance of perpetual rights between private owners for common
elements, such as off-street parking spaces, access drives and open space, that are
shared between lots in separate ownership. CIC plats must be prepared by a
licensed land surveyor in accordance with Minnesota Statutes 515B.2-110.
2. Prior to the date of adoption of this Code, those lots held in separate ownership, but
considered one (1) zoning lot in order to fulfill Code requirements, which were
established through the Certificate of Survey process or a cross-access agreement
are permitted to continue under such approved Certificates of Survey or previously
established agreements.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2016
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 5:
Land Development Code Article 5 - Page 10 Subdivision Application and Approval
5.11 ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS
In addition to the requirements of this Article, the following additional requirements apply
in the overlay and special purpose districts of this Ordinance.
A. Shoreland Overlay District
1. Land Suitability
Each lot created through subdivision must be suitable in its natural state for the
proposed use with minimal alteration. Suitability analysis by the City must consider
susceptibility to flooding, existence of wetlands, soil and rock formations with
severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential, steep topography,
inadequate water supply or sewage treatment capabilities, near-shore aquatic
conditions unsuitable for water-based recreation, important fish and wildlife
habitat, presence of significant historic sites, or any other feature of the natural
land likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of future residents of the
proposed subdivision or the City.
2. Consistency with Other Controls
Subdivisions must conform to all official controls of the City. A subdivision will not
be approved where a variance from one (1) or more standards would be
needed to use the lots for their intended purpose. In areas that do not already
have City sewer and water services, or that cannot be provided with City sewer
and water services as part of the platting process, a subdivision may not be
approved.
3. Notice
Copies of all notices for public hearings to consider proposed subdivisions/plats
within the Shoreland Overlay District must be sent to the Commissioner of Natural
Resources and postmarked at least ten (10) days before the hearing. A copy of
any approved subdivision/plat must be sent to the Commissioner of Natural
Resources and postmarked within ten (10) days of final action.
4. Information Requirements
Sufficient information must be submitted by the applicant to the City to make a
determination of land suitability in the Shoreland Overlay District. The following
information must be provided:
a. Topographic contours at two (2) foot intervals or less, showing limiting site
characteristics.
b. The surface water features required in Minnesota Statutes, Section 505.02,
Subdivision 1, to be shown on plats, obtained from U.S. Geological Survey
quadrangle topographic maps or more accurate sources.
c. Adequate soils information to determine suitability for building capabilities for
every lot from the most current existing sources or from field investigations
such as soil borings, percolation tests, or other methods.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2016
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 5:
Land Development Code Article 5 - Page 11 Subdivision Application and Approval
d. Information regarding adequacy of anticipated vegetation and topographic
alterations, near-shore aquatic conditions, including depths, types of bottom
sediments, and aquatic vegetation, and proposed methods for controlling
stormwater runoff and erosion, both during and after construction activities.
e. Location of one-hundred (100) year floodplain areas and floodway districts
from existing adopted maps or data.
f. A line or contour representing the ordinary high water level, the “toe” and the
“top” of bluffs, and the minimum building setback distances from the top of
the bluff and the lake or stream.
B. Scenic Rivers Overlay District
1. Land Suitability
No land may be subdivided which is held unsuitable by the City Council for the
proposed use for reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, soil and rock
formations with severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential,
unfavorable topography, inadequate water supply or sewage disposal
capabilities, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety or
welfare of the future residents of the proposed subdivision or others in the
community. The City Council, in applying the provisions of this section, will, in
writing, recite the particular facts upon which it bases its conclusions that the land
is not suitable for the proposed use and afford the subdivider an opportunity to
present evidence regarding such suitability in a public hearing, after which the
City Council may affirm, modify or withdraw its determination of unsuitability.
2. Lot Size
Lots within a plat must be of a size and shape to satisfy the minimum lot size
requirements of the Scenic Rivers Overlay District. The shape of individual lots may
render portions unusable for installing private sewage disposal systems or
providing adequate separating distances between them and water courses or
water wells. Thereafter, any part of a lot less than thirty (30) feet wide must not be
used in computing the minimum lot area.
3. Inconsistent Plats
Approval of a plat which is inconsistent with this Code is permissible only when the
detrimental impact of the inconsistency is more than overcome by other
protective characteristics of the proposal. Plats which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Code must be certified by the Commissioner of Natural
Resources in accordance with Section 4.7 (Scenic Rivers Certification of
Approval).
C. Floodplain Overlay District
1. Land Suitability
No land may be subdivided which is unsuitable for the reason of flooding,
inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. All lots within
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2016
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 5:
Land Development Code Article 5 - Page 12 Subdivision Application and Approval
the Floodplain Overlay District must contain a building site located outside of the
floodway at, or above, the regulatory flood protection elevation. All subdivisions
must have water and sewage treatment facilities that comply with the provisions
of this Code and have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual
building sites no lower than two (2) feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation. For all subdivisions in the Floodplain Overlay District, the regulatory
flood protection elevation and the required elevation of all access roads must be
clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting documents.
2. Removal of Special Flood Hazard Area Designation
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for
removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly
elevated on fill above the one-hundred (100) year flood elevation. FEMA’s
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection
standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should be
investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood
hazard area designation will be requested.
Article Last Amended: July 11, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 6:
Land Development Code Article 6 - Page 1 Zoning Districts
Article 6. Zoning Districts
6.1 PURPOSE
6.2 DISTRICT CLASSIFICATION
6.3 ZONING MAP
6.4 ANNEXATIONS
6.5 ZONING OF STREETS, ALLEYS, PUBLIC WAYS, AND RAILROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY
6.6 BOUNDARY LINES
6.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Article is to outline the different zoning districts within this Code and
introduce the Zoning Map of the City of St. Cloud.
6.2 DISTRICT CLASSIFICATION
In order to carry out the purpose and intent of this Code, the City of St. Cloud is hereby
divided into zoning districts. These districts are:
A. Agricultural
AG Agricultural District
B. Residential
RR Rural Residential District
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
R-1A Single-Family Residential District
R-2 Single-Family and Two-Family Residential District
R-3 Lodging House, and Fraternity/Sorority House Residential District
R-3A General Residential and Lodging House District
R-4 Townhouse Residential District
R-5 General Multi-Family Residential District
R-6 Multi-Family Residential District
R-7 High Rise Multi-Family Residential District
C. Commercial
C-1 Business Office District
C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District
C-3 Central Business District
C-4 Fringe Central Business District
C-5 Highway Commercial District
D. Industrial
I-1 Light Industrial District
I-2 General Industrial District
I-3 Planned Industrial District
Article Last Amended: July 11, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 6:
Land Development Code Article 6 - Page 2 Zoning Districts
E. Special Purpose
MD Medical District
PUD Planned Unit Development District
F. Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
Floodplain Overlay District
Shoreland Overlay District
Scenic Rivers Overlay District
Environmentally Sensitive Areas
6.3 ZONING MAP
The boundary of each district is indicated upon the “Zoning Map of St. Cloud” which is
made part of this Code. The “Zoning Map of St. Cloud,” referred to in this Code as the
“Zoning Map” and all notations, references, and other matters shown thereon are a part
of this Code.
6.4 ANNEXATIONS
Any territory annexed into the City will automatically, upon annexation, be classified as
AG Agricultural District. That land will be subject to the requirements of the AG
Agricultural District, unless otherwise provided for in the annexation agreement or until
the territory is rezoned.
The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by reference into Article 12, Section 12.1
of the Land Development Code may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the
corporate boundaries of the City of St. Cloud at the time of adoption of this ordinance. If
any these floodplain areas are annexed into the City of St. Cloud after the date of
adoption of this ordinance, the newly annexed floodplain lands shall be subject to the
provisions of this ordinance immediately upon the date of annexation into the City of St.
Cloud.
6.5 ZONING OF STREETS, ALLEYS, PUBLIC WAYS AND RAILROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY
All streets, alleys, public ways and railroad rights-of-way, if not specifically designated,
are the same zone as the property in the most restrictive classification immediately
abutting such alleys, streets, public ways and railroad rights-of-way. Where the centerline
of a street, alley, public way or railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the
zoning is deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such centerline.
6.6 BOUNDARY LINES
If uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any use district as shown on the zoning map,
the following rules apply:
A. Where district boundary lines are indicated as following streets, alleys, railroads or
similar rights-of-way, they will be construed as following the centerlines.
Article Last Amended: July 11, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 6:
Land Development Code Article 6 - Page 3 Zoning Districts
B. Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following lot lines or
section lines, such lines will be construed to be such boundaries.
C. Where a lot held in one (1) ownership and of record at the effective date of this
Code is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot will be construed to be
within the less restricted district, provided that this will not apply if it increases the area
of the less restrictive portion of the lot by more than twenty percent (20%).
D. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the
district or the elevation of any proposed structure or fill, a plat will be submitted with
application for a building permit.
E. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the floodplain and
floodway boundaries as shown on the official Zoning Map, the determination shall
be made by the Zoning Administrator based on the mapped boundary and actual
field conditions. Applicants have the option of appealing the Zoning Administrator’s
decision as per Article 4, Section 4.15, D. Procedure, 2. Appeal of Zoning
Administrator Decision. All decisions shall be based on elevations on the regional
(100-year) flood profile, the ground elevations that existed on the site at the time the
Community adopted its initial floodplain ordinance or on the date of the first National
Flood Insurance Program map showing the area in the floodplain if earlier, and
other technical data that is available. Persons contesting the location of floodplain
districts shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Zoning
Board of Appeals and to submit technical evidence.
Article Last Amended: July 13, 2015
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 7:
Land Development Code Article 7 - Page 1 Agricultural Districts
Article 7. Agricultural Districts
7.1 PURPOSE
7.2 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
7.3 BULK AND YARD REGULATIONS
7.4 GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY
7.1 PURPOSE OF THE AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
The purpose of the Agricultural (AG) District is to establish and preserve areas within the
City for the continuation of viable agricultural operations, preserve areas unsuitable for
use other than agriculture or open space, protect agricultural uses from untimely
encroachment by potential conflicting urban uses, protect the natural amenities of the
City from harmful exploitation, provide for very low density residential development to
preserve rural character in large areas of the community, and preserve areas that, due
to natural features and limited roads, as well as proximity to available services, are best
suited to limited development.
7.2 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
Table 7-1: Agricultural Districts Permitted and Conditional Uses lists permitted and
conditional uses for the agricultural districts. A “P” indicates that a use is considered
permitted within that district. A “C” indicates that a use is considered a conditional use in
that district and must obtain a conditional use permit as required in Section 4.3
(Conditional Use Permit). No letter (i.e., a blank space), or the absence of the use from
the table, indicates that use is not permitted within that district.
TABLE 7-1: AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
USE
AG
DISTRICT
USE STANDARDS
Agricultural Uses1 2
Agricultural Services Establishment2 C
General Farming1 2 P
Industrial Farming: Small Poultry & Animals
(Over 50 Poultry or Animals Per Acre)1 2
C See Section 14.3.M
Nursery and/or Tree Farm2 P
Raising of Livestock: Less than 10 Acres (Includes Fur-
Bearing Animals)1 2
C
Stable1 2 C
Residential Uses
Bed & Breakfast Facility2 C See Section 14.3.C
Dwelling, Single-Family Detached P See Section 14.3.H
Residential Facility: 6 or Fewer Persons P See Section 14.3.T
Institutional and Public Uses
Essential Services & Essential Service Structure P
Place of Worship C
Public Building C
Utilities C See Section 14.3.X
School C
Open Space Uses
Cemetery/Memorial Garden P
Public Park/Recreation Area, Athletic Field & Open P
Article Last Amended: July 13, 2015
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 7:
Land Development Code Article 7 - Page 2 Agricultural Districts
TABLE 7-1: AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
USE
AG
DISTRICT
USE STANDARDS
Space
Game Refuge P
Commercial Uses
Commercial Kennel2 C See Section 14.3.F
Commercial Outdoor Recreation Facility2 C
Day Care Facility: 12 or Fewer Persons2 C
Office2 C See Section 14.3.Q
Roadside Stand2 P
Veterinary Office (Large Animal)2 C
Industrial Uses
Mineral Extraction2 C
Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS)
Building Mounted P3 See Section 14.3.Y
P3 See Section 14.3.Y
FOOTNOTES TABLE 7-1
1 All properties with livestock must have a Waste Utilization Plan (according to NRCS Standard 633) that is
approved by the applicable county soil and water conservation district and comply with all MPCA
permitting requirements.
2 Maximum building area of three thousand five hundred (3,500) sq. ft. of gross floor area when a building is
within 200’ of a property line or six thousand five hundred (6,500) sq. ft. of gross floor when a building is
further than 200’ from a property line
3 WECS with a rated capacity of 5 kw or less are permitted
7.3 BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
Table 7-2: Agricultural Districts Bulk and Setback Regulations establishes bulk and setback
regulations for the agricultural districts.
TABLE 7-2: AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
Bulk and Setback Regulations AG District
BULK REQUIREMENTS
Minimum Lot Area 40 acres
Minimum Lot Width 1,320 ft
Minimum Lot Depth 300 ft
Maximum Lot Coverage 30%
Maximum FAR 0.6
Maximum Principal Building Height 35 ft
Minimum Driveway Separation
(Excluding Farm Field Approaches)
400 feet on a collector street
1,250 feet on an arterial street
Maximum Animal Density1,2
1 equine per acre
1 cattle per acre
3 swine per acre
4 cervidae per acre (e.g. deer)
5 goats and/or sheep per acre
25 large poultry per acre (e.g. turkeys, ducks,
etc.)
50 small poultry and animals per acre (e.g.
chickens, rabbits, etc.) 3
51 or more small poultry per acre requires a
conditional use permit
MINIMUM SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
Article Last Amended: July 13, 2015
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 7:
Land Development Code Article 7 - Page 3 Agricultural Districts
TABLE 7-2: AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
Bulk and Setback Regulations AG District
Minimum Front Setback 50 ft
Minimum Interior Side Setback
Residential Use – 10 ft
Agricultural or Non-Residential Use –50 ft
Minimum Street Side Setback 50 ft
Minimum Rear Setback 50 ft
FOOTNOTES TABLE 7-2
1 Animal density allowances are calculated using gross acreage of all substantially contiguous property
owned or leased by the same property owner regardless of jurisdictional boundary and rounded up to the
nearest whole number.
2 All properties with livestock must have a Waste Utilization Plan (according to NRCS Standard 633) that is
approved by the applicable county soil and water conservation district and comply with all MPCA
permitting requirements.
7.4 GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY
A. Accessory Structures and Uses
See Section 15.5 (Accessory Structures and Uses) for standards governing accessory
structures and uses.
B. Temporary Uses
See Section 14.4 (Temporary Uses) for standards governing temporary uses.
C. On-Site Development Standards
See Article 15 (On-Site Development Standards) for on-site development standards.
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading
See Article 16 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) for standards governing off-street
parking and loading.
E. Landscaping and Screening
See Article 17 (Landscaping, Buffering and Screening) for standards governing
landscaping and screening.
F. Signs
See Article 18 (Signs) for standards governing signs.
Article Last Amended: July 13, 2015
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 8:
Land Development Code Article 8 - Page 1 Residential Districts
Article 8. Residential Districts
8.1 PURPOSE
8.2 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
8.3 BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
8.4 ADDITIONAL SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
8.5 GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY
8.1 PURPOSE
A. Purpose of RR Rural Residential District
The purpose of the RR Rural Residential District is to establish and preserve areas
within the City where agriculture, very low density development or open space is a
current and proper use, but which, in the future, may gradually be required for
expansion of urban development as urban facilities and services become available,
and preserve said land in agricultural or open space usage and in large parcels until
capital funds for the extension of urban facilities and services are committed in an
adopted capital improvement program. Although the predominant use within the RR
District is intended to be agriculture, other quasi-urban uses are also permitted,
including scattered non-farm residences facilitating an orderly transition from
agricultural and rural uses to urban uses.
B. Purpose of R-1 Single-Family Residential District
The purpose of the R-1 Single-Family Residential District is to provide for and preserve
single-family residential development on larger lots within the City. The R-1 District
provides for limited non-residential uses that are compatible with surrounding
residential neighborhoods.
C. Purpose of R-1A Single-Family Residential District
The purpose of the R-1A Single-Family Residential District is to provide for and preserve
single-family residential development within the City on traditionally smaller lots. The R-
1A District provides for limited non-residential uses that are compatible with surrounding
residential neighborhoods.
D. Purpose of R-2 Single-Family and Two-Family Residential District
The purpose of the R-2 Single-Family and Two-Family Residential District is to provide for,
and preserve, two-family residential development, as well as single-family dwellings.
The R-2 District also provides for limited non-residential uses that are compatible with
surrounding residential neighborhoods.
E. Purpose of R-3 Lodging House, Fraternity and Sorority House Residential District
The purpose of the R-3 Lodging House, Fraternity and Sorority House Residential District
is to accommodate multi-tenant residences in those areas, such as the university
neighborhood, where there is demand for these housing types, as well as singlefamily
and two-family residential development. The R-3 District also provides for limited
non-residential uses that are compatible with surrounding residential neighborhoods.
Article Last Amended: July 13, 2015
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 8:
Land Development Code Article 8 - Page 2 Residential Districts
F. R-3A General Residential and Lodging House District
The purpose of the R-3A General Residential and Lodging House District is to
accommodate multi-tenant residences, as well as single-family, two-family and multifamily
residential development. The R-3A District also provides for limited nonresidential
uses that are compatible with surrounding residential neighborhoods.
G. Purpose of R-4 Townhouse Residential District
The purpose of the R-4 Townhouse Residential District is to provide for, and preserve,
single-family, two-family and townhouse residential development, as well as low-rise
multi-family dwellings. The R-4 District also provides for limited non-residential uses that
are compatible with surrounding residential neighborhoods.
H. Purpose of R-5 General Multi-Family Residential District
The purpose of R-5 Multi-Family Residential District is to provide for, and preserve, quality
high density residential development including multi-family dwellings up to four (4)
stories. The R-5 District also provides for limited non-residential uses that are compatible
with surrounding residential neighborhoods.
I. Purpose of R-6 Multi-Family Residential District
The purpose of the R-6 Multi-Family Residential District is to create a higher density
environment of single-family homes, two-family dwellings, townhomes and multi-family
dwellings, including limited multi-tenant housing like dormitories. Limited non-residential
uses that are compatible with surrounding residential neighborhoods may be
permitted.
J. Purpose of R-7 High Rise Multi-Family Residential District
The purpose of the R-7 High-Rise Multi-Family Residential District is to accommodate the
highest density residential environment of multi-family dwellings, of significant height,
within the City. Limited non-residential uses that are compatible with surrounding
residential neighborhoods may be permitted.
8.2 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
Table 8-1: Residential Districts Permitted and Conditional Uses lists permitted and
conditional uses for the residential districts. A “P” indicates that a use is considered
permitted within that district. A “C” indicates that a use is considered a conditional use in
that district and must obtain a conditional use permit as required in Section 4.3
(Conditional Use Permit). No letter (i.e., a blank space), or the absence of the use from
the table, indicates that use is not permitted within that district.
TABLE 8-1: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
USES
DISTRICTS
RR R-1
R-
1A
R-2 R-3
R-
3A
R-4 R-5 R-6 R-7
USE
STANDARD
Agricultural Uses1 5 RR R-1
R-
1A
R-2 R-3
R-
3A
R-4 R-5 R-6 R-7
Agricultural Service C
Article Last Amended: July 13, 2015
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 8:
Land Development Code Article 8 - Page 3 Residential Districts
TABLE 8-1: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
USES
DISTRICTS
RR R-1
R-
1A
R-2 R-3
R-
3A
R-4 R-5 R-6 R-7
USE
STANDARD
Establishment 5
Crop, Vegetable and/or
Flower Farm: Over 100
acres2
P P P
Hobby Farm1 5 P
Nursery and/or Tree Farm 5 P
Raising of Livestock
(Excludes Fur-Bearing
Animals) 1 5
C
Stable1 5 C
Residential Uses RR R-1
R-
1A
R-2 R-3
R-
3A
R-4 R-5 R-6 R-7
Assisted Living Facility P P P P
Bed & Breakfast Facility C6 C C C C C C C C C
See Section
14.3.C
Convalescent Home P
Dormitory P P
Dwelling, Multi-Family P P P P P P
Dwelling, Single-Family
Detached
P P P P P P P P P P
See Section
14.3.H
Dwelling, Townhouse P P P P
See Section
14.3.H
Dwelling, Two-Family P P P P P P P
See Section
14.3.H
Fraternity/Sorority House P P
Independent Living Facility P P P P
Lodging House P P
See Section
14.3.N
Manufactured Housing
Park
C C C C C C C C
See Section
14.3.O
Nursing Home P
Residential Facility: 6 or
Fewer Persons
P P P P P P P P P P
Residential Facility: 7 to 16
Persons
P P P P P P P
See Section
14.3.T
Residential Facility: 16 or
More Persons
C C C C C C C
See Section
14.3.T
Institutional and Public
Uses
RR R-1
R-
1A
R-2 R-3
R-
3A
R-4 R-5 R-6 R-7
Club, University-Related:
Social or Religious
P P
Community Center C C C C C C C
Essential Services &
Essential Service Structure
P P P P P P P P P P
Place of Worship P C P P P P P P P P
See Section
14.3.S
Public Building P P P P P P P P P P
Utilities C C C C C C C C C C
See Section
14.3.X
School C C P P P P P P P P
Temporary Shelter Facility P3 P3 P3 P P3 P P P P
See Section
14.3.V
Article Last Amended: July 13, 2015
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 8:
Land Development Code Article 8 - Page 4 Residential Districts
TABLE 8-1: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
USES
DISTRICTS
RR R-1
R-
1A
R-2 R-3
R-
3A
R-4 R-5 R-6 R-7
USE
STANDARD
University P
Open Space Uses RR R-1
R-
1A
R-2 R-3
R-
3A
R-4 R-5 R-6 R-7
Cemetery/Memorial
Garden
P C C C C C C C C
See Section
14.3.E
Driving Range C C C C C C C
Golf Course C4 C C C C C C
Public Park/Recreation
Area, Athletic Field &
Open Space –
Owned/Operated by
Church Group or
Homeowner’s Association
C C C C C C C C C C
Public Park/Recreation
Area, Athletic Field &
Open Space
P P P P P P P P P P
Tennis Club C C C C C C C
Commercial Uses RR R-1
R-
1A
R-2 R-3
R-
3A
R-4 R-5 R-6 R-7
Activity Center C C C C C C
Commercial Kennel 5 C
See Section
14.3.F
Commercial Outdoor
Recreation Facility 5 C
Day Care Facility: 12 or
Fewer Persons
P5 P P P P P P P P P
Day Care Facility: 13 or
More Persons
C C C C C C
On-Site Rental Office P P P P P P
See Section
14.3.R
Roadside Stand: Sale of
Excess Garden Produce 5 C
Veterinary Establishment
(Large Animal) 5 C
Transportation Uses RR R-1
R-
1A
R-2 R-3
R-
3A
R-4 R-5 R-6 R-7
Airport C C C C C C C
Heliport C C C C C C C
Industrial Uses RR R-1
R-
1A
R-2 R-3
R-
3A
R-4 R-5 R-6 R-7
Mineral Extraction 5 C
Wind Energy Conversion
Systems
RR R-1
R-
1A
R-2 R-3
R-
3A
R-4 R-5 R-6 R-7
Building Mounted P/C7 C6 C6 C6 C6 C6 P/C7 P/C7 P/C7 P/C7 See Section
14.3.Y
Freestanding P/C7 C6 C6 C6 C6 C6 C6 C6 C6 C6 See Section
14.3.Y
FOOTNOTES TABLE 8-11 All properties with livestock must have a Waste Utilization Plan (according to NRCS
Standard 633) approved by the applicable county soil and water conservation district and comply with all
MPCA permitting requirements.
Article Last Amended: July 13, 2015
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 8:
Land Development Code Article 8 - Page 5 Residential Districts
2 Subject to species approved by City Park Department. The sale or display of a product or commodity that
is readily visible and accessible by non-residents of the property or building are prohibited.
3 In the R-1, R-1A and R-3A, temporary shelter facilities are limited to serving 4 or fewer persons. In the R-2
District, temporary shelter facilities are limited to serving 6 or fewer persons.
4 In the R-1 District, a golf course may include an accessory miniature golf course. Unless noted, miniature
golf courses are not permitted as part of a golf course.
5 Maximum building area of three thousand (3,000) square feet of gross floor area.
6Allowed only on institutional properties with a Conditional Use Permit. Systems may not exceed 10 kw.
7WECS with a rated capacity of 1.8 kw or less are permitted on parcels occupied by a residential or
institutional use. WECS between 1.9 kw and 10 kw are allowed on institutional properties with a Conditional
Use Permit.
8.3 BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
Table 8-2: Residential Districts Bulk and Setback Regulations establishes bulk and setback
regulations for the residential districts.
TABLE 8-2: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
BULK AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
DISTRICT
RR
BULK REQUIREMENTS
Minimum Lot Area 10 acres
Minimum Lot Width 300 ft
Minimum Lot Depth 300 ft
Maximum Lot Coverage 30%
Maximum FAR 0.6
Maximum Building Height 35 ft
Minimum Driveway Separation
(excluding farm field approaches)
300 feet on collector or arterial street
Maximum Animal Density1,2
.5 equine per acre
.5 cattle per acre
1.5 swine per acre
2 cervidae per acre (e.g. deer)
2.5 goats and/or sheep per acre
12.5 large poultry per acre (e.g. turkeys, ducks, etc.)
25 small poultry and animals per acre (e.g. chickens,
rabbits, etc.)
SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
Front Setback 30 ft
Interior Side Setback
Residential use: 10 ft
Non-Residential Use: 30 ft
Street Side Setback 30 ft
Rear Setback 30 ft
TABLE 8-2: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
BULK AND SETBACK
REQUIREMENTS
DISTRICT
R-1 R-1A
BULK REQUIREMENTS
Minimum Lot Area
Single-Family & Day Care Facility: 9,000sf
Place of Worship & School: 22,000sf
Public Building & Utilities: 40,000sf
Single-Family: 6,000sf
Day Care Facility, Residential Facility &
Temporary Shelter Facility: 8,000sf
Place of Worship & School: 22,000sf
Public Building & Community Center:
40,000sf
Article Last Amended: July 13, 2015
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 8:
Land Development Code Article 8 - Page 6 Residential Districts
TABLE 8-2: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
BULK AND SETBACK
REQUIREMENTS
DISTRICT
R-1 R-1A
Minimum Lot Width
Single-Family & Day Care Facility:
Interior Lot – 75 ft
Corner Lot – 85 ft
Place of Worship & School: 100 ft
Public Building & Public/Private Utility: 150 ft
Single-Family, Day Care Facility,
Residential Facility & Temporary Shelter
Facility:
Interior Lot – 50 ft
Corner Lot – 60 ft
Place of Worship, School, Public Building &
Community Center: 100 ft
Minimum Lot Depth
Single-Family, Day Care Facility & School:
120 ft
Single-Family, Day Care Facility,
Residential Facility, Temporary Shelter
Facility & School: 120 ft
Maximum Lot Coverage 35% 35%
Minimum Open Space
33% total open space on zoning lot with
50% of front setback & 25% of rear setback
33% total open space on zoning lot with
50% of front setback & 25% of rear setback
Maximum FAR 0.6 Non-Residential Use: 0.6
Maximum Building Height 35 ft 35 ft
Design Guidelines Section 13.1 Section 13.1
SETBACK REQUIREMENTS – ADDITIONAL SETBACK REQUIREMENTS IN SECTION 8.4
Front Setback3
Single-Family: 25 ft
Day Care Facility, Residential Facility,
Temporary Shelter Facility, Place of Worship
& School: 35 ft
Public Building4 & Utilities: 50 ft
Single-Family, Day Care Facility,
Residential Facility & Temporary Shelter
Facility: 25 ft
School & Place of Worship: 35 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Interior Side Setback3
Single-Family, Day Care Facility, Residential
Facility & Temporary Shelter Facility: 10 ft
Place of Worship & School: 20 ft
Public Building4: 50 ft
Utilities: 100 ft
Single-Family: 5 ft
Day Care Facility, Residential Facility &
Temporary Shelter Facility: 10 ft
Place of Worship & School: 20 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Street Side Setback3
Single-Family, Day Care Facility, Residential
Facility & Temporary Shelter Facility: 15 ft
Place of Worship & School: 25 ft
Public Building4 & Utilities: 50 ft
Single-Family: 10 ft
Day Care Facility, Residential Facility &
Temporary Shelter Facility: 15 ft
Place of Worship & School: 25 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Rear Setback3
Single-Family: 35 ft or 20% of lot depth,
whichever is less
Day Care Facility, Residential Facility,
Temporary Shelter Facility, Place of Worship
& School: 35 ft
Public Building4: 50 ft
Utilities: 100 ft
Single-Family: 35 ft or 20% of lot depth,
whichever is less
Day Care Facility, Residential Facility,
Temporary Shelter Facility, Place of
Worship & School: 35 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
TABLE 8-2: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
BULK AND SETBACK
REQUIREMENTS
DISTRICT
R-2 R-3
BULK REQUIREMENTS
Minimum Lot Area
Single-Family: 6,000sf
Two-Family, Day Care Facility, Residential
Facility & Temporary Shelter Facility: 8,000sf
Single-Family: 6,000sf
Two-Family: 7,200sf
Lodging House, Fraternity or Sorority House:
Article Last Amended: July 13, 2015
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 8:
Land Development Code Article 8 - Page 7 Residential Districts
TABLE 8-2: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
BULK AND SETBACK
REQUIREMENTS
DISTRICT
R-2 R-3
Place of Worship & School: 22,000sf
Public Building & Community Center:
40,000sf
500sf per room but no less than 6,000sf
Dormitory: 600sf per room but no less than
16,000sf
Multi-Family: 2,000sf per dwelling unit but no
less than 10,000sf
Community Center: 40,000sf
Place of Worship & School: 22,000sf
Public Building: 40,000sf
Day Care Facility & Residential Facility:
7,200sf
Temporary Shelter Facility: 400sf per bed but
no less than 7,200sf
Minimum Floor Area
(Dwelling Units)
Efficiency Dwelling Unit: 400sf
1-Bedroom: 540sf
2-Bedroom: 750sf
3+ Bedrooms: 750sf for first 2 bedrooms +
100sf for each additional bedroom
Minimum Lot Width
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care Facility,
Residential Facility & Temporary Shelter
Facility:
Interior Lot – 50 ft
Corner Lot – 60 ft
Place of Worship, School, Public Building &
Community Center: 100 ft
Single-Family, Two-Family, Multi-Family,
Lodging House, Fraternity or Sorority House,
Day Care Facility, Residential Facility &
Temporary Shelter Facility:
Interior Lot – 50 ft
Corner Lot – 55 ft
Dormitory, Community Center, Place of
Worship, School & Public Building: 100 ft
Minimum Lot Depth
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care Facility,
Residential Facility, Temporary Shelter
Facility & School: 120 ft
Single-Family, Two-Family, Multi-Family,
Lodging House, Fraternity or Sorority House,
Day Care Facility, Residential Facility &
Temporary Shelter Facility: 120 ft
Maximum Lot Coverage 30% 30%
Minimum Open Space
33% total open space on zoning lot with
50% of front setback & 25% of rear setback
33% total open space on zoning lot with 50%
of front setback & 25% of rear setback
Maximum FAR Non-Residential Use: 0.6 1.0
Minimum Building
Separation
40 ft between principal buildings
Maximum Building Height 35 ft 35 ft
Design Guidelines Section 13.1 See Section 13.1
SETBACK REQUIREMENTS – ADDITIONAL SETBACK REQUIREMENTS IN SECTION 8.4
Front Setback3
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care Facility,
Residential Facility & Temporary Shelter
Facility: 25 ft
Place of Worship & School: 35 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Single-Family, Two-Family, Multi-Family,
Lodging House, Fraternity or Sorority House,
Day Care Facility, Residential Facility, &
Temporary Shelter Facility: 25 ft
Dormitory, Place of Worship & School: 35 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Interior Side Setback3
Single-Family: 5 ft
Two-Family, Day Care Facility, Residential
Facility & Temporary Shelter Facility: 10 ft
Place of Worship & School: 20 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care Facility,
Residential Facility & Temporary Shelter
Facility: 10 ft
Multi-Family, Lodging House, Fraternity or
Sorority House, Dormitory, Place of Worship &
School: 20 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Article Last Amended: July 13, 2015
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 8:
Land Development Code Article 8 - Page 8 Residential Districts
TABLE 8-2: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
BULK AND SETBACK
REQUIREMENTS
DISTRICT
R-2 R-3
Street Side Setback3
Single-Family: 10 ft
Two-Family, Day Care Facility, Residential
Facility & Temporary Shelter Facility: 15 ft
Place of Worship & School: 25 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care Facility,
Residential Facility & Temporary Shelter
Facility: 15 ft
Multi-Family, Lodging House, Fraternity or
Sorority House, Place of Worship & School: 25
ft
Dormitory: 30 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Rear Setback3
Single-Family: 35 ft or 20% of lot depth,
whichever is less
Two-Family, Day Care Facility, Residential
Facility, Temporary Shelter Facility, Place of
Worship & School: 35 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care Facility,
Residential Facility, Temporary Shelter Facility
& Place of Worship: 35 ft
Multi-Family, Lodging House, Fraternity or
Sorority House, Place of Worship, School &
Dormitory: 40 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
TABLE 8-2: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
BULK AND SETBACK
REQUIREMENTS
DISTRICT
R-3A R-4
BULK REQUIREMENTS
Minimum Lot Area
Single-Family: 6,000sf
Two-Family: 7,200sf
Lodging House, Fraternity or Sorority House:
700sf per room but no less than 6,000sf
Multi-Family: 2,800sf per dwelling unit but no
less than 10,000sf
Place of Worship & School: 22,000sf
Public Building: 40,000sf
Day Care Facility & Residential Facility:
7,200sf
Temporary Shelter Facility: 800sf per bed
but no less than 7,200sf
Single-Family: 6,000sf
Two-Family, Day Care Facility & Residential
Facility: 8,000sf
Townhouse & Multi-Family, Assisted Living
Facility & Independent Living Facility:
3,600sf per dwelling unit but no less than
12,000sf
Community Center & Public Building:
40,000sf
Place of Worship & School: 22,000sf
Temporary Shelter Facility: 800sf per bed
but no less than 8,000sf
Minimum Floor Area
(Dwelling Units)
Efficiency Dwelling Unit: 400sf
1-Bedroom: 540sf
2-Bedroom: 750sf
3+ Bedrooms: 750sf for first 2 bedrooms +
100sf for each additional bedroom
Efficiency Dwelling Unit: 400sf
1-Bedroom: 540sf
2-Bedroom: 750sf
3+ Bedrooms: 750sf for first 2 bedrooms +
100sf for each additional bedroom
Minimum Lot Width
Single-Family, Two-Family, Multi-Family,
Lodging House, Fraternity or Sorority House,
Day Care Facility, Residential Facility &
Temporary Shelter Facility:
Interior Lot – 50 ft
Corner Lot – 55 ft
Place of Worship, School & Public Building:
100 ft
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care
Facility, Residential Facility & Temporary
Shelter Facility:
Interior Lot – 50 ft
Corner Lot – 60 ft
Townhouse & Multi-Family, Assisted Living
Facility, Independent Living Facility: 75 ft
Community Center, Place of Worship,
School & Public Building: 100 ft
Minimum Lot Depth Single-Family, Two-Family, Multi-Family, Single-Family, Two-Family, Multi-Family,
Article Last Amended: July 13, 2015
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 8:
Land Development Code Article 8 - Page 9 Residential Districts
TABLE 8-2: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
BULK AND SETBACK
REQUIREMENTS
DISTRICT
R-3A R-4
Lodging House, Fraternity or Sorority House,
Day Care Facility, Residential Facility &
Temporary Shelter Facility: 120 ft
Townhouse, Assisted Living Facility,
Independent Living Facility, Day Care
Facility, Residential Facility, Temporary
Shelter Facility & School: 120 ft
Maximum Lot Coverage 30% 30%
Minimum Open Space
33% total open space on zoning lot with
50% of front setback & 25% of rear setback
33% total open space on zoning lot with
50% of front setback & 25% of rear setback
Maximum FAR 0.7 0.6
Minimum Building
Separation
40 ft between principal buildings
40 ft between principal buildings on the
same zoning lot
10 ft between townhouses on the same
zoning lot
Maximum Building Height 35 ft 35 ft
Design Guidelines See Section 13.1 See Section 13.1
SETBACK REQUIREMENTS – ADDITIONAL SETBACK REQUIREMENTS IN SECTION 8.4
Front Setback3
Single-Family, Two-Family, Multi-Family,
Lodging House5, Fraternity or Sorority
House5, Day Care Facility, Residential
Facility & Temporary Shelter Facility: 25 ft
Place of Worship & School: 35 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Single-Family, Two-Family, Townhouse,
Multi-Family, Assisted Living Facility,
Independent Living Facility, Day Care
Facility, Residential Facility, Temporary
Shelter Facility, Place of Worship & School:
35 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Interior Side Setback3
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care Facility,
Residential Facility & Temporary Shelter
Facility: 10 ft
Multi-Family, Lodging House5, Fraternity or
Sorority House5, Place of Worship & School:
20 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care
Facility, Residential Facility & Temporary
Shelter Facility: 10 ft
Multi-Family, Townhouse, Assisted Living
Facility, Independent Living Facility, Place
of Worship & School: 20 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Street Side Setback3
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care Facility,
Residential Facility & Temporary Shelter
Facility: 15 ft
Multi-Family, Lodging House5, Fraternity or
Sorority House5, Place of Worship & School:
25 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care,
Residential Facility & Temporary Shelter
Facility: 15 ft
Multi-Family & Townhouse, Assisted Living
Facility, Independent Living Facility: 30 ft
Place of Worship & School: 25 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Rear Setback3
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care Facility,
Residential Facility, Temporary Shelter
Facility & Place of Worship: 35 ft
Multi-Family, Lodging House5, Fraternity or
Sorority House5, Place of Worship & School:
40 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care
Facility, Residential Facility, Temporary
Shelter Facility, Place of Worship & School:
35 ft
Multi-Family & Townhouse, Assisted Living
Facility, Independent Living Facility: 40 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
TABLE 8-2: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
BULK AND SETBACK
REQUIREMENTS
DISTRICT
R-5 R-6
BULK REQUIREMENTS
Minimum Lot Area
Single-Family: 6,000sf
Two-Family, Day Care Facility & Residential
Single-Family: 6,000sf
Two-Family, Day Care Facility & Residential
Article Last Amended: July 13, 2015
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 8:
Land Development Code Article 8 - Page 10 Residential Districts
TABLE 8-2: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
BULK AND SETBACK
REQUIREMENTS
DISTRICT
R-5 R-6
Facility: 8,000sf
Townhouse, Assisted Living Facility,
Independent Living Facility: 2,800sf per
dwelling unit but no less than 12,000sf
Multi-Family: 2,000sf per dwelling unit but no
less than 10,000sf
Community Center & Public Building:
40,000sf
Place of Worship & School: 22,000sf
Temporary Shelter Facility: 400sf per bed
but no less than 8,000sf
Facility: 8,000sf
Townhouse, Assisted Living Facility,
Independent Living Facility: 2,800sf per
dwelling unit but no less than 12,000sf
Multi-Family: 2,000sf per dwelling unit but
no less than 10,000sf
Dormitory, Nursing Home & Convalescent
Home: 620sf per dwelling unit but no less
than 16,000sf
Community Center & Public Building:
40,000sf
Place of Worship & School: 22,000sf
Temporary Shelter Facility: 400sf per bed
but no less than 8,000sf
Minimum Floor Area
(Dwelling Units)
Efficiency Dwelling Unit: 400sf
1-Bedroom: 540sf
2-Bedroom: 750sf
3+ Bedrooms: 750sf for first 2 bedrooms +
100sf for each additional bedroom
Efficiency Dwelling Unit: 400sf
1-Bedroom: 540sf
2-Bedroom: 750sf
3+ Bedrooms: 750sf for first 2 bedrooms +
100sf for each additional bedroom
Minimum Lot Width
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care Facility,
Residential Facility & Temporary Shelter
Facility:
Interior Lot – 50 ft
Corner Lot – 60 ft
Townhouse, Multi-Family, Assisted Living
Facility, Independent Living Facility: 75 ft
Community Center, Place of Worship,
School & Public Building: 100 ft
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care
Facility, Residential Facility & Temporary
Shelter Facility:
Interior Lot – 50 ft
Corner Lot – 60 ft
Townhouse, Multi-Family, Assisted Living
Facility, Independent Living Facility,
Dormitory, Nursing Home & Convalescent
Home: 75 ft
Community Center, Place of Worship,
School & Public Building: 100 ft
Minimum Lot Depth
Single-Family, Two-Family, Multi-Family,
Townhouse, Assisted Living Facility,
Independent Living Facility, Day Care
Facility, Residential Facility, Temporary
Shelter Facility & School: 120 ft
Single-Family, Two-Family, Multi-Family,
Townhouse, Assisted Living Facility,
Independent Living Facility, Day Care
Facility, Residential Facility, Temporary
Shelter Facility & School: 120 ft
Maximum Lot Coverage 30% 40%
Minimum Open Space
33% total open space on zoning lot with
50% of front setback & 25% of rear setback
33% total open space on zoning lot with
50% of front setback & 25% of rear setback
Maximum FAR 0.7 1.5
Minimum Building
Separation
40 ft between principal buildings
10 ft between townhouses
40 ft between principal buildings
10 ft between townhouses
Maximum Building Height 45 ft 45 ft
Design Guidelines See Section 13.1 See Section 13.1
SETBACK REQUIREMENTS – ADDITIONAL SETBACK REQUIREMENTS IN SECTION 8.4
Front Setback3
Single-Family, Two-Family, Townhouse,
Multi-Family, Assisted Living Facility,
Independent Living Facility, Day Care
Facility, Residential Facility, Temporary
Shelter Facility, Place of Worship & School:
35 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Single-Family, Two-Family, Townhouse,
Multi-Family, Assisted Living Facility,
Independent Living Facility, Dormitory,
Nursing Home, Convalescent Home, Day
Care Facility, Residential Facility,
Temporary Shelter Facility, Place of
Worship & School: 35 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Article Last Amended: July 13, 2015
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 8:
Land Development Code Article 8 - Page 11 Residential Districts
TABLE 8-2: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
BULK AND SETBACK
REQUIREMENTS
DISTRICT
R-5 R-6
SETBACK REQUIREMENTS – ADDITIONAL SETBACK REQUIREMENTS IN SECTION 8.4
Interior Side Setback3
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care Facility,
Residential Facility & Temporary Shelter
Facility: 10 ft
Multi-Family, Townhouse, Assisted Living
Facility, Independent Living Facility, Place
of Worship & School: 20 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care
Facility, Residential Facility & Temporary
Shelter Facility: 10 ft
Multi-Family, Townhouse, Assisted Living
Facility, Independent Living Facility,
Dormitory, Nursing Home, Convalescent
Home, Place of Worship & School: 20 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Street Side Setback3
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care,
Residential Facility & Temporary Shelter
Facility: 15 ft
Multi-Family, Townhouse, Assisted Living
Facility, Independent Living Facility: 30 ft
Place of Worship & School: 25 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care
Facility, Residential Facility & Temporary
Shelter Facility: 15 ft
Multi-Family, Townhouse, Assisted Living
Facility, Independent Living Facility,
Dormitory, Nursing Home, Convalescent
Home, Place of Worship & School: 30 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Rear Setback3
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care Facility,
Residential Facility, Temporary Shelter
Facility, Place of Worship & School: 35 ft
Multi-Family, Townhouse, Assisted Living
Facility, Independent Living Facility: 40 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care
Facility, Residential Facility, Temporary
Shelter Facility, Place of Worship & School:
35 ft
Multi-Family, Townhouse, Assisted Living
Facility, Independent Living Facility,
Dormitory, Nursing Home & Convalescent
Home: 40 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
TABLE 8-2: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
BULK AND SETBACK
REQUIREMENTS
DISTRICT
R-7
BULK REQUIREMENTS
Minimum Lot Area
Single-Family: 6,000sf
Two-Family, Day Care Facility & Residential Facility: 8,000sf
Townhouse, Assisted Living Facility, Independent Living Facility: 2,100sf per
dwelling unit but no less than 12,000sf
Multi-Family: 1,500sf per dwelling unit but no less than 10,000sf
Community Center & Public Building: 40,000sf
Place of Worship & School: 22,000sf
Temporary Shelter Facility: 400sf per bed but no less than 8,000sf
Minimum Floor Area
(Dwelling Units)
Efficiency Dwelling Unit: 400sf
1-Bedroom: 540sf
2-Bedroom: 750sf
3+ Bedrooms: 750sf for first 2 bedrooms + 100sf for each additional bedroom
Minimum Lot Width
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care Facility, Residential Facility & Temporary
Shelter Facility:
Interior Lot – 50 ft
Corner Lot – 60 ft
Townhouse, Multi-Family, Assisted Living Facility, Independent Living Facility: 75 ft
Article Last Amended: July 13, 2015
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 8:
Land Development Code Article 8 - Page 12 Residential Districts
TABLE 8-2: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
BULK AND SETBACK
REQUIREMENTS
DISTRICT
R-7
Community Center, Place of Worship, School & Public Building: 100 ft
Minimum Lot Depth
Single-Family, Two-Family, Multi-Family, Townhouse, Assisted Living Facility,
Independent Living Facility, Day Care Facility, Residential Facility, Temporary
Shelter Facility & School: 120 ft
Maximum Lot Coverage 40%
Minimum Open Space
33% total open space on zoning lot with 50% of front setback & 25% of rear
setback
Maximum FAR 3.5
Minimum Building
Separation
40 ft between principal buildings
10 ft between townhouses
Maximum Building Height 70 ft
Design Guidelines See Section 13.1
SETBACK REQUIREMENTS – ADDITIONAL SETBACK REQUIREMENTS IN SECTION 8.4
Front Setback3
Single-Family, Two-Family, Townhouse, Multi-Family, Assisted Living Facility,
Independent Living Facility, Day Care Facility, Residential Facility, Temporary
Shelter Facility, Place of Worship & School: 35 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Interior Side Setback3
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care Facility, Residential Facility & Temporary
Shelter Facility: 10 ft
Multi-Family, Townhouse, Assisted Living Facility, Independent Living Facility, Place
of Worship & School: 20 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Street Side Setback3
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care Facility, Residential Facility & Temporary
Shelter Facility: 15 ft
Multi-Family, Townhouse, Assisted Living Facility, Independent Living Facility: 30 ft
Place of Worship & School: 25 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
Rear Setback3
Single-Family, Two-Family, Day Care Facility, Residential Facility, Temporary Shelter
Facility, Place of Worship & School: 35 ft
Multi-Family, Townhouse, Assisted Living Facility, Independent Living Facility: 40 ft
Other Uses: 50 ft
FOOTNOTES TABLE 8-2
1 Animal density allowances are calculated using gross acreage of all substantially contiguous property
owned or leased by the same property owner regardless of jurisdictional boundary and rounded up to the
nearest whole number.
2 All properties with livestock must have a Waste Utilization Plan (according to NRCS Standard 633) that is
approved by the applicable county soil and water conservation district and comply with all MPCA
permitting requirements.
3 Setbacks in the residential districts are subject to the requirements of Section 8.4.
4 Includes civic and cultural buildings.
5 Principal structures containing a lodging house and fraternity or sorority houses constructed prior to July 1,
1990 are permitted to use the existing setbacks. Any addition must comply with the setback requirements
of Table 8-2.
8.4 ADDITIONAL SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
A. Front Setback
1. When more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the blockface on the side of the
street between intersections is occupied by structures having setbacks less than
Article Last Amended: July 13, 2015
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 8:
Land Development Code Article 8 - Page 13 Residential Districts
the minimum setback required by this Code, the minimum required setback for all
new or relocated structures is the average of all existing buildings on the
blockface. See Figure 8-1: Front Setback Averaging.
FIGURE 8-1: FRONT SETBACK AVERAGING
2. For new structures, when there is an established setback different from the
minimum required setback, and there are existing buildings on both sides, the
front setback will be no greater than that which would be established by
connecting a straight line between the forward-most portions of the adjacent
building on either side. This provision does not apply to multi-family dwellings,
lodging houses, and fraternity and sorority houses in the R-3 District. See Figure 8-2:
Established Front Setback.
FIGURE 8-2: ESTABLISHED FRONT SETBACK
B. Street Side Setback
1. When there is an adjoining lot facing onto the side street, the side street setback
must be increased from the required minimum setback to that of the required
front setback (See Figure 8-3: Street Side Setback – Reverse Corner Lot).
Article Last Amended: July 13, 2015
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 8:
Land Development Code Article 8 - Page 14 Residential Districts
FIGURE 8-3: STREET SIDE SETBACK – REVERSE CORNER LOT
2. In residential districts, where a garage fronts onto a side street, the minimum
setback must be twenty (20) feet. (See Figure 8-4: Street Side Setback – Side
Street Garage Access)
FIGURE 8-4: STREET SIDE SETBACK – SIDE STREET GARAGE ACCESS
C. Interior Side Setback
1. Substandard Lot of Record
For a substandard lot of record with a single-family or two-family dwelling, the
minimum interior side setback may be reduced to twenty percent (20%) of the lot
width, except for single-family dwellings in the R-2 District where the interior side
yard setback must be a minimum of five (5) feet. However, in no case, the interior
Article Last Amended: July 13, 2015
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 8:
Land Development Code Article 8 - Page 15 Residential Districts
side setback must be no less than five (5) feet and the street side setback must
be no less than ten (10) feet.
2. Building Height Setback
If the structure is greater than seventeen (17) feet in height, the interior side
setback requires an additional foot of setback for each two (2) feet of structure
height over seventeen (17) feet. In the case where a lot is occupied by a singlefamily
or two-family dwelling with a side yard setback less than what is required in
this section, the existing dwelling unit structure establishes the side yard setback,
except, in no case, the interior side setback must be no less than five (5) feet.
D. Rear Setback
1. Substandard Lot of Record
Where a lot of record has less than the minimum depth required, thirty-three
percent (33%) of the total lot depth is required as rear yard.
2. Building Height Setback
In such case where a multi-family structure exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in height,
an additional rear setback of one-half (0.5) foot is required for each foot of
vertical building height over thirty-five (35) feet.
E. Pipeline Setback
1. The purpose of this provision is to increase public safety by requiring that new
development be set back from pipeline locations. This requirement applies to
new residential and other development. It does not apply to development that
has occurred or for which development permits have been issued before the
effective date of this requirement.
2. Buildings and places of assembly may not be constructed closer to the pipeline
than the boundary of the pipeline easement.
8.5 GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY
A. Accessory Structures and Uses
See Section 15.5 (Accessory Structures and Uses) for standards governing accessory
structures and uses.
B. Temporary Uses
See Section 14.4 (Temporary Uses) for standards governing temporary uses.
C. On-Site Development Standards
See Article 15 (On-Site Development Standards) for on-site development standards.
Article Last Amended: July 13, 2015
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 8:
Land Development Code Article 8 - Page 16 Residential Districts
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading
See Article 16 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) for standards governing off-street
parking and loading.
E. Landscaping and Screening
See Article 17 (Landscaping, Buffering and Screening) for standards governing
landscaping and screening.
F. Signs
See Article 18 (Signs) for standards governing signs.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 9:
Land Development Code Article 9 - Page 1 Commercial Districts
Article 9. Commercial Districts
9.1 PURPOSE
9.2 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
9.3 BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
9.4 GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY
9.1 PURPOSE
A. Purpose of C-1 Business Office District
The purpose of the C-1 Business Office District is intended to create a commercial
environment of a primarily non-retail nature for the development of office structures
and related uses.
B. Purpose of C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District
The C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District is composed of establishments offering
convenience goods and basic services which are incidental to and compatible with
the residential character of the abutting neighborhood.
C. Purpose of C-3 Central Business District
The C-3 Central Business District is designed to reflect central location and ease of
access of being the hub of a system of radial thoroughfares. A prime characteristic of
this district is the historic core of intense pedestrian activity.
D. Purpose of C-4 Fringe Central Business District
The purpose of the C-4 Fringe Central Business District is designated for activities
related in a peripheral manner to those in the C-3 Central Business District. The
customer may come to a particular establishment by automobile or on foot. Good
traffic accessibility is essential.
E. Purpose of C-5 Highway Commercial District
The purpose of the C-5 Highway Commercial District is to provide an area of service
facilities to the motoring public adjacent to arterial traffic routes as defined in the
Comprehensive Transportation Plan.
9.2 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
Table 9-1: Commercial Districts Permitted and Conditional Uses lists permitted and
conditional uses for the commercial districts. A “P” indicates that a use is considered
permitted within that district. A “C” indicates that a use is considered a conditional use in
that district and must obtain a conditional use permit as required in Section 4.3
(Conditional Use Permit). No letter (i.e., a blank space), or the absence of the use from
the table, indicates that use is not permitted within that district.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 9:
Land Development Code Article 9 - Page 2 Commercial Districts
TABLE 9-1: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
USES
DISTRICTS
USE STANDARDS
C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5
Residential Uses C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5
Assisted Living Facility1 P P P
Convalescent Home1 P P P
Dormitory6 P P P
Dwelling, Above the Ground Floor P P P P P
Independent Living Facility1 P P P
Lodging House1 P P P See Section 14.3.N
Nursing Home1 P P P
Residential Facility: 7 or More Persons C C C See Section 14.3.T
Institutional and Public Uses C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5
Club, Non-Profit P P P
Community Center P P P P
Essential Services & Essential Service
Structure
P P P P P
Homeless Day Center C C See Section 14.3.J
Place of Worship P P P P P See Section 14.3.S
Public Building P P P P P
Public Recreation Facility P P P P
School P
Temporary Shelter Facility P P P P See Section 14.3.V
Utilities C C P P P See Section 14.3.X
Commercial Uses C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5
Amusement Center C C C See Section 14.3.B
Bakery: Prep Area Less than 2,400sf P P P P
Bakery: Prep Area More than 2,400sf C C
Commercial Kennel C See Section 14.3.F
Convenience Store P P P P See Section 14.3.U
Car Wash P See Section 14.3.D
Dance Establishment C C C
Day Care Facility: 12 or Less Persons P P P P P
Day Care Facility: 13 or More Persons C C C C C
Drive-In Establishment P
Drive-Thru Facility2 P P
Dry Cleaner3 P P P P
Escape Room P P P
Financial Institution P4 P4 P P P
Hotel/Motel P P P See Section 14.3.L
Massage Facility P P P P P
See Municipal Code
Section 447
Medical/Dental Office P P P P P
Micro-Brewery P/C P/C P/C See Section 14.3.P
Motor Vehicle Dealership C7 C
Motor Vehicle Rental/Leasing Facility C
Motor Vehicle Repair, Minor P
Office P P P P P
Personal Services Establishment P P P P P
Retail Goods Establishment P P P P
Print Shop P P P P
Restaurant P5 P P P
Restaurant with Drive-Thru Facility P P
School for Karate, Dance, Music, Exercise
& Vocational Training
P P P
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 9:
Land Development Code Article 9 - Page 3 Commercial Districts
TABLE 9-1: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
USES
DISTRICTS
USE STANDARDS
C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5
Service Station P P P P See Section 14.3.U
Shopping Centers: 20,000 or Less GFA P
Shopping Centers: Less than 50,000 GFA P P P
Shopping Centers: 50,000 – 100,000 GFA C C P
Shopping Centers: 100,000 or More GFA C
Sign Sales & Service P P
Tavern P P P
Taxidermy P P
Theater (Not Outdoor or Drive-In) P P P
Veterinary Office/Animal Hospital (Small
Animal)
P P P P P
Open Space Uses C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5
Cemetery/Memorial Garden C C C C C See Section 14.3.E
Transportation Uses C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5
Ambulance Operations Facility P P P
Parking Lot or Garage P P P
Industrial Uses C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5
Warehousing (Indoor Only) P P
Wholesale (Indoor Only) P P
Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5
Building Mounted P P P P P See Section 14.3.Y
Freestanding P/C8 See Section 14.3.Y
Meteorological Tower C See Section 14.3.Y
FOOTNOTES TABLE 9-1
1 The entire structure must be of residential use only.
2 Drive-thru facilities are allowed only as accessory to uses permitted within the district.
3 Dry cleaning and processing areas limited to 2,400sf.
4 Limited to 6,000sf.
5 Sale of wine and beer for consumption on the premises only is allowed. Sale of all other intoxicating
beverages is prohibited.
6 Drive-thru facilities prohibited.
7Motor vehicle dealership must have been existing prior to January 1, 2009, to qualify for a Conditional Use
Permit and cannot be expanded beyond their boundaries existing at that time.
8WECS with a rated capacity of 1.8kw or less are permitted. Systems between 1.9kw and 20 kw are
conditional uses.
9.3 BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
Table 9-2: Commercial Districts Bulk and Setback Regulations establishes bulk and setback
regulations for the commercial districts.
TABLE 9-2: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
BULK AND SETBACK
REGULATIONS
DISTRICT
C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5
BULK REQUIREMENTS
Minimum Lot Area None None None None None
Minimum Floor Area
(Dwelling Units)
Efficiency
Dwelling Unit:
400sf
Efficiency
Dwelling Unit:
400sf
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 9:
Land Development Code Article 9 - Page 4 Commercial Districts
TABLE 9-2: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
BULK AND SETBACK
REGULATIONS
DISTRICT
C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5
1-Bedroom: 540sf
2-Bedroom: 750sf
3+ Bedrooms:
750sf for first 2
bedrooms + 100sf
for each
additional
bedroom
1-Bedroom: 540sf
2-Bedroom: 750sf
3+ Bedrooms:
750sf for first 2
bedrooms + 100sf
for each
additional
bedroom
Minimum Lot Width None None None None None
Minimum Lot Depth None None None None None
Maximum Lot Coverage 30% 40% None None 45%
Maximum FAR 1.0 1.0 7.0 2.0 0.45
Maximum Building Height 35 ft 35 ft n/a n/a 50 ft
Design Standards Section 13.1
Section 13.1 &
13.3
Section
13.1
Section
13.1
MINIMUM SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
Minimum Front Setback 35 ft 35 ft None1 None1 10 ft1
Minimum Interior Side
Setback
20 ft 20 ft None1,2 None1,2 None1,2
Minimum Street Side
Setback
30 ft 25 ft None1 None1
10 ft1
Minimum Rear Setback 40 ft 20 ft None1 None1 None3
FOOTNOTES TABLE 9-2
1 When C-3, C-4 or C-5 District boundaries are adjacent to a residential district, the required setback must
be the same as required on the residential lot line.
2 Where an interior side setback is provided, there must be a minimum interior side setback of 5 feet,
provided that the structure contains a solid fireproof wall. If the structure contains windows and/or doors on
the interior side yard, a setback equal to one-half the height of the structure is required.
3 Where a rear setback is provided and the rear yard is not adjacent to a public alley, there must be a
minimum setback of 10 feet. If the rear yard abuts an alley, no setback is required.
9.4 GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY
A. Accessory Structures and Uses
See Section 15.5 (Accessory Structures and Uses) for standards governing accessory
structures and uses.
B. Temporary Uses
See Section 14.4 (Temporary Uses) for standards governing temporary uses.
C. On-Site Development Standards
See Article 15 (On-Site Development Standards) for on-site development standards.
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 9:
Land Development Code Article 9 - Page 5 Commercial Districts
See Article 16 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) for standards governing off-street
parking and loading.
E. Landscaping and Screening
See Article 17 (Landscaping, Buffering and Screening) for standards governing
landscaping and screening.
F. Signs
See Article 18 (Signs) for standards governing signs.
Article Last Amended: October 25, 2010
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 10:
Land Development Code Article 10 - Page 1 Industrial Districts
Article 10. Industrial Districts
10.1 PURPOSE
10.2 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
10.3 BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
10.4 GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY
10.1 PURPOSE
A. Purpose of I-1 Light Industrial District
The purpose of the I-1 Light Industrial District is to accommodate those light industrial
activities that are located in close relation to commercial and residential areas. The
type and intensity of industrial uses should be held to those types that do not detract
from an area of less intense land use or become a blighting influence to such an
area. It is for this purpose that performance standards in the I-1 Light Industrial District
should be normally high.
B. Purpose of I-2 General Industrial District
The purpose of the I-2 General Industrial District is to provide an area where heavy
and intensive land uses may locate. The uses within this district are considered to be
too heavy to be normally included within either the I-1 Light Industrial District or the I-3
Planned Industrial District and should therefore be located in such an area as to
present the least deleterious effect to adjacent, less intensive land uses.
C. Purpose of I-3 Planned Industrial District
The purpose of the I-3 Planned Industrial District is to provide exemplary standards of
development for certain industrial uses that, because of location, transportation,
access and other land use factors, must necessarily be located and adjacent to
lesser land use intensities.
10.2 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
Table 10-1: Industrial Districts Permitted and Conditional Uses lists permitted and
conditional uses for the industrial districts. A “P” indicates that a use is considered
permitted within that district. A “C” indicates that a use is considered a conditional use in
that district and must obtain a conditional use permit as required in Section 4.3
(Conditional Use Permit). No letter (i.e., a blank space), or the absence of the use from
the table, indicates that use is not permitted within that district.
TABLE 10-1: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
USES DISTRICTS I-1 I-2 I-3 USE STANDARDS
Institutional and Public Uses I-1 I-2 I-3
Essential Services & Essential Service Structure P P P
Homeless Day Center P P C See Section 14.3.J
Place of Worship C C C See Section 14.3.S
Power Generating Station P
Temporary Shelter Facility C C See Section 14.3.V
Article Last Amended: October 25, 2010
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 10:
Land Development Code Article 10 - Page 2 Industrial Districts
TABLE 10-1: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
USES DISTRICTS I-1 I-2 I-3 USE STANDARDS
Utilities P P P See Section 14.3.X
Open Space Uses I-1 I-2 I-3
Cemetery/Memorial Garden C C C See Section 14.3.E
Driving Range C C
Golf Course C C
Commercial Uses I-1 I-2 I-3
Adult Use P P See Section 14.3.A
Veterinary Office/Animal Hospital (Small Animal) P P
Building Materials Sales & Storage P
Dry Cleaner P
Motor Vehicle Dealership P P C3
Motor Vehicle Parts Retail Establishment P P
Motor Vehicle Repair, Major P P C3
Motor Vehicle Repair, Minor P P C3
Office C C C
Office, Headquarters: Production or Storage in
District P P P
Personal Services Establishment (Accessory to
Permitted Use) P
Restaurant C1 C1
Retail Goods Establishment (Accessory to
Permitted Use) P P P
Service Station P P See Section 14.3.U
School for Karate, Dance, Music, Exercise &
Vocational Training C C C
Industrial Uses I-1 I-2 I-3
Blacksmith Shop P P
Bottling Works & Distribution P P P
Carpet Cleaning Establishment P P
Cold Storage Plant P P P
Communications Facility P
Distribution (Excluding Bulk Petroleum, Gasoline
or Explosives) P P P
Engraving Facility P
Food Processing P
Junk/Scrap Yard Operation2 C
Laboratory: Industrial Research P P
Laboratory: Scientific, Medical, Dental & Optical P
Machine Shop P P
Manufacturing: Acid, Ammonia, Asphalt &
Similar Materials C
Manufacturing: Camera & Photographic
Materials P
Manufacturing: General P P P
Manufacturing: Jewelry P
Manufacturing: Petroleum, Paint, Varnish &
Similar Materials P
Manufacturing: Plastics, Tires, Batteries, Rubber,
Sodium Compounds, Cement & Bricks P
Mineral Extraction C
Publishing P P P
Railroad Repair Shop P
Railyard or Truck Terminal P P
Article Last Amended: October 25, 2010
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 10:
Land Development Code Article 10 - Page 3 Industrial Districts
TABLE 10-1: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
USES DISTRICTS I-1 I-2 I-3 USE STANDARDS
Stone, Marble & Granite Grinding, Dressing &
Cutting C C
Warehousing: General (Excluding Bulk Petroleum,
Gasoline or Explosives) P P P
Warehousing: Petroleum, Paint, Varnish & Similar
Materials P
Wholesale (Bulk Petroleum, Gasoline or
Explosives) P P P
Transportation Uses I-1 I-2 I-3
Heliport P
Parking Lot or Garage P P P
Transportation Facility P
Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) I-1 I-2 I-3
Building Mounted P P P See Section 14.3.Y
Freestanding P/C4 P/C4 P/C4 See Section 14.3.Y
Meteorological Tower C C C See Section 14.3.Y
FOOTNOTES TABLE 10-1
1Sale of intoxicating beverages for consumption in a restaurant is allowed provided the sale of intoxicating
liquor, non-intoxicating malt liquor, or wine was a conforming use or a permitted nonconforming use prior
to the issuance of any intoxicating liquor license for the restaurant.
2 A conditional use permit must be acquired by existing junk/scrap yard uses when there is a physical
expansion of the land area or building area(s), or when any new scrap processing equipment is introduced
including, but not limited to, equipment that has the ability to shred, bale, compact or shear ferrous metals
other than food and beverage containers, or replacement of existing scrap processing equipment with the
equipment that has the potential for creating more significant impacts to the community and surrounding
area (e.g. noise, air emissions, vibrations). This excludes cold storage or office space less than 1,000 square
feet.
3Sale, service, and repair of travel trailers, motor homes, farm or construction vehicles/equipment, and
semi-tractors and trailers. The outside storage of any parts or wrecked vehicles or equipment is not
allowed.
4WECS with a rated capacity of 20 kw or less are permitted. Systems between 20 kw and 100 kw are
conditional uses.
10.3 BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
Table 10-2: Industrial Districts Bulk and Setback Regulations establishes bulk and setback
regulations for the industrial districts.
TABLE 10-2: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
BULK AND SETBACK
REGULATIONS
DISTRICTS
I-1 I-2 I-3
BULK REQUIREMENTS
Minimum Lot Area None None None4
Minimum Lot Width None None 200 ft
Maximum Lot Coverage 50%
Maximum FAR 1.0 1.0 1.0
Maximum Building
Height
50 ft 50 ft 50 ft
Design Standards See Section 13.2 See Section 13.2 See Section 13.2
SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
Front Setback 10 ft1 10 ft2 35 ft3
Article Last Amended: October 25, 2010
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 10:
Land Development Code Article 10 - Page 4 Industrial Districts
TABLE 10-2: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
BULK AND SETBACK
REGULATIONS
DISTRICTS
I-1 I-2 I-3
Interior Side Setback
None1
If one is provided, it
must be a minimum
of 10 ft
None2
If one is provided, it
must be a minimum
of 10 ft
20 ft3
Street Side Setback 10 ft1 10 ft2 20 ft3
Rear Setback
None1
If one is provided, it
must be a minimum
of 10 ft
None2
If one is provided, it
must be a minimum
of 10 ft
20 ft3
FOOTNOTES TABLE 10-2
1 When adjacent to a residential district, a 50 foot setback is required on that side of the district adjacent to
the residential district, unless the industrial property is at least 150 feet from the residential property, in which
case, the normal setback will apply.
2 When adjacent to a residential district, a 75 foot setback is required on that side of the district adjacent to
the residential district.
3 When adjacent to a residential district, a 50 foot setback is required on that side of the district adjacent to
the residential district.
4 The minimum district size required for rezoning to an I-3 District is 80 acres. This requirement may be waived
if the tract is in single ownership or under unified control where tract abuts or adjoins at least 25% of the
perimeter of I-3 District.
10.4 GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY
A. Accessory Structures and Uses
See Section 15.5 (Accessory Structures and Uses) for standards governing accessory
structures and uses.
B. Temporary Uses
See Section 14.4 (Temporary Uses) for standards governing temporary uses.
C. On-Site Development Standards
See Article 15 (On-Site Development Standards) for on-site development standards.
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading
See Article 16 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) for standards governing off-street
parking and loading.
E. Landscaping and Screening
See Article 17 (Landscaping, Buffering and Screening) for standards governing
landscaping and screening.
F. Signs
See Article 18 (Signs) for standards governing signs.
Article Last Amended: December 2, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 11:
Land Development Code Article 11 - Page 1 Special Purpose Districts
Article 11. Special Purpose Districts
11.1 MEDICAL SERVICE DISTRICT
11.2 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
11.1 MEDICAL SERVICE DISTRICT
A. Purpose
The purpose of the MD Medical Service District is to address the special needs and
impacts of a large-scale, multi-functional hospital and medical campus. Within the
district, development will proceed in accordance with an approved General
Development Plan that will relate to the adjacent district, community and needs of
the medical institutions.
B. Permitted Uses
Table 11-1: Medical Service District Permitted Uses lists permitted uses for the MD
District. A “P” indicates that a use is considered permitted within that district. A “C”
indicates that a use is considered a conditional use in that district and must obtain a
conditional use permit as required in Section 4.3 (Conditional Use Permit). The
absence of the use from the table indicates that use is not permitted within the
district.
TABLE 11-1: MEDICAL SERVICE DISTRICT PERMITTED USES
USE MD DISTRICT
Clinic P
Commercial Establishment: Accessory to Permitted Use & Not Advertised
on Exterior (Pharmacy, Cafeteria, Gift Shop, Florist & Dispensary of Surgical
Supplies)
P
Essential Services & Essential Service Structure P
Hospital P
Medical-Related Educational Institutions, Includes Dormitory P
Nursing Home and/or Convalescent Home P
Outpatient Lodging Facility P
Places of Worship P
Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) P1
Uses Similar to Those Allowed within MD District (Determined by Zoning
Administrator) C
FOOTNOTES TABLE 11-1
1Amendment of the Medical Service District General Development Plan shall be required.
C. Bulk and Setback Regulations
Table 11-2: Medical Service District Bulk and Setback Regulations establishes bulk and
setback regulations for the MD District.
Article Last Amended: December 2, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 11:
Land Development Code Article 11 - Page 2 Special Purpose Districts
TABLE 11-2: MEDICAL SERVICE DISTRICT BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS MD DISTRICT1
Bulk Requirements
Minimum Lot Area 2 acres
Maximum Lot Coverage 30%
Maximum Building Height As determined in approved General Development
Plan
Maximum FAR 2.0
Minimum Building Separation 25 ft between buildings
Setback Regulations
Setback 50 ft
FOOTNOTES TABLE 11-2
1 A MD District may only be established once a General Development Plan has been adopted for the area
in accordance with Section 11.1-D.
D. Medical Service District General Development Plan
An MD District may only be established after a General Development Plan has
received recommendation from the Planning Commission and approval from the
City Council.
1. General Development Plan Submittal
A General Development Plan must address the general layout of the entire area,
including traffic pattern plan, parking plan and access points, and must include
the following:
a. Plans for development of the entire district including the boundaries of the
proposed district and the ownership of the land therein.
b. The general location and approximate square footage of all existing and
proposed future structures and uses intended. Applicable building density
information, such as number of beds, number of tenant sleeping rooms,
number of physicians, number of employees on a major shift and/or seating
capacities, must also be indicated to determine parking needs and traffic
circulation impacts.
c. Landscaping plan.
d. Sign plan, including on-site identification and directional signs, and proposed
off-site directional sign plan.
e. Internal traffic circulation plans including traffic ingress and egress locations.
f. The location and capacity of all off-street parking and loading spaces.
g. Estimates of traffic load impact on surrounding public street system.
2. Procedure
An MD District is established by rezoning, in accord with Section 4.1 (Text
Amendments and Rezoning). As part of the rezoning application, a General
Development Plan must be submitted to the Planning Commission for
Article Last Amended: December 2, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 11:
Land Development Code Article 11 - Page 3 Special Purpose Districts
recommendation prior to submission to the City Council for adoption and
approval of the rezoning.
The proposed General Development Plan, containing all required submittals
described in Paragraph 1 (General Development Plan Submittal) above, must be
accompanied by a written application, in the form prescribed by the Planning
Commission, and filed with the Zoning Administrator who will forward a complete
application to the Planning Commission. The application must be accompanied
by the required fee.
3. Amendments
Any amendments to an approved General Development Plan must follow the
text amendment procedures of Section 4.1 (Text Amendments and Rezoning).
11.2 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
A. Purpose
The purpose of the PUD Planned Unit Development District is to offer an alternative to
the residential, commercial and industrial zoning districts of this Code. A PUD District
may deviate from the definitive and precise requirements of established zoning
districts if the particular areas to be developed can offer greater value to the
community and can preserve the community’s health, welfare and safety than if
those same areas were to be developed as a single purpose zoning district. A PUD
District may also be mixed-use so that it not only contains residential, commercial or
industrial uses, but a combination of these uses.
The purpose of the PUD District is to:
1. Encourage flexibility in the development of land and in the design of structures.
2. Encourage planned diversification in the location of structures.
3. Encourage a creative approach to the use of land that results in better
development and design than might otherwise be accomplished under the strict
application of this Code.
4. Provide for the efficient use of land to facilitate a more effective arrangement of
land uses, buildings, circulation systems and utilities.
5. Provide for more usable and suitably located open space and recreation areas
than might otherwise be provided under the application of this Code.
6. Encourage the construction of appropriate aesthetic amenities which will enhance
the character of the site.
7. Guarantee quality construction commensurate with other developments within the
community, and compatible with the character of the surrounding area and
adjoining properties.
8. Facilitate implementation of the Comprehensive Plan.
Article Last Amended: December 2, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 11:
Land Development Code Article 11 - Page 4 Special Purpose Districts
9. Provide for the development of unique land areas and sites that would not be
possible under the strict application of this Code.
10. Encourage quality construction and design.
B. General Standards
1. The PUD is under common ownership and/or unified control. If there are two (2) or
more owners, the application for the PUD must be filed jointly by all such owners.
2. There is no standard minimum size requirement for any PUD. However, the size of
the proposed development would be such that this form of development is
logical and adheres to the overall purposes of this Code.
3. The rezoning authorizing the PUD may grant exceptions to the regulations
contained in this Code including, but not limited to, use, density, area, bulk,
off-street parking and loading, landscaping and signs, as may be desirable to
achieve the objectives of the proposed planned development, provided that such
exceptions are fully consistent with and authorized by this Code.
4. PUD must be compatible with the purpose and intent of this Code and the City’s
Comprehensive Plan. A PUD must not substantially diminish the market value of
surrounding properties, and it must not cause substantial impairment of the use of
those properties.
5. The PUD must not adversely affect the natural environment of the community as
a whole. Natural assets and features, such as existing trees and native
vegetation, must be protected and preserved to the greatest extent practical.
6. The PUD must be accessible to public streets that are adequate to carry the traffic
that will be generated by the proposed development. The streets and driveways
within the proposed development must be adequate to serve the uses within the
development.
7. All proposed streets, alleys and driveways must be adequate to serve the
residents, occupants, visitors or other anticipated traffic. The PUD may be, subject
to City Council approval, designed to discourage outside through traffic from
traversing the development. Access points to public streets, and the location of
private streets, alleys and driveways are subject to the approval of the City
Council.
8. The pedestrian circulation system and its related walkways must provide for
separation of pedestrian and vehicular movement and for maximum pedestrian
safety.
9. The construction and maintenance of all utilities, roadways, parking facilities and
other site improvements must be in accordance with the requirements of this Code
and other regulations of the City. All roadways and utilities within the PUD must be
constructed to specifications established by the City Council. At the City
Council’s request, an agreement for the completion of this work may be
established by the City and the developer.
Article Last Amended: December 2, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 11:
Land Development Code Article 11 - Page 5 Special Purpose Districts
10. Nothing in this section or this Code may be interpreted as negating the necessity
of filing a plat as required by the subdivision regulations.
11. The burden of justification for any PUD project is the exclusive responsibility of the
applicant. The applicant is responsible for providing the information and data
required in this section. In addition, as the PUD is intended to be an innovative
approach, the applicant must provide any other data or information required by
the Planning Commission or the City Council to assist in decision-making.
12. The additional standards applicable in the Scenic Rivers Overlay District and the
Shoreland Overlay District in Paragraph F (Additional Procedures and Standards)
below, and for EPUD in ESA as required in Section 4.4.C.6 (Review Process:
Environmental Planned Unit Development (EPUD)).
C. Exceptions From District Regulations
1. Permitted Bulk and Setback Regulation Exceptions
Exceptions to the bulk and setback district regulations may be granted as part of
a PUD District rezoning. The PUD District is subject to the current district regulations,
including any overlay districts and designated areas, unless such exception is
granted. Exceptions from district regulations may be granted for planned unit
developments with respect to district bulk regulations, required setbacks, offstreet
parking and loading, landscaping and screening, and signs, if the City
Council finds that such exceptions:
a. Enhance the overall merit of the PUD.
b. Promote the objectives of both the City and the development.
c. Enhance the quality of the design of the structures and the site plan.
d. Enable the development to offer environmental and pedestrian amenities.
e. Will not cause such an adverse impact on neighboring properties so as to
outweigh the benefits of the development.
f. Is compatible with the land use policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
g. Provide a public benefit to the City, as described in Paragraph 3 (Public
Benefits and Amenities) below.
2. Use Regulation
The approved General Development Plan of the PUD will establish the permitted
uses within the development that are desirable in achieving the objectives of the
PUD. However, there must be clear evidence that:
a. Such uses are desirable and appropriate with respect to the primary purpose
of the development.
Article Last Amended: December 2, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 11:
Land Development Code Article 11 - Page 6 Special Purpose Districts
b. Such uses are not of such a nature, or so located, as to exercise a detrimental
influence on the development or the surrounding neighborhood.
3. Public Benefits and Amenities
A PUD must demonstrate a substantial benefit to the City as part of the rezoning
approval. No rezoning to a PUD District may be approved unless the Planning
Commission and City Council determine that a public benefit has been provided
to the City as part of the PUD design. Design characteristics and amenities that
would qualify for this determination include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Landscaping, buffering or screening within or around the perimeter of the
PUD over and above the minimum required by this Code.
b. The provision of underground parking, and additional landscaping and
screening of parking lots and structures over and above the minimum
required by this Code.
c. Reduced use of impervious surface materials, including cluster development
and use of semi-pervious materials such as grass-crete and pervious pavers.
d. Design characteristics including, but not limited to, mixed-use development,
circulation systems that utilize alleys or traffic-calming techniques, and a
pedestrian-oriented environment.
e. Use of sustainable design and green architecture such as: green roofs and
other energy efficient design concepts; water conservation; environmental
sensitivity; new building technologies; Leadership in Energy and Environmental
Design (LEED) techniques; and xeriscaping (water conservation landscaping).
f. Community amenities including plazas, malls, formal gardens, places to
congregate, outdoor seating, public art, and pedestrian and transit facilities.
g. Preservation of environmental features.
h. Preservation of historic features.
i. Open space and recreational amenities that are available to the public such
as:
i. Swimming pools
ii. Tennis courts
iii. Recreational open space accessory buildings
iv. Jogging trails and fitness courses
v. Playgrounds
vi. Natural water features, wetlands and conservation areas
Article Last Amended: December 2, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 11:
Land Development Code Article 11 - Page 7 Special Purpose Districts
vii. Detention areas which are accessible to occupants or the public via
nature trails, boardwalks, and/or perimeter walkways, but only if they are
designed as natural water features and are landscaped with native
vegetation
j. Additional public infrastructure improvements in addition to the minimum
required by the PUD, such as new or repaved streets, installation of gutters
and sewers, and traffic control devices to improve traffic flow.
k. Provision of accessible dwelling units with accessible features beyond what is
required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) or any other applicable
codes.
D. Procedure
1. Overview
a. Before receiving approval of a rezoning to a PUD District, the applicant must
submit and receive approval of a General Development Plan.
b. Additional standards are applicable in the Scenic Rivers Overlay District and
the Shoreland Overlay District in Paragraph E (Additional Procedures and
Standards) below, and for an EPUD in an ESA, as required in Section 4.4.C.6
(Review Process: Environmental Planned Unit Development (EPUD)).
2. General Development Plan
a. The General Development Plan must be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator at least thirty (30) days prior to the Planning Commission’s
regularly scheduled meeting.
b. The General Development Plan must include:
i. Site plan of the area to be developed.
ii. The topographic surface of the entire area to be developed.
iii. Points of ingress or egress, excluding those of single-family detached and
two-family dwellings.
iv. Recreation and open space areas.
v. Parking areas for uses other than single-family detached and two-family
dwellings.
vi. Land use of each specific lot or outlot as determined by the final plat.
c. The Planning Commission will review the General Development Plan upon
receipt of a complete application, based upon the standards contained in
Paragraph e below, and either:
Article Last Amended: December 2, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 11:
Land Development Code Article 11 - Page 8 Special Purpose Districts
i. Recommend approval or denial of the General Development Plan, and
submit its recommendation to the City Council.
ii. Advise the applicant in writing of any recommended changes, additions
or corrections to the General Development Plan. The applicant may then
submit a revised General Development Plan for Planning Commission
review without paying an additional filing fee. The Planning Commission
will then recommend approval or denial of the General Development
Plan, and submit its recommendation to the City Council.
d. The City Council, after receipt of the recommendations from the Planning
Commission, may approve or deny the General Development Plan.
e. The Planning Commission’s recommendation to the City Council and the City
Council’s action of approval or denial must set forth in what respects the PUD
is or is not in the public interest including, but not limited to, findings of fact on
the following:
i. The site or zoning lot is adaptable to the unified development proposed.
ii. The proposed PUD is not detrimental to nor does it endanger the public
health, safety, comfort or general welfare of any portion of the community.
iii. The proposed PUD is not injurious to the use and enjoyment of other
property in the vicinity for the purposes already permitted.
iv. The proposed PUD does not diminish or impair property values within the
neighborhood.
v. The proposed PUD does not impede the normal and orderly development
and improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in the zoning
district.
vi. There is provision for adequate utilities, drainage, off-street parking and
loading, pedestrian access and all other necessary facilities.
vii. There is provision for adequate vehicular ingress and egress designed to
minimize traffic congestion upon public streets.
viii. The location and arrangement of structures, parking areas, walks, lighting
and appurtenant facilities are compatible with the surrounding
neighborhood and adjacent land uses.
ix. Those areas within the proposed PUD that are not used for structures,
parking and loading areas, or access ways, are suitably landscaped.
x. The proposed PUD’s location is consistent with the spirit and intent of this
Code and the adopted Comprehensive Plan.
E. Post-Approval
Once an area has been rezoned to a PUD District, all development must comply
with the following:
Article Last Amended: December 2, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 11:
Land Development Code Article 11 - Page 9 Special Purpose Districts
1. Any deviation from the approved plans is a violation of this Code.
2. Upon approval of the PUD District by the City Council, the area will be subject
to the stipulations of the approved plans. The developer, when requested, will
make periodic reports to the Planning Commission.
3. Once the rezoning to a PUD District has been approved and building permits
have been issued, the applicant may begin construction. The PUD District is, in
all cases, conditional and no departure from the General Development Plan
is allowed without approval by the City Council.
4. Any amendments to an approved General Development Plan must follow the
text amendment procedures of Section 4.1 (Text Amendments, Rezoning,
Development Plan Amendments, and Medical District Amendments).
5. Amendments may be requested by an owner of any individual property
regulated by the approved General Development Plan.
6. Amendment requests will be reviewed for consistency with Section 11.2D.2e
(General Development Plan).
F. Additional Procedures and Standards
Due to their specific nature, when a PUD is proposed for certain areas, additional
standards and procedures may apply as part of PUD District approval. These
additional standards and procedures are as follows:
1. Planned Unit Developments in the Scenic Rivers Overlay District
In addition to the applicable standards regarding PUD Districts, the following
procedures and standards for the review and approval of a PUD in the Scenic
Rivers Overlay District apply.
a. Procedures
i. Within the Scenic Rivers Overlay District, it is recommended that the
applicant have a preliminary meeting with the Zoning Administrator
and the Department of Natural Resources Area Hydrologist. If possible,
this step should include a meeting and site inspection with all parties
present.
ii. General Development Plans must be approved by the Minnesota
Commissioner of Natural Resources prior to final approval by the City
Council.
iii. Subdivision of the land involved should be carried out simultaneously.
b. Standards
The following standards will be considered:
Article Last Amended: December 2, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 11:
Land Development Code Article 11 - Page 10 Special Purpose Districts
i. Land to be set aside as open space or common area must be clearly
indicated on the plan. Facilities such as docks, swimming areas and
launching ramps must be centralized and shown on the plan.
ii. All developments must be serviced by City sewer and water utilities.
iii. The maximum number of individual units which may be allowed within
the PUD is determined by multiplying by one and one-half (1.5) the
number of lots that would normally be allowed using a standard lotblock
approach. Density increase within the first tier cannot exceed
fifty percent (50%).
iv. When, in the opinion of the City Council, a PUD will result in excessive
surface water usage, the City Council may, as a condition to
approval, restrict the number of allowable units and/or restrict access
rights to public water bodies.
v. Common open space is required and described as such:
(1) The location, shape, size and character of the common open
space must be deemed adequate for the PUD.
(2) At least fifty percent (50%) of the project area must be common
open space, which must include the area between residential
structures and the water.
(3) Common open space areas must be preserved. This may be
accomplished through the use of covenants, dedications or other
methods.
(4) Recreational facilities, such as tennis courts and swimming pools,
may be permitted on or within common open space.
2. Planned Unit Developments in the Shoreland Overlay District
Within the Shoreland Overlay District, a PUD is allowed for new projects on
undeveloped land, redevelopment of previously built sites, or conversions of
existing buildings and land.
a. Procedure
The applicant for a PUD must submit the following documents prior to
General Development Plan approval:
i. A site plan and/or plat for the project showing locations of property
boundaries, surface water features, existing and proposed structures
and other facilities, land alterations, sewage treatment and water
supply systems where public systems will not be provided, and
topographic contours at ten (10) foot intervals or less. When a PUD
combines commercial and residential development, the site plan
and/or plat must indicate and distinguish which buildings and portions
of the project are residential, commercial or a combination.
Article Last Amended: December 2, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 11:
Land Development Code Article 11 - Page 11 Special Purpose Districts
ii. A property owner’s association agreement for residential-only
development with mandatory membership, and all in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
iii. Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements or other
instruments that properly address future vegetative and topographic
alterations, construction of additional buildings, beaching of
watercraft, and construction of commercial buildings in residentialonly
developments, and ensure the long-term preservation and
maintenance of open space in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
iv. When necessary, a master plan/drawing describing the project and
the floor plan for all commercial structures to be occupied.
v. Any additional documents as requested by the Planning Commission
or the City Council necessary to explain how the PUD will be designed
and will function.
b. Standards
The following standards will be considered in the approval of a PUD in the
Shoreland Overlay District:
i. The existing recreational use of the surface water and likely increases
in use associated with the PUD.
ii. The physical and aesthetic impacts of increased density.
iii. The suitability of lands for the PUD District approach, including the
suitable area evaluation of Paragraph c (Suitable Area Evaluation)
below.
iv. Level of current development in the area.
v. The amount and type of ownership of undeveloped lands.
c. Suitable Area Evaluation
i. Proposed new, or expansions to existing PUD, must be evaluated using
the procedures and standards of this section to determine the
suitable area for the dwelling unit/density evaluation of Paragraph
d (PUD Density Evaluation) below.
ii. The project parcel must be divided into tiers by locating one (1) or
more lines approximately parallel to a line that identifies the ordinary
high water level of the river at three-hundred (300) foot intervals,
proceeding landward.
iii. The suitable area within each tier calculated by excluding from the
tier area all wetlands, bluffs or land below the ordinary high water
Article Last Amended: December 2, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 11:
Land Development Code Article 11 - Page 12 Special Purpose Districts
level of public waters. This suitable area and the proposed project are
then subjected to the density evaluation steps of Paragraph d (PUD
Density Evaluation) below to arrive at an allowable number of
dwelling units or sites.
d. PUD Density Evaluation
The procedures for determining the “base” density of a PUD and density
increase multipliers are as follows. Allowable densities may be transferred
from any tier to any other tier further from the waterbody, but must not be
transferred to any closer tier.
i. Residential Use PUD Base Density Evaluation
The suitable area within each tier is divided by the single residential lot
size standard for the rivers, the single residential lot width standard
times the tier depth, unless the City has specified an alternative
minimum lot size for rivers, which is then used to yield a base density of
dwelling units or sites for each tier. Proposed locations and numbers of
dwelling units or sites for the PUD are then compared with the tier,
density and suitability analyses, and the design criteria of this section.
ii. Mixed-Use PUD Base Density Evaluation
The following steps are followed to determine the base density
evaluation:
(1) Determine the average inside living area size of dwelling units
or sites within each tier, including both existing and proposed
units and sites. Computation of inside living area sizes does not
include decks, patios, stoops, steps, garages, porches and
basements, unless they are habitable space.
(2) Select the appropriate floor area ratio from the following table
- Table 11-3: Commercial Planned Unit Development Floor
Area Ratios.
TABLE 11-3: COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT FLOOR AREA RATIOS1
AVERAGE UNIT FLOOR AREA
SEGMENTS
URBAN RIVER
SEGMENTS FLOOR AREA
RATIO
200sf .040
300sf .048
400sf .056
500sf .065
600sf .072
700sf .082
800sf .091
900sf .099
1,000sf .108
1,100sf .116
1,200sf .125
Article Last Amended: December 2, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 11:
Land Development Code Article 11 - Page 13 Special Purpose Districts
TABLE 11-3: COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT FLOOR AREA RATIOS1
AVERAGE UNIT FLOOR AREA
SEGMENTS
URBAN RIVER
SEGMENTS FLOOR AREA
RATIO
1,300sf .133
1,400sf .142
1,500sf .150
FOOTNOTES TABLE 11-3
1 For average unit floor areas less than shown, use the floor area ratios listed for 200sf. For areas greater than
shown, use the ratios listed for 1,500sf. For recreational camping areas, use the ratios listed at 400sf.
Manufactured home sites in recreational camping areas must use a ratio equal to the size of the
manufactured home, or if unknown, the ratio listed for 1,000sf.
(3) Multiply the suitable area within each tier by the floor area
ratio to yield total floor area for each tier allowed to be used
for dwelling units or sites. Divide the total floor area by tier by
the average inside living area size. This yields a base number of
dwelling units and sites for each tier.
(4) Proposed locations and numbers of dwelling units or sites for
the PUD are then compared with the tier, density and suitability
analyses and the design criteria of this section.
iii. Density Increase Multipliers
Increases to the dwelling unit or dwelling site base densities
previously determined are allowed if the dimensional standards of
the Shoreland Overlay District are met or exceeded, and the
design criteria in Paragraph e (Maintenance and Design Criteria)
below are met. The allowable density increases of Table 11-4:
Allowable Dwelling Unit or Dwelling Site Density Increases will only
be permitted if structure setbacks from the ordinary high water
level are increased to at least fifty percent (50%) greater than the
minimum setback, or the impact on the waterbody is reduced an
equivalent amount through vegetative management, topography
or additional means acceptable to the City, and the setback is at
least twenty-five percent (25%) greater than the minimum setback.
TABLE 11-4: ALLOWABLE DWELLING UNIT OR DWELLING SITE DENSITY INCREASES
DENSITY EVALUATION TIERS MAXIMUM DENSITY INCREASE WITHIN EACH TIER
1st 50%
2nd 100%
3rd 200%
4th 200%
5th 200%
e. Maintenance and Design Criteria
Before final approval of a PUD, adequate provisions must be developed
for preservation and maintenance in perpetuity of open spaces and for
the continued existence and functioning of the development.
Article Last Amended: December 2, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 11:
Land Development Code Article 11 - Page 14 Special Purpose Districts
i. Open Space Preservation
Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements, public
dedication and acceptance, or other equally effective and
permanent means must be provided to ensure the long-term
preservation and maintenance of open space. The instruments must
include all of the following protections:
(1) Commercial uses are prohibited in residential-only
developments.
(2) Vegetation and topographic alterations, other than routine
maintenance, are prohibited.
(3) Construction of additional buildings or storage of vehicles and
other materials are prohibited.
(4) Uncontrolled beaching of watercraft are prohibited.
ii. Owners Association
Unless an equally effective alternative community framework is
established, when applicable, all residential-only developments must
use an owners association with the following features:
(1) Membership must be mandatory for each dwelling unit or site
purchaser, and any successive purchasers
(2) Each member must pay a pro-rata share of the association's
expenses, and unpaid assessments can become liens on units
or sites.
(3) Assessments must be adjustable to accommodate changing
conditions.
(4) The association must be responsible for insurance, taxes and
maintenance of all commonly owned property and facilities.
iii. Open Space Requirements
Open space in a PUD must meet all of the following criteria:
(1) At least fifty percent (50%) of the total project area must be
preserved as open space.
(2) Dwelling units or sites, road right-of-way or land covered by road
surfaces, parking areas or structures, except water-oriented
accessory structures or facilities, are developed areas and are not
included in the computation of minimum open space.
Article Last Amended: December 2, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 11:
Land Development Code Article 11 - Page 15 Special Purpose Districts
(3) Open space must include areas with physical characteristics
unsuitable for development in their natural state, and areas
containing significant historic sites or unplatted cemeteries.
(4) Open space may include outdoor recreational facilities for use by
owners of dwelling units or sites, by guests staying in commercial
dwelling units or sites, and by the general public.
(5) Avoid adverse impacts on the systems.
(6) Open space must not include commercial facilities or uses, but
may contain water-oriented accessory structures or facilities.
(7) The appearance of open space areas, including topography,
vegetation and allowable uses, must be preserved by use of
restrictive deed covenants, permanent easements, public
dedication and acceptance, or other equally effective and
permanent means.
(8) The shore impact zone, based on normal structure setbacks, must
be included as open space. For residential-only developments, at
least fifty percent (50%) of the shore impact zone area of existing
developments, or at least seventy percent (70%) of the shore
impact zone area of new developments must be preserved in its
natural or existing state. For mixed-use developments, at least fifty
percent (50%) of the shore impact zone must be preserved in its
natural state.
iv. Erosion Control and Stormwater Management
(1) Erosion control and stormwater management plans must be
developed and the PUD must be designed, and the construction
managed, to minimize the likelihood of serious erosion occurring
either during or after construction. This must be accomplished by
limiting the amount and length of time of bare ground exposure.
Temporary groundcover, sediment entrapment facilities,
vegetated buffer strips, or other appropriate techniques must be
used to minimize erosion impacts on surface water features.
Erosion control plans approved by a soil and water conservation
district may be required if project size and site physical
characteristics warrant.
(2) Erosion control and stormwater management plans must be
developed and the PUD must be designed and constructed to
effectively manage reasonably expected quantities and qualities
of stormwater runoff. Impervious surface coverage within any tier
must not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the tier area, except
for mixed-use developments where thirty-five percent (35%)
impervious surface coverage may be allowed in the first tier of
general development lakes with an approved stormwater
management plan and consistency with this section.
Article Last Amended: December 2, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 11:
Land Development Code Article 11 - Page 16 Special Purpose Districts
v. Centralization and Design of Facilities
Centralization and design of facilities and structures must be done
according to the following standards:
(1) Planned unit developments must be connected to the City water
supply and sewer system, if available. On-site water supply and
sewage treatment systems must be centralized and designed and
installed to meet or exceed applicable standards or rules of the
Minnesota Department of Health and this Code. On-site sewage
treatment systems must be located on the most suitable areas of
the development, and sufficient lawn area free of limiting factors
must be provided for a replacement soil treatment system for
each sewage system.
(2) Dwelling units or sites must be clustered into one (1) or more groups
and located on suitable areas of the development. They must be
designed and located to meet or exceed the following
dimensional standards for the relevant shoreland classification:
setback from the ordinary high water level, elevation above the
surface water features, and maximum height. Setbacks from the
ordinary high water level must be increased in accordance with
density increases.
(3) Shore recreation facilities including, but not limited to, swimming
areas, docks, and watercraft mooring areas and launching ramps,
must be centralized and located in areas suitable for them.
Evaluation of suitability must include consideration of land slope,
water depth, vegetation, soils, depth to groundwater and
bedrock, and other relevant factors. The number of spaces
provided for continuous beaching, mooring or docking of
watercraft must not exceed one (1) for each permitted dwelling
unit or site in the first tier, notwithstanding existing mooring sites in
an existing commercially-used harbor. Launching ramp facilities,
including a small dock for loading and unloading equipment, may
be provided for use by occupants of dwelling units or sites located
in other tiers.
(4) Structures, parking areas and other facilities must be treated to
reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent
shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color
or other means acceptable to the local unit of government,
assuming summer, leaf-on conditions. Vegetative and
topographic screening must be preserved, if existing, or may be
required to be provided.
(5) Accessory structures and facilities, except water-oriented
accessory structures, must meet the required principal structure
setback and must be centralized. Water-oriented accessory
structures and facilities may be allowed if they meet or exceed
design standards of the Shoreland Overlay District and are
centralized.
Article Last Amended: December 2, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 11:
Land Development Code Article 11 - Page 17 Special Purpose Districts
f. Conversions to Residential-Only Developments
The City may allow existing resorts or other land uses and facilities to be
converted to residential-only developments if all of the following standards
are met:
i. Proposed conversions must be initially evaluated using the same
procedures for new construction of residential-only developments.
Inconsistencies between existing features of the development and these
standards must be identified.
ii. Deficiencies involving water supply and sewage treatment, structure
color, impervious coverage, open space and shore recreation facilities
must be corrected as part of the conversion or as specified in the
approval conditions.
iii. Shore and bluff impact zone deficiencies must be evaluated, and
reasonable improvements made, as part of the conversion. These
improvements must include, where applicable, the following:
(1) Removal of extraneous buildings, docks or other facilities that no
longer need to be located in shore or bluff impact zones.
(2) Remedial measures to correct erosion sites and improve vegetative
cover and screening of buildings and other facilities as viewed from
the water.
(3) If existing dwelling units are located in shore or bluff impact zones,
conditions must be attached to approvals of conversions that
preclude exterior expansions in any dimension or substantial
alterations. The conditions must also provide for future relocation of
dwelling units, where feasible, to other locations, meeting all setback
and elevation requirements when they are rebuilt or replaced.
iv. Existing dwelling unit or site densities that exceed the standards may be
allowed to continue but must not be increased, either at the time of
conversion or in the future. Efforts must be made during the conversion to
limit impacts of high densities by requiring seasonal use, improving
vegetative screening, centralizing shore recreation facilities, installing new
sewage treatment systems, or other means.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 1 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
Article 12. Overlay Districts and
Designated Areas
12.1 FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
12.2 SHORELAND OVERLAY DISTRICT
12.3 SCENIC RIVERS OVERLAY DISTRICT
12.4 ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS
12.5 HISTORIC DISTRICT OVERLAY DISTRICTS
12.1 FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
A. Purpose
The legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 103 and
Chapter 462, delegated responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations
designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council has adopted these
floodplain regulations and the Floodplain Overlay District.
It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare, and to minimize those losses within the flood hazard areas of the City, which
are subject to periodic inundation that results in potential loss of life, loss of property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of
the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare. These regulations are based upon a reasonable method of analyzing flood
hazards consistent with the standards established by the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources (DNR).
B. Designation
1. This Floodplain Overlay District applies to all lands within the City shown on the
Official Zoning Map, and/or any attachments thereto, as being located within
the boundaries of the Floodway, Flood Fringe or General Floodplain Districts.
2. The Official Zoning Map, and/or any attachments thereto, is adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of these regulations and this Code. The
attached material prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) for the following jurisdictions include the following:
a. Flood Insurance Studies
i. Stearns County, Minnesota and Incorporated Areas 27145CV000A,
dated February 16, 2012
ii. Sherburne County, Minnesota and Incorporated Areas 27141CV000A,
dated November 16, 2011
iii. Benton County, Minnesota and Incorporated Areas 27009CV000A, dated
August 16, 2011
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 2 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
b. Flood Insurance Rate Maps
COMMUNITY PANEL NUMBERS MAP DATED/REVISED
27145C0610E (Stearns Co.) February 16, 2012
27145C0620E (Stearns Co.) February 16, 2012
27145C0628E (Stearns Co.) February 16, 2012
27145C0629E (Stearns Co.) February 16, 2012
27145C0633E (Stearns Co.) February 16, 2012
27145C0640E (Stearns Co.) February 16, 2012
27145C0645E (Stearns Co.) February 16, 2012
27145C0860E (Stearns Co.) February 16, 2012
27145C0880E 9Stearns Co.) February 16, 2012
27141C0020 F (Sherburne Co.) November 16, 2011
27141C0040 F (Sherburne Co.) November 16, 2011
27141C0045 F (Sherburne Co.) November 16, 2011
27009C0258E (Benton Co.) August 16, 2011
27009C0259E (Benton Co.) August 16, 2011
27009C0270E (Benton Co.) August 16, 2011
27009C0278E (Benton Co.) August 16, 2011
27009C0280E (Benton Co.) August 16, 2011
27009C0285E (Benton Co.) August 16, 2011
27009C0295E (Benton Co.) August 16, 2011
C. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
These regulations do not imply that areas outside the Floodplain Overlay District,
or the permitted uses, will be free from flooding or flood damages. These
regulations must not create liability on the part of the City, or any officer or
employee thereof, for any flood damages that result from reliance on these
regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
D. Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation
The regulatory flood protection elevation must be an elevation no lower than one
(1) foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood
elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from
designation of a floodway.
E. Certification
As-built elevations for elevated or flood-proofed structures must be certified by
ground surveys, and flood-proofing techniques must be designed and certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect.
F. Floodplain Overlay District Sub-Districts
1. Established Sub-Districts
The Floodplain Overlay District is divided into the following three (3) subdistricts:
a. FW Floodway District
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 3 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
b. FF Flood Fringe District
c. GF General Floodplain District
2. Floodway District
The FW Floodway District includes those areas designated as floodway on the
Flood Insurance Rate Maps. The following regulations apply to the FW District.
a. Permitted Uses
i. The following uses are permitted in the FW District, subject to the
conditions of Paragraph ii below. All uses not listed as a permitted or
conditional use are prohibited.
(1) General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop
harvesting.
(2) Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas and airport
landing strips.
(3) Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges,
archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming
areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet
ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and single or multiple purpose
recreational trails.
(4) Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
ii. The permitted uses within the FW District, as listed in Paragraph i
above, are subject to the following conditions:
(1) The use has a low flood damage potential.
(2) The use is allowed in the underlying zoning district.
(3) The use must not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations
and must not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or
storage of materials or equipment.
b. Conditional Uses
i. The following uses are allowed as conditional uses in the FW District,
subject to the conditions of Paragraph ii below. All uses not listed as a
permitted or conditional use are prohibited.
(1) Structures accessory to the uses listed in Paragraph a (Permitted
Uses) above and the conditional uses listed below.
(2) Extraction and storage of sand, gravel and other materials.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 4 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
(3) Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves and water control
structures.
(4) Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and pipelines.
(5) Storage yards for equipment, machinery or materials.
(6) Placement of fill and construction of fences that obstruct flood
flows.
(7) Structural works for flood control, such as levees, dikes and
floodwalls constructed to any height where the intent is to protect
individual structures, and levees or dikes where the intent is to
protect agricultural crops for a frequency flood event equal to or
less than the ten (10) year frequency flood event.
ii. The conditional uses within the FW District, as listed in Paragraph i
above, are subject to the following conditions:
(1) No temporary or permanent structure, fill, including fill for roads
and levees, deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or
equipment, or other uses may be allowed as a conditional use
that will cause any increase in the stage of the one-hundred (100)
year or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages in
the reach or reaches affected.
(2) All floodway conditional uses are subject to the conditional use
permit procedure (Section 4.3).
(3) A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway must not
cause an increase to the one-hundred (100) year or regional
flood, and the technical analysis must assume equal conveyance
or storage loss on both sides of a stream.
(4) The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding,
flammable, explosive or potentially injurious to human, animal or
plant life is prohibited. Storage of other materials or equipment
may be allowed if readily removable from the area within the time
available after a flood warning and in accordance with a plan
approved by the City.
(5) Fill, dredge spoil, and all other similar materials deposited or stored
in the floodplain must comply with the following:
(A) Materials deposited or stored in the floodplain must be
protected from erosion by vegetative cover, mulching, riprap
or other acceptable method.
(B) Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations are not
allowed in the FW District unless a long-term site development
plan is submitted, which includes an erosion/sedimentation
prevention element to the plan. As an alternative, dredge spoil
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 5 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
disposal and sand and gravel operations may allow
temporary, on-site storage of fill or other materials which would
have caused an increase to the stage of the one-hundred
(100) year or regional flood but only after the City has received
an appropriate plan which assures the removal of the
materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning
time available. The conditional use permit must be title
registered with the property in the Office of the County
Recorder.
c. Accessory Structures
The following conditions apply to all accessory structures in the FW District:
i. Accessory structures must not be designed for human habitation.
ii. Accessory structures, if permitted, must be constructed and placed on
the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of
flood waters.
iii. Whenever possible, structures must be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow and, so far as
practicable, structures must be placed approximately on the same
flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
iv. Accessory structures must be elevated on fill or structurally dry floodproofed
in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood-proofing
classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an
accessory structure may be flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 floodproofing
classification in the State Building Code, provided the
accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment and does not
exceed five-hundred (500) square feet in size. A detached garage
must be used solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage.
v. All flood-proofed accessory structures must be adequately anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure,
and must be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls. Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be
elevated to, or above, the regulatory flood protection elevation or
properly flood-proofed.
vi. To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must be a
minimum of two “automatic” openings in the outside walls of the
structure having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. There must be
openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all
openings must be no higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent
grade to the structure. Using human intervention to open a garage
door prior to flooding will not satisfy this requirement for automatic
openings.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 6 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
d. Prohibited Uses and Structures
Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current or
cross-section of protected wetlands or public waters are subject to the
provisions of Minnesota Statute, Chapter 105. Community-wide structural
works for flood control intended to remove areas from the regulatory
floodplain, manufactured homes and recreational vehicles are prohibited
in the floodway.
3. Flood Fringe District
The FF Flood Fringe District includes those areas designated as Zone AE
outside of the floodway on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
a. Permitted Uses
i. Permitted uses are those uses of land or structures listed as permitted
uses in the underlying zoning use district(s), unless it is considered a
conditional use under Paragraph b (Conditional Uses) below. If no preexisting,
underlying zoning district exists, then any residential or nonresidential
structure or use of a structure or land is a permitted use in
the FF District provided such use does not constitute a public
nuisance, unless it is considered a conditional use under Paragraph b
(Conditional Uses) below. All permitted uses must comply with the
standards of Paragraph ii below and Paragraph c (Standards for all
Uses) below.
ii. The permitted uses within the FF District, as listed in Paragraph i above,
are subject to the following conditions:
(1) All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on
fill so that the lowest floor, including the basement floor, is at or
above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill
elevation for structures must be no lower than one (1) foot below
the regulatory flood protection elevation and the fill must extend
at such elevation at least fifteen (15) feet beyond the outside limits
of the structure erected thereon.
(2) As an alternative to elevation of fill, accessory structures that
constitute a minimal investment and do not exceed five-hundred
(500) square feet for the outside dimension at ground level may be
internally flood-proofed. Accessory structures must be elevated on
fill or structurally dry flood-proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or
FP-2 flood-proofing classifications in the State Building Code. As an
alternative, an accessory structure may be flood proofed to the
FP-3 or FP-4 flood-proofing classification in the State Building Code
provided the accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment
and does not exceed five-hundred (500) square feet in size. A
detached garage must be used solely for parking of vehicles and
limited storage. All flood-proofed accessory structures must be
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure, and must be designed to equalize
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 7 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. Any mechanical and
utility equipment in a structure must be elevated to, or above, the
regulatory flood protection elevation or properly flood-proofed.
To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must be
a minimum of two “automatic” openings in the outside walls of the
structure having a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. There
must be openings on at least two sides of the structure and the
bottom of all openings must be no higher than one foot above the
lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using human intervention
to open a garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy this
requirement for automatic openings.
(3) The cumulative placement of fill where, at any one time, in excess
of one-thousand (1,000) cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel
is allowed only as a conditional use, unless said fill is specifically
intended to elevate a structure in accordance with Paragraph (1)
above.
(4) The storage of any materials or equipment must be elevated on fill
to the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
b. Conditional Uses
i. Any structure that is not elevated on fill or flood-proofed in
accordance with, or any use of land that does not comply with the
standards of, Paragraph a (Permitted Uses) above is only allowable as
a conditional use. All conditional uses must comply with the standards
of Paragraph ii below and Paragraph c (Standards for all Uses) below.
ii. The conditional uses within the FF District, as listed in Paragraph i
above, are subject to the following conditions:
(1) Alternative elevation methods, other than the use of fill, may be
utilized to elevate a structure’s lowest floor above the regulatory
flood protection elevation. These alternative methods may include
the use of stilts, pilings, parallel walls, etc., or above-grade,
enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck-under garages,
subject to the following:
(A) The base or floor of an enclosed area is considered abovegrade
and not a basement or lowest floor if:
(i) The enclosed area is above-grade on at least one (1) side
of the structure.
(ii) It is designed to internally flood and is constructed with
flood-resistant materials.
(iii) It is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access
or storage.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 8 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
(B) The structure’s design and as-built condition must be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect as being in
compliance with the general design standards of the State
Building Code and, specifically, that all electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities must be at or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation or be designed to prevent flood water
from entering or accumulating within these components
during times of flooding.
(C) Above-grade, fully enclosed areas, such as crawl spaces or
tuck-under garages, must be designed to internally flood and
the design plan must stipulate:
(i) A minimum area of “automatic” openings in the walls
where internal flooding is to be used as a flood proofing
technique. There shall be a minimum of two openings on
at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all
openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
The automatic openings shall have a minimum net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding unless a registered
professional engineer or architect certifies that a smaller
net area would suffice. The automatic openings may be
equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings
or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry
and exit of flood waters without any form of human
intervention; and,
(ii) That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant
materials in accordance with the FP-3 and FP-4
classifications in the State Building Code and must be used
solely for building access, parking of vehicles, or storage.
(D) Residential basement construction is not allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
(E) All areas of non-residential structures, including basements, to
be placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation
must be flood-proofed in accordance with the structurally dry
flood-proofing classifications in the State Building Code.
Structurally dry flood- proofing must meet the FP-1 or FP-2
flood-proofing classification in the State Building Code and this
requires making the structure watertight with the walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy. Structures flood-proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4
classification are not permitted.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 9 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
(F) When at any one time more than one-thousand (1,000) cubic
yards of fill or other similar material is located on a parcel for
such activities as on-site storage, landscaping, sand and
gravel operations, landfills, roads, dredge spoil disposal or
construction of flood control works, an erosion and
sedimentation control plan must be submitted unless the
community is enforcing a state-approved shoreland
management ordinance. In the absence of a state-approved
shoreland ordinance, the plan must clearly specify methods to
be used to stabilize the fill on site for a flood event at a
minimum of the one-hundred (100) year or regional flood
event. The plan must be prepared and certified by a
registered professional engineer or other qualified individual
acceptable to the City. The plan may incorporate alternative
procedures for removal of the material from the floodplain if
adequate flood warning time exists.
(G) The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive or potentially injurious to
human, animal or plant life are prohibited. Storage of other
materials or equipment may be allowed if readily removable
from the area within the time available after a flood warning
and in accordance with a plan approved by the City.
c. Standards for all Uses
i. All new principal structures must have vehicular access at, or above,
an elevation not more than two (2) feet below the regulatory flood
protection elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the
Zoning Board of Appeals must specify limitations on the period of use
or occupancy of the structure for times of flooding and only after
determining that adequate flood warning time and local flood
emergency response procedures exist.
ii. Accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad tracks and parking lots,
may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood protection
elevation. A permit for such facilities, used by employees or the
general public, may be granted only where a flood warning system is
in place that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area were
to be inundated to a depth and velocity such that when multiplying
the depth (in feet) times velocity (in feet per second) the product
number exceeds four (4) upon occurrence of the regional flood.
iii. Measures must be taken to minimize interference with normal
manufacturing and industrial plant operations, especially along
streams having protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land
uses such as yards and parking lots may be at lower elevations subject
to requirements set out in Paragraph ii above. In considering permit
applications, due consideration must be given to needs of an industry
whose business requires that it be located in floodplain areas.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 10 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
iv. Fill must be properly compacted and the slopes must be properly
protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable
method. FEMA has established criteria for removing the special flood
hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill
above the one-hundred (100) year flood elevation. FEMA’s
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope
protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments.
These standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site
preparation if a change of special flood hazard area designation will
be requested.
v. Floodplain developments must not adversely affect the hydraulic
capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary
watercourse or drainage system where a floodway or other
encroachment limit has not been specified on the Official Zoning
Map.
vi. New and existing manufactured home parks are subject to the
following:
(1) All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation,
collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame
ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable
state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(2) New manufactured home parks and expansion of existing
manufactured home parks are subject to the subdivision
regulations for the Floodplain Overlay District.
(3) The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in
existing manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record
that are located in the Floodplain Overlay District will be treated
as a new structure and may be placed only if elevated in
compliance with the FF District provisions. If vehicular road access
for pre-existing manufactured home parks is not provided in
accordance with Paragraph i above, then replacement
manufactured homes will not be allowed until the owner(s)
develops a flood warning emergency plan acceptable to the
City.
(4) Travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the following:
(A) Travel trailers and travel vehicles may be located in the
following areas:
(i) Individual lots or parcels of record.
(ii) Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 11 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
(iii) Existing condominium type associations.
(B) The following conditions must be met:
(i) Have current licenses required for highway use.
(ii) Are highway-ready, meaning on wheels or the internal
jacking system, are attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities commonly used in campgrounds
and trailer parks and the travel trailer or travel vehicle has
no permanent structural type additions attached to it.
(iii) The travel trailer or travel vehicle and associated use must
be permissible in any pre-existing, underlying zoning use
district.
(iv) The travel trailer or travel vehicle may not be placed in a
FW District.
(C) Exempt travel trailers and travel vehicles lose exemption status
when development occurs on the parcel exceeding onethousand
dollars ($1,000) for a structural addition to the travel
trailer or travel vehicle or an accessory structure, such as a
garage or storage building. The travel trailer or travel vehicle,
and all additions and accessory structures, will then be
treated as a new structure and are subject to the elevation
and/or flood-proofing requirements and the use of land
restrictions specified in the FF District.
(D) New commercial travel trailer or travel vehicle parks or
campgrounds and new residential-type subdivisions and
condominium associations and the expansion of any existing
similar use exceeding five (5) units or dwelling sites are subject
to the following:
(i) Any new or replacement travel trailer or travel vehicle may
be allowed in the FF District provided said trailer or vehicle
and its contents are placed on fill above the regulatory
flood protection elevation and proper elevated road
access to the site exists in accordance with Paragraph i
above. Any fill placed in the FF District for the purpose of
elevating a travel trailer must be protected from erosion by
vegetative cover, mulching, riprap or other acceptable
method.
(ii) All new or replacement travel trailers or travel vehicles not
meeting the criteria above may, as an alternative, be
allowed as a conditional use and subject to a conditional
use permit, and must submit an emergency plan for the
safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the onehundred
(100) year flood. The plan must be prepared by a
registered engineer or other qualified individual, and
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 12 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to
carry out the evacuation and that the provisions of (4) (B)
above are satisfied. All attendant sewage and water
facilities for new or replacement travel trailers or other
recreational vehicles must be protected or constructed so
as to not be impaired or contaminated during times of
flooding. On-site water supply systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems, and new or replacement on-site sewage
treatment systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters, and they are
not subject to impairment or contamination during times of
flooding. Any sewage treatment system designed in
accordance with the State’s current statewide standards
for on- site sewage treatment systems is in compliance with
this Section.
4. General Floodplain District
The GF General Floodplain District includes those areas designated as
Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
a. Permitted Uses
i. All permitted uses of the FW District are permitted within the GF
District.
ii. All other uses are subject to the evaluation criteria pursuant to
Paragraph b (Procedures for FW and FF District Determination
within the GF District) below. FW District provisions apply if the
proposed use is in the FW District, and FF District provisions apply if
the proposed use is in the FF District.
b. Procedures for FW and FF District Determination within the GF District
i. Submittal Requirements
Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other approval
within the GF District, the applicant is required to furnish the
following information, as deemed necessary by the Zoning
Administrator, for the determination of the regulatory flood
protection elevation and whether the proposed use is within the
FW or FF District.
(1) A typical valley cross-section(s) showing the channel of the
stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the
channel, cross-sectional areas to be occupied by the
proposed development, and high water information.
(2) Surface view plan showing elevations or contours of the
ground, pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations, the size,
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 13 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
location and spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing
structures on the site, and the location and elevations of
streets.
(3) Photographs showing existing land uses, vegetation upstream
and downstream, and soil types.
(4) Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow
line of the stream for at least five-hundred (500) feet in either
direction from the proposed development.
ii. Expert Evaluation
The applicant is responsible to submit one (1) copy of the above
information to a designated engineer or other expert person or
agency for technical assistance in determining whether the
proposed use is in the FW or FF District, and to determine the
regulatory flood protection elevation. Procedures consistent with
Minnesota Regulations, Parts 6120.5000 - 6120.6200 and 44 Code of
Federal Regulations Part 65 must be followed in this expert
evaluation. The designated engineer or expert is strongly
encouraged to discuss the proposed technical evaluation
methodology with the respective Department of Natural
Resources Area Hydrologist prior to commencing the analysis.
The designated engineer or expert will:
(1) Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood.
(2) Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based
upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank
areas.
(3) Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the
regional flood without increasing flood stages more than onehalf
(0.5) foot. A lesser stage increase than one-half (0.5) foot is
required if, as a result of the additional stage increase,
increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of
encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach is
assumed in computing floodway boundaries.
iii. Procedure
The Zoning Administrator will present the technical evaluation and
findings of the designated engineer or expert to the City Council.
The City Council must formally accept the technical evaluation
and the recommended FW or FF District boundary, or deny the
permit application. The City Council, prior to official action, may
submit the application and all supporting data and analyses to
FEMA, the DNR or the Planning Commission for review and
comment. Once the FW and FF District boundaries have been
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 14 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
determined, the City Council will refer the matter back to the
Zoning Administrator who processes the permit application.
12.2 SHORELAND OVERLAY DISTRICT
A. Purpose
The Shoreland Overlay District is adopted pursuant to the authorization and policies
contained in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 103F, Minnesota Regulations, Parts
6120.2500 - 6120.3900, and the planning and zoning enabling legislation in Minnesota
Statutes, Chapter 462. The uncontrolled use of shorelands in the City affects the
public health, safety and general welfare by contributing to pollution of public waters
and impairing the local tax base. Therefore, it is in the best interests of the public
health, safety and welfare to provide for the wise subdivision, use and development
of shorelands of public waters. The Legislature of Minnesota has delegated
responsibility to local governments of the state to regulate the subdivision, use and
development of the shorelands of public waters, and thus preserve and enhance the
quality of surface waters, conserve the economic and natural environmental values
of shorelands, and provide for the wise use of waters and related land resources.
B. Applicability
The use of any shoreland of public waters, the size and shape of lots, the use, size,
type and location of structures on lots, the installation and maintenance of water
supply and waste treatment systems, the grading and filling of any shoreland area,
the cutting of shoreland vegetation, and the subdivision of land must be in full
compliance with these regulations.
C. Designation
The provisions of this district apply to the shorelands of the public water bodies as
classified below. Pursuant to Minnesota Regulations, Parts 6120.2500 - 6120.3900, a
lake, pond or flowage less than ten (10) acres in size is not required to be regulated
by these shoreland provisions. A body of water created by a private user where there
was no previous shoreland may, at the discretion of the City, be considered exempt
from these shoreland regulations.
The public waters of the City, subject to the shoreland regulations, have been
classified below, consistent with the criteria found in Minnesota Regulations, Part
6120.3300, and the Protected Waters Inventory Map for Benton, Sherburne, and
Stearns Counties, Minnesota.
The shoreland area for the Sauk River and the Mississippi River, classified as urban
rivers, are defined under the definition of “shoreland” in this Code, and as shown on
the Official Zoning Map.
D. Permitted and Conditional Uses
1. The permitted and conditional uses of the underlying zoning district apply within
the Shoreland Overlay District. Additional permitted uses and standards are also
contained within Paragraph 2 below. The following criteria must be considered
for any permitted or conditional use:
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 15 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
a. Preservation of natural areas.
b. Present ownership and development of shoreland areas.
c. Shoreland soil types and their engineering capabilities.
d. Topographic characteristics.
e. Vegetative cover.
f. In-water physical characteristics, values and constraints.
g. Recreational use of the surface water.
h. Road and service center accessibility.
i. Socioeconomic development needs and plans as they involve water and
related land resources.
j. The land requirements of industry, which, by its nature, requires location in
shoreland areas.
k. The necessity to preserve and restore certain areas having significant
historical or ecological value.
2. Use Standards
The following use standards apply to commercial, industrial, public and semipublic,
agricultural, forestry, and extractive uses and mining of metallic minerals
and peat.
a. Standards for Water-Oriented Commercial, Industrial, Public and Semi-Public
Uses
Surface water-oriented commercial, industrial, public and semi-public uses
with similar needs to have access to and use of public waters may be located
on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters. Those uses with wateroriented
needs must meet the following standards:
i. In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits, setbacks and other
zoning standards in this Code, the uses must be designed to incorporate
topographic and vegetative screening of parking areas and structures.
ii. Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons must centralize
these facilities, design them to avoid obstructions of navigation, and to be
the minimum size necessary to meet the need.
iii. Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may use signs and
lighting to convey needed information to the public, subject to the
following general standards:
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 16 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
(1) No advertising signs or supporting facilities for signs may be placed in
or upon public waters. Signs conveying information or safety messages
may be placed in or on public waters by a public authority or under a
permit issued by the County Sheriff.
(2) Signs may be placed, when necessary, within the shore impact zone if
they are designed and sized to be the minimum necessary to convey
needed information. The signs must only convey the location and
name of the establishment and the general types of goods or services
available. The signs must not contain other detailed information, such
as product brands and prices, must not be located higher than ten
(10) feet above the ground, and must not exceed thirty-two (32)
square feet in size. If illuminated by artificial lights, the lights must be
shielded or directed to prevent illumination out across public waters.
iv. Outside lighting may be located within the shore impact zone or over
public waters if it is used primarily to illuminate potential safety hazards
and is shielded or otherwise directed to prevent direct illumination out
across public waters. This does not preclude use of navigational lights.
v. Industrial uses require a conditional use permit.
b. Standards for Non-Water-Oriented Commercial, Industrial, Public and Semi-
Public Uses
Non-residential uses without water-oriented needs must be located on lots or
parcels without public waters frontage or, if located on lots or parcels with
public waters frontage, must either be set back twice the normal ordinary
high water level setback or be substantially screened from view from the
water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
c. Agriculture Use Standards
General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, sod
farming and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses if steep slopes and shore
and bluff impact zones are maintained in permanent vegetation or operated
under an approved conservation plan (Resource Management Systems)
consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water
conservation districts or the United States Soil Conservation Service, as
provided by a qualified individual or agency. The shore impact zone for
parcels with permitted agricultural land uses is equal to a line parallel to and
fifty (50) feet from the ordinary high water level. Animal feedlots are
prohibited.
d. Forest Management Standards
The harvesting of timber and associated reforestation must be conducted
consistent with the provisions of the Minnesota Non-Point Source Pollution
Assessment-Forestry and the provisions of Water Quality in Forest
Management “Best Management Practices in Minnesota.”
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 17 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
e. Extractive Use Standards
i. Extractive uses require a conditional use permit.
ii. An extractive use site development and restoration plan must be
developed, approved and followed over the course of operation of the
site. The plan must address dust, noise, possible pollutant discharges, hours
and duration of operation, and anticipated vegetation and topographic
alterations. It must also identify actions to be taken during operation to
mitigate adverse environmental impacts, particularly erosion, and must
clearly explain how the site will be rehabilitated after extractive activities
end.
iii. Processing machinery must be located consistent with setback standards
for structures from ordinary high water levels of public waters and from
bluffs.
f. Mining of Metallic Minerals and Peat
Mining of metallic minerals and peat, as defined in Minnesota Statutes,
Sections 93.44 to 93.51, are a permitted use provided the provisions of
Minnesota Statutes, Sections 93.44 to 93.51, are satisfied.
g. Residential Uses
i. Residential subdivisions with dwelling unit densities exceeding those in
Table 12-1 are only allowed if designed and approved as a planned unit
development. Only land above the ordinary high water level of public
waters can be used to meet lot area standards. Lot width standards must
be met at both the ordinary high water level and at the building line.
ii. Lots intended as private controlled accesses to public waters, or as
recreation areas for use by owners of non-riparian lots within subdivisions,
are prohibited.
E. Bulk and Setback Regulations
The bulk and setback regulations of the underlying zoning district apply unless
otherwise modified by this section. Table 12-1: Shoreland Overlay District Bulk and
Setback Regulations establishes bulk and setback regulations for the Shoreland
Overlay District. Additional land development restrictions are located in Paragraph F
(Land Development Restrictions) below.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 18 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
TABLE 12-1: SHORELAND OVERLAY DISTRICT BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS SHORELAND OVERLAY DISTRICT
Bulk Requirements
Minimum Lot Width
Single-Family Dwelling – 100 ft
Two-Family Dwelling – 150 ft
Multi-Family Dwelling – 3 Units: 200 ft
Multi-Family Dwelling – 4 Units: 250 ft
Maximum Building Height1 35 ft
Maximum Impervious Surface2 30%
Setback Requirements
Setback from Ordinary High Water Level3 75 ft
Setback from Top of Bluff 30 ft
Setback from Unplatted Cemetery 50 ft
Setback from Federal, State or County Highway Right-of-Way 50 ft
Setback from Town Road, Public Street or Other Roads or Streets Not
Classified Right-of-Way and Parking Lots, Except Public Non-Motorized
Trails
20 ft
FOOTNOTES TABLE 12-1
1 Non-residential agricultural structures are exempt from the height restriction.
2 In lieu of meeting this impervious surface requirement, a property may submit a stormwater drainage
plan, certified by a licensed engineer, to the City for review and approval which restricts the developed 5
year frequency event peak discharge to a rate no greater than the 5 year historic undeveloped peak
discharge. To the maximum extent possible, the drainage plan must also provide for methods of runoff
settlement and/or filtration prior to discharge to the receiving water.
3 One water-oriented accessory structure designed in accordance with this section may be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from the ordinary high water level.
F. Land Development Restrictions
1. Placement of Structures on Lots
When more than one (1) setback applies to a site, structures and facilities must be
located to meet all setbacks. Where principal buildings exist on the adjoining lots
on both sides of a proposed principal building site, principal building setbacks
may be altered, without a variance, to conform to the adjoining setbacks from
the ordinary high water level, provided the proposed building site is not located
in a shore impact zone or in a bluff impact zone and is a minimum of twenty-five
(25) feet from the ordinary high water level.
2. Bluff Impact Zones
Structures and accessory facilities, except stairways and landings, may not be
placed within bluff impact zones.
3. Steep Slopes
The Zoning Administrator must evaluate possible soil erosion impacts and
development visibility from public waters before issuing a permit for construction
of sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways, structures or other improvements
on steep slopes. When determined necessary, conditions must be attached to
issued permits to prevent erosion and to preserve existing vegetation screening of
structures, vehicles, and other facilities as viewed from the surface of public
waters, assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 19 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
4. Setbacks and Screening for Uses Without Water-Oriented Needs
Non-residential uses without water-oriented needs must be located on lots or
parcels without public waters frontage or, if located on lots or parcels with public
waters frontage, must either be set back twice the normal ordinary high water
level setback or be substantially screened from view from the water by
vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
5. High Water Elevations
Structures must be placed in high water elevations in accord with the floodplain
regulations. Water-oriented accessory structures may have the lowest floor
placed lower than the elevation determined in this item if: 1) the structure is
constructed of flood-resistant materials to the elevation; 2) electrical and
mechanical equipment is placed above the elevation; and 3) if long duration
flooding is anticipated, the structure is built to withstand ice action and winddriven
waves and debris.
6. Design Criteria For Structures
a. Water-Oriented Accessory Structures
Each lot may have one (1) water-oriented accessory structure not meeting
the normal structure setback if this water-oriented accessory structure
complies with the following:
i. The structure or facility must not exceed ten (10) feet in height, exclusive
of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area greater than one-hundred fifty
(150) square feet. Detached decks must not exceed four (4) feet above
grade at any point.
ii. The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary high water level
must be at least ten (10) feet.
iii. The structure or facility must be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from
public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography,
increased setbacks or color, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
iv. The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails, but must not be
enclosed or used as a storage area.
v. The structure or facility must not be designed or used for human
habitation, and must not contain water supply or sewage treatment
facilities.
b. Stairways, Lifts and Landings
Stairways and lifts are the preferred alternative to major topographic
alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore
areas. Stairways and lifts must meet the following design requirements:
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 20 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
i. Stairways and lifts must not exceed four (4) feet in width on residential lots.
Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties, public open
space recreational properties, and planned unit developments.
ii. Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots must not exceed twentyfour
(24) square feet in area. Landings larger than twenty-four (24) square
feet may be used for commercial properties, public open space
recreational properties, and planned unit developments.
iii. Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts or landings.
iv. Stairways, lifts and landings may be either constructed above the ground
on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground, provided they are designed
and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion.
v. Stairways, lifts and landings must be located in the most visually
inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the public
water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical.
vi. Facilities, such as ramps, lifts or mobility paths, for physically handicapped
persons are also allowed for achieving access to shore areas, provided
that the dimensional and performance standards comply with the
requirements above, in addition to the requirements of Minnesota
Regulations, Chapter 1340.
c. Significant Historic Sites
No structure may be placed on a significant historic site in a manner that
affects the values of the site unless adequate information about the site has
been removed and documented in a public repository.
G. Shoreland Alterations
Alterations of vegetation and topography will be regulated to prevent erosion into
public waters, fix nutrients, preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values,
prevent bank slumping, and protect fish and wildlife habitat.
1. Vegetation Alterations
Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of structures and sewage
treatment systems, and the construction of roads and parking areas regulated by
this section are exempt from the vegetation alteration standards that follow.
Removal or alteration of vegetation, except for agricultural and forest
management uses, is allowed subject to the following standards:
a. Intensive vegetation clearing within the shore and bluff impact zones and on
steep slopes is prohibited. Intensive vegetation clearing for forest land
conversion to another use outside of these areas is permitted as a conditional
use if an erosion control and sedimentation plan is developed and approved
by the soil and water conservation district in which the property is located.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 21 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
b. In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes, limited clearing of trees
and shrubs and cutting, pruning and trimming of trees is allowed to provide a
view to the water from the principal dwelling site and to accommodate the
placement of stairways and landings, picnic areas, access paths, livestock
watering areas, beach and watercraft access areas, and permitted wateroriented
accessory structures or facilities, provided that:
i. The screening of structures, vehicles or other facilities as viewed from the
water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, is not substantially reduced.
ii. Along rivers, existing shading of water surfaces is preserved.
iii. The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of trees, limbs or
branches that are dead, diseased or pose safety hazards.
2. Topographic Alterations and Grading and Filling
Grading and filling and excavations necessary for the construction of structures,
sewage treatment systems and driveways under validly issued construction
permits for these facilities do not require the issuance of a separate grading and
filling permit. However, the grading and filling standards in this section must be
incorporated into the issuance of permits for construction of structures, sewage
treatment systems and driveways. A grading and filling permit will be required for
the movement of more than ten (10) cubic yards of material on steep slopes or
within shore or bluff impact zones or the movement of more than fifty (50) cubic
yards of material outside of steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones.
The following considerations and conditions must be adhered to during the
issuance of construction permits, grading and filling permits, conditional use
permits, variances and subdivision approvals:
a. Grading or filling in any Type 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 or 8 Wetland must be evaluated to
determine how extensively the proposed activity would affect the following
functional qualities of the wetland:
i. Sediment and pollutant trapping and retention.
ii. Storage of surface runoff to prevent or reduce flood damage.
iii. Fish and wildlife habitat.
iv. Recreational use.
v. Shoreline or bank stabilization.
vi. Noteworthiness, including special qualities such as historic significance,
critical habitat for endangered plants and animals and others.
This evaluation must also include a determination of whether the wetland
alteration being proposed requires permits, reviews or approvals by other
local, state or federal agencies, such as a watershed district, the DNR, or the
United States Army Corps of Engineers. The applicant will be so advised.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 22 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
b. Alterations must be designed and conducted in a manner that ensures only
the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest time possible.
c. Mulches or similar materials must be used, where necessary, for temporary
bare soil coverage, and a permanent vegetation cover must be established
as soon as possible.
d. Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before they reach any
surface water feature must be used.
e. Altered areas must be stabilized to acceptable erosion control standards
consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water
conservation districts and the United States Soil Conservation Service.
f. Fill or excavated material must not be placed in a manner that creates an
unstable slope.
g. Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes must be reviewed by
qualified professionals for continued slope stability and must not create
finished slopes of thirty percent (30%) or greater.
h. Fill or excavated material must not be placed in bluff impact zones.
i. Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of public waters must first
be authorized by the Commissioner under Minnesota Statutes, Section 105.42.
j. Alterations of topography must only be allowed if they are accessory to
permitted or conditional uses and do not adversely affect adjacent or nearby
properties.
k. Placement of natural rock riprap, including associated grading of the
shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, is permitted if the finished slope
does not exceed three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical, the
landward extent of the riprap is within ten (10) feet of the ordinary high water
level, and the height of the riprap above the ordinary high water level does
not exceed three (3) feet.
3. Connections to Public Waters
Excavations, where the intended purpose is connection to public water, such as
boat slips, canals, lagoons and harbors, must be controlled by local shoreland
controls. Permission for excavations may be given only after the Commissioner of
Natural Resources has approved the proposed connection to public waters.
H. Placement and Design of Roads, Driveways and Parking Areas
1. Public and private roads and parking areas must be designed to take advantage
of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening from view
from public waters. Documentation must be provided by a qualified individual
that all roads and parking areas are designed and constructed to minimize and
control erosion to public waters consistent with the field office technical guides of
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 23 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
the local soil and water conservation district, or other applicable technical
materials.
2. Roads, driveways and parking areas must meet structure setbacks and must not
be placed within bluff and shore impact zones when other reasonable and
feasible placement alternatives exist. If no alternatives exist, they may be placed
within these areas, and must be designed to minimize adverse impacts.
3. Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads and access-related
parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones provided the vegetative
screening and erosion control conditions of this section are met. For private
facilities, the grading and filling provisions of this section must be met.
I. Stormwater Management
The following stormwater management standards apply:
1. When possible, existing natural drainageways, wetlands and vegetated soil
surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter and retain stormwater runoff before
discharge to public waters.
2. Development must be planned and conducted in a manner that will minimize
the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential, and reduce and
delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must be stabilized and protected as soon
as possible, and facilities or methods used to retain sediment on the site.
3. When development density, topographic features, and soil and vegetation
conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle stormwater runoff using natural
features and vegetation, various types of constructed facilities such as diversions,
settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, waterways, and ponds may be used.
Preference must be given to designs using surface drainage, vegetation and
infiltration rather than buried pipes and man-made materials and facilities.
4. When constructed facilities are used for stormwater management,
documentation must be provided that they are designed and installed under the
supervision of a licensed engineer.
5. New constructed stormwater outfalls to public waters must provide for filtering or
settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface debris before discharge,
unless an alternative plan has been approved by the Department of Natural
Resources.
12.3 SCENIC RIVERS OVERLAY DISTRICT
A. Purpose
The purpose of the Scenic Rivers Overlay District is to control bluffland and riverland
development in order to protect and preserve the outstanding scenic, recreational,
natural, historic and scientific values of the designated scenic Mississippi River in St.
Cloud, Minnesota, in a manner consistent with Minnesota Statutes, Section 104.31-
104.40, Minnesota Regulations NR 78-81, and the Management Plan for the Mississippi
River hereafter referred to as NR 2400.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 24 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
The purpose of establishing standards and criteria for uses in the Scenic Rivers Overlay
District is to protect and preserve existing natural, scenic, historic, scientific and
recreational values, to maintain proper relationships between various land use types,
and to prohibit new residential, commercial or industrial uses that are inconsistent
with state-wide standards and criteria for Wild and Scenic Rivers, NR 78-81, and NR
2420.
These regulations are adopted to achieve the following:
1. Designate land use districts along the bluffland and shoreline of the Mississippi
River as required by NR 2420.
2. Regulate the area of a lot, and length of bluffland and water frontage suitable
for building sites.
3. Regulate the setback of structures and sanitary waste treatment facilities from
blufflines and shorelines to protect the existing and/or natural scenic values,
vegetation, soils, water quality, floodplain areas and bedrock from disruption by
man-made structures or facilities.
4. Regulate alterations of the natural vegetation and topography.
5. Maintain property values and prevent poorly planned development.
6. Conserve and protect the natural scenic values and resources of the Mississippi
River, and to maintain a high standard of environmental quality.
7. To comply with Minnesota Regulations NR 78-81 and NR 2410.
B. Designation
In order to preserve and protect the Mississippi River and its adjacent lands which
possess outstanding scenic, recreational, natural, historic, scientific and similar values,
the Mississippi River in the City of St. Cloud has been given the Scenic Rivers Overlay
District classification, and the uses and classification of this river and certain adjacent
lands are hereby designated the Scenic Rivers Overlay District, the boundaries of
which are based on the Mississippi River Management Plan, NR 2400, as amended.
C. Permitted and Conditional Uses
Table 12-2: Scenic Rivers Overlay District Permitted and Conditional Uses lists
permitted uses for the Scenic Rivers Overlay District. A “P” indicates that a use is
considered permitted within that district. A “C” indicates that a use is considered a
conditional use in that district and must obtain a conditional use permit as required in
Section 4.3 (Conditional Use Permit). The absence of the use from the table indicates
that use is not permitted within the district.
TABLE 12-2: SCENIC RIVERS OVERLAY DISTRICT PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
USE SR DISTRICT USE STANDARDS
Agricultural Use P
Dwelling, Single-Family Detached P See Section 14.3.H
Essential Services & Essential Service Structure P See Section 14.3.I
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 25 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
TABLE 12-2: SCENIC RIVERS OVERLAY DISTRICT PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
USE SR DISTRICT USE STANDARDS
Forestry Use P
Government Campground1 P
Government Open Space Recreational Use
(Excluding Government Campground &
Government Resource Management Area)1
P
Government Resource Management Area for
Improving Fish & Wildlife Habitat, Wildlife
Management Areas, Nature Areas, & Accessory
Roads
P
Grading & Filling Activity C See Section 14.3.K
Private Open Space Recreational Use (Excluding
Private Recreational Camping Area)1 C
Private Recreational Camping Area1 C
Private Road & Minor Public Street P
Public Access: Road-Type Access – With Boat
Launching Facilities1 P
Public Access: Trail-Type Access1 P
Public Road C
Sewage Disposal System P
Transmission Services P See Section 14.3.W
Temporary Dock C
FOOTNOTES TABLE 12-2
1 Subject to management plan specifications
D. Bulk and Setback Regulations
Table 12-3: Scenic River District Bulk and Setback Regulations establishes additional
bulk and setback regulations for the Scenic Rivers Overlay District. Additional land
development restrictions are located in Paragraph E below.
TABLE 12-3: SCENIC RIVER OVERLAY DISTRICT BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS
BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS SR DISTRICT
Bulk Requirements
Minimum Lot Area 4 acres
Minimum Lot Width 250 ft at building line
250 ft at water line abutting Mississippi River
Maximum Building Height1 30 ft
Setback Requirements
From Ordinary High Water Mark of Mississippi
River
150 ft
From Blufflines 10 ft
Interior Side Setback 10 ft
Road Setback 50 ft from federal, state or county trunk highway right-of-way
30 ft from road or public street right-of-way
63 ft from centerline of any road easement
FOOTNOTES TABLE 12-3
1 Structures used for agricultural purposes are excluded from building height restriction.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 26 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
E. Land Development Restrictions
1. Slope Restrictions
No structure may be placed on any slope greater than thirteen percent (13%) –
thirteen (13) feet vertical rise in one-hundred (100) feet horizontal distance –
unless such structure can be screened and sewage disposal facilities can be
installed so as to comply with Section 360 of the St. Cloud Code of Ordinances.
2. Floodway Restrictions
No structure may be placed within a floodway. For the purpose of this section,
“floodway” means the channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining flood plains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge the
regional flood. Placement of structures must be in conformance with any
applicable floodplain regulations. Where no regulations are applicable, the
elevation of structures is determined after an evaluation of available flood
information and must be consistent with Statewide Standards and Criteria for
Management of Floodplain Areas of Minnesota.
3. Restrictions on Vegetative Cutting
On lands within one-hundred fifty (150) feet of the ordinary high water mark of the
Mississippi River and on lands thirty (30) feet landward of blufflines, the following
standards apply:
a. Clear cutting, except for any authorized public services such as roads and
utilities, is not permitted.
b. Selective cutting of trees in excess of four (4) inches in diameter at breast
height is permitted provided cutting is spaced in several cutting operations
and a continuous tree cover is maintained.
c. These provisions do not prevent the removal of diseased or insect infested
trees, or of rotten or damaged trees that present safety hazards, or pruning
understory, vegetation, shrubs, plants, brushes, grasses or from harvesting
crops, or cutting suppressed trees or trees less than four (4) inches in diameter
at breast height.
4. Permitted Clear Cutting
Clear cutting of vegetation within the SR District outside the prohibited areas
designated in Paragraph 3 (Restrictions on Vegetative Cutting) above is subject
to the following:
a. Clear cutting must not be used as a cutting method where soil, slope or other
watershed conditions are determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
fragile and subject to severe erosion and/or sedimentation. This determination
may be made with the assistance of the Soil Conservation Service.
b. Clear cutting may be conducted only where clear-cut blocks, patches or
strips are, in all cases, shaped and blended with the natural terrain.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 27 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
c. The size of clear cut blocks, patches or strips must be kept to the minimum
necessary.
12.4 ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS
A. Purpose
1. The intent of these regulations is:
a. To provide and encourage measures of protection to those properties
identified as Environmentally Sensitive Areas (ESA).
b. To provide for equitable economic return in consideration of protection and
preservation of ESA.
2. This designation of ESA creates a process through which the City can comply with
the Comprehensive Plan's pledge to support orderly growth and development,
while protecting environmentally sensitive resources within the City.
3. All future development occurring in areas identified as “environmentally sensitive”
must be guided by a concern to protect, conserve and enhance those
resources. To accomplish this goal, these regulations create a process to aid,
support and promote development that achieves these environmental goals. This
process will:
a. Identify and prioritize ESA.
b. Aid developers in the creation of their development plans.
c. Aid City staff, the Planning Commission and City Council in their assessment of
development plans in ESA.
d. Provide flexibility in the planning process when needed to balance
environmental and economic goals.
B. Rationale for Protecting Environmentally Sensitive Areas
ESA are areas that contain native vegetation and natural features and/or natural
resources that contribute to the health, welfare and quality of life of the people of St.
Cloud. The City has a right and the responsibility to protect and conserve these areas
for a variety of reasons, including:
1. Some areas contribute to community health (e.g., wetlands that function to filter
and purify water).
2. Some areas are valued for historic and symbolic reasons (e.g., the few remaining
examples of pre-settlement prairie or granite outcrops that symbolize St. Cloud's
heritage).
3. Some areas contribute to community safety (wetlands and riparian corridors
contribute to flood control).
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 28 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
4. Some areas are valued as habitat for wildlife and/or natural communities, some
of which include rare native plant or animal species.
5. Some areas are valued for recreational (hiking, skiing, walking) purposes.
6. Some areas are valued on the grounds of aesthetics and quality of life, as open
areas and woodlands provide solitude and quiet amidst the noise and crowds of
modern life.
7. Some areas function as educational resources for scientific research and
teaching, especially by providing our children with convenient and local access
to learn about their natural surroundings and their history.
C. Use and Bulk and Setback Regulations
No development will occur within an ESA without approval of an Environmentally
Sensitive Areas Site Plan (Section 4.4.). The underlying zoning district regulations apply
unless modified as part of the site plan review process.
D. Identification of Environmentally Sensitive Areas
Environmentally Sensitive Areas (ESA) are areas that contain native vegetation and
natural features and/or natural resources. ESA contain natural communities, i.e.,
naturally-occurring associations of plants and animals whose existence and extent
are determined by factors such as soil composition, hydrology, climate, solar
conditions and a site's unique history. Natural communities are named for the
dominant plant species within them or for characteristic environmental features -
examples include oak forest and wet meadow. ESA may also contain rare species or
protect natural resources of concern. ESA are sensitive in that further fragmentation,
disturbance and development will adversely affect and may destroy the natural
processes operating within them, as well as the composition, structure and function
of the natural communities they contain.
ESA are identified to:
1. Protect, conserve and enhance the City's natural resources including the City's
inventoried and identified native prairies, forests, woodlands, sensitive geological
and hydrological features, wetlands, riparian (river and stream) corridors, wildlife
corridors and other sensitive natural features.
2. Develop a priority system for guiding protection of ESA.
3. Promote open space, including an interconnected system of trails for people and
corridors for wildlife where appropriate and feasible.
4. Provide for the orderly growth and development of the City including
commercial, industrial and residential areas.
5. Promote flexible site planning.
6. Allow for a mix of housing types.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 29 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
7. Promote protection of steep slopes and sensitive soils.
8. Encourage coordination between City, county, state and federal agencies
concerned with natural resources.
9. Encourage cooperation through joint planning and development with
neighboring communities to protect, preserve and enhance the shared natural
environment.
10. Encourage early cooperative planning between owners and/or developers, the
City and individuals with scientific expertise in natural communities and resources.
E. Criteria for Designating ESA
Properties designated as “environmentally sensitive” have one (1) or more of the
following characteristics:
1. Contains much native biodiversity and few exotics.
2. Is of adequate size and cohesiveness to be biologically sustainable.
3. Is a remaining example of a pre-permanent settlement natural community for
Minnesota.
4. Is considered significant because it is rare in the St. Cloud area.
5. Contains, or is adjacent to, a rare species site, and is critical in preserving the rare
plant species or in conserving the rare animal species present. See Minnesota
Statute 84.0895, Protection of Threatened and Endangered Species.
6. Contains sensitive geological and hydrological features.
7. Contains, or is adjacent to, a wetland, river or stream and is critical in maintaining
water quality, rare species habitat or flood control.
8. Contributes significantly to biological or hydro-geological functions, such as
wildlife habitat, air purification and erosion control.
These criteria, when ecologically significant, are used in designating new properties
as ESA through the amendment process of Section 4.1 (Text Amendment and
Rezoning).
F. Determination of Location of ESA
1. Preliminary determination of the location of an ESA will be made by the Planning
Division and Engineering Department using the maps as denoted in Paragraph 2
below and included in Appendix A – ESA Information. ESA, as denoted on the
maps, and their impact zones are the only properties regulated by the ESA
regulations and the Environmentally Sensitive Areas Site Plan Review process
(Section 4.4), except that the land area regulated also applies to any land area
that is added, and does not apply to a land area deleted, as an ESA under the
amendment process.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 30 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
2. ESA are indicated on the following maps:
a. St. Cloud Natural Areas Inventory and Planning Framework (1996) and 2001
Addendum, including the St. Cloud Natural Areas and Rare Species Sites map
and 2001 Addendum maps.
b. Minnesota County Biological Survey Map entitled Natural Communities and
Rare Species, St. Cloud Metropolitan Area (1997).
3. The City and the Environment and Development Team (EDT) may use other
pertinent reference maps, reports and documents, etc., in dealing with property
that contains an ESA. See Appendix A – ESA Information for examples of other
resources that may be used. The use of other resources is only for reference and
does not create new ESA.
4. Final determination of the specific boundaries of an ESA will be made by qualified
scientists through the Environmentally Sensitive Areas Site Plan Review process
(Section 4.4).
G. Annexations
In the event that any land not previously inventoried is annexed to the City, the land
must be inventoried as soon as feasible for inclusion on the Environmentally Sensitive
Areas Maps but no less than nine (9) months from the date of annexation.
H. Criteria for Prioritization of ESA
Areas designated as “environmentally sensitive” are prioritized for planning purposes.
Prioritization is based on the presence of one (1) or more of the following
characteristics:
1. Quality of the area as determined by the degree of human disturbance on the
ecosystem – the less the disturbance, the higher the quality.
2. Local and/or state rarity.
3. Biodiversity of native species.
4. Interconnectedness; corridors and complexes form interconnected and
contiguous areas, which allow for movement of species from one ESA to another.
5. Part of a riparian (river and stream) corridor; part of a wildlife corridor.
6. Size; each type of ESA has its own size requirements that contribute to continued
viability for that natural community.
7. Provides an environmental service. Purification system for drinking water and
surface waters, a groundwater recharge area, an air purification system that
fosters human health, a low cost stormwater management and flood control
system, and noise abatement, natural wind and snow break, etc.
Article Last Amended: October 10, 2011
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 12:
Land Development Code Article 12 - Page 31 Overlay Districts and Designated Areas
8. Ecological sensitivity, i.e. the ability of the natural community to tolerate
development and/or recover from human disturbance.
12.5 HISTORIC DISTRICT OVERLAY DISTRICT
A. Purpose
The purpose of the Historic Districts Overlay District is to identify, preserve, protect,
enhance, perpetuate and use areas, places, buildings, structures and other objects
having special historical interest and value in the City of St. Cloud, which are in the
public interest and desired in the interest of the health, education, safety, welfare and
prosperity of the people. This overlay district incorporates a series of design guidelines
and specific approval processes for development and/or exterior building alterations in
the Historic District Overlay Districts. The location of the historic residential and
commercial districts are illustrated in Appendix C – Historic Districts.
B. Permitted and Conditional Uses
Permitted and conditional uses within the Historic District Overlay District are those of
the underlying zoning district.
C. Bulk and Setback Regulations
The bulk and setback regulations within the Historic District Overlay District are those
of the underlying zoning district.
D. Design Guidelines
Development and/or exterior building alterations within the Historic District Overlay
District must comply with the design guidelines of Section 13.7 (Residential Historic
District Preservation Design Guidelines) and Section 13.8 (Commercial Historic District
Design Guidelines).
E. Approval Processes
In addition to any other applicable permits and development applications,
development and/or exterior building alterations within the Historic District Overlay
District must comply with approval processes of Section 4.6 (Heritage Preservation
Property Certificate of Appropriateness).
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 13:
Land Development Code Article 13 - Page 1 Design Standards
Article 13. Design Standards
13.1 RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL DISTRICT GENERAL BUILDING DESIGN
13.2 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT GENERAL BUILDING DESIGN
13.3 RESIDENTIAL HISTORIC DISTRICT PRESERVATION DESIGN GUIDELINES
13.4 COMMERCIAL HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGN GUIDELINES
13.1 RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL DISTRICT GENERAL BUILDING DESIGN
A. Applicability
These general building design standards apply in the following districts:
1. Residential Districts
2. C-1, C-2, C-4 and C-5 Districts
B. Design Standards
The following design standards apply:
1. All exterior wall finishes on any building must be one (1) or a combination of the
following materials: face brick, natural stone or cultured stone, wood, textured
pre-cast concrete panels, textured concrete block, stucco, pre-finished
decorative panels made of metal, plastic or wood, and lap, vinyl, steel and
aluminum siding.
2. All subsequent additions and outbuildings constructed after the original
building(s) must be harmonious in architectural design and general appearance.
3. The following design standards apply within the C2 District: Each business
establishment shall be operated as a separate, distinct business entity, and each
shall be limited to a maximum gross floor area of six thousand square feet (6,000
sq. ft.). Each business establishment shall be physically separate from any other
such establishment by solid walls, partitions, or windows although nothing in this
paragraph is intended to prevent either common ownership or free pedestrian
movement from one (1) business establishment to another through either an area
commonly owned or leased by all adjoining establishments or through direct
doorway connections. All business establishments shall be accessible from the
exterior of the building in which they are located by either a direct floor to the
exterior or by direct access to a “common area” which in turn has adequate
access to the exterior of the building without passing through another business
establishment.
13.2 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS GENERAL BUILDING DESIGN
A. Applicability
These building design standards apply in the Industrial Districts.
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 13:
Land Development Code Article 13 - Page 2 Design Standards
B. Design Standards
The following design standards apply:
1. All exterior wall finishes on any building must be any single one (1) or combination
of the following:
a. Face brick
b. Natural stone or cultured stone
c. Specially designed pre-cast concrete units, if the surfaces have been
integrally treated with an applied decorative material or texture
d. Membrane
e. Factory fabricated and finished metal-framed panel construction, if the panel
materials are any of those named in Paragraphs 1 through 3 above, glass,
pre-finished metal (excluding unpainted galvanized iron), or plastic
f. Other material as may be approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals
2. All subsequent additions and outbuildings constructed after the original
building(s) must be harmonious in architectural design and general appearance.
3. Any other exterior wall finishes or any changes in architectural design must be
approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
13.3 RESIDENTIAL HISTORIC DISTRICT PRESERVATION DESIGN GUIDELINES
A. Applicability
The following design guidelines from the “City of St. Cloud Residential Historic District
Preservation Design Manual” apply to the designated residential historic districts. In
addition, the full requirements and design guidelines of the “City of St. Cloud
Residential Historic District Preservation Design Manual,” which is a separate
document from this Code, also apply to these districts. The “City of St. Cloud
Residential Historic District Preservation Design Manual” is the basis for the Heritage
Preservation Commission’s Certificate of Appropriateness review for properties and
parcels within local residential historic districts and individual locally-designated
properties.
The location of the historic residential districts is illustrated in Appendix C – Historic
Districts.
B. Design Guidelines for Restoration and Rehabilitation
The following design guidelines apply to any restoration and rehabilitation work within
the designated residential historic districts.
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 13:
Land Development Code Article 13 - Page 3 Design Standards
1. Masonry Walls and Foundations
a. Deteriorated brick, stone, mortar, and other materials should be replaced
with material used in the original construction or with materials that resemble
the appearance of the original, as closely as possible. The advice of a skilled
mason should be sought for major repair projects.
b. Masonry cleaning should be conducted only to halt deterioration and by
means such as low-pressure water, soft brushes and/or appropriate chemical
treatment. Sandblasting should not be used under any circumstances.
c. Original mortar joint size and profile should be retained and/or reduplicated in
re-pointing. Mortar mixtures should duplicate the original in lime, sand and
cement proportion, and should duplicate the original mortar in color and
texture.
d. Repairs to stucco surfaces should duplicate the original in color and texture, if
evidence exists. Smooth or heavy dashed surfaces should be avoided unless
they were used in the original surface.
e. The original color and texture of masonry surfaces should be retained, and
unpainted stone and brick surfaces should not be painted. The removal of
paint from painted masonry surfaces should only be attempted if unpainted
surfaces are historically appropriate and if removal can be accomplished
without damage to the masonry.
f. Stucco, artificial stone, brick veneer, or vinyl or aluminum products should not
be applied over masonry surfaces.
2. Walls: Wood Siding and Elements
a. Wooden siding should be maintained with paint or stain. Deteriorated
wooden siding should be replaced with new material resembling the original
in width, thickness and profile, and texture. New siding should be installed with
the weather (exposed surface) identical to the original. Siding should be
installed horizontally except in those instances where vertical or diagonal
siding was used on the original exterior. Appropriate comer boards, frieze
boards, and drip caps and other features should be included with
replacement siding.
b. Buildings originally clad in wooden siding should not be resurfaced with brick,
stucco, artificial stone or brick veneer, hardboard, or vinyl or aluminum siding.
The Heritage Preservation Commission may consider the following exceptions
to the installation of vinyl, metal, or hardboard siding on a case-by-case basis:
i. In cases where existing asphalt, asbestos, aluminum or vinyl siding is to be
removed and where the underlying original siding and decorative
features are found to be significantly deteriorated, the Heritage
Preservation Commission should conduct a site visit during the removal
process and advise on appropriate treatment.
ii. In the resurfacing of non-contributing buildings constructed after 1940.
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 13:
Land Development Code Article 13 - Page 4 Design Standards
iii. In the resurfacing of existing or construction of new garages, particularly
when the garage is inconspicuously sited.
iv. If vinyl, metal, or hardboard siding is used, it must be of a width
appropriate to the style of the building, and all architectural details
including window trim, wood cornices and ornament must remain
uncovered. Replacement siding may cover only one layer of existing
siding. Trim must be built up so that it projects from the new siding to the
same extent as the original.
c. Buildings originally clad in horizontal wooden siding should not be re-surfaced
with shingles of wood or other material. Wooden shingles used for cladding
material or decoration, such as in the gable ends, should be conserved and
retained. If replacement is necessary, shingles should replicate the original in
width, pattern, thickness, profile, texture, and weather (lap).
d. Decorative siding treatments, such as paneled herringbone patterns used in
the gable ends, should be retained in repair or resurfacing.
e. Exterior wooden surfaces should be maintained with appropriate paint or
stain.
3. Roofs and Chimneys
a. New roofing material should be appropriate to the character of the building
in composition, size, shape and texture. Dark brown, dark gray, and
“weathered wood” are among usually acceptable colors. Rolled roofing may
be used only on flat or slightly sloped roofs which are not visible from the
public way.
b. The original roof type, slope, and overhangs should be preserved. The roof
shape at the front should not be altered except to restore it to the original
documented appearance or to add architecturally compatible dormers.
Documentation includes evidence of the former appearance of the building,
or, in the case of pattern book houses, those of similar period and style. The
shape of existing dormers should not be altered unless compatible with the
original design.
c. Alterations to the roof shape at the sides or rear should be compatible with
the architectural character of the building.
d. Wherever possible, skylights should not be installed on the front roof plane.
They should be flat and as close to the roof plane as possible.
e. If rebuilding is necessary, original brick details such as decorative panels and
coffers should be replicated. In the absence of evidence of the original
appearance of the chimney, repair or rebuilding should be compatible with
the building style or type.
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 13:
Land Development Code Article 13 - Page 5 Design Standards
f. Wherever possible, new chimneys and stovepipes should not be installed on
the front roof plane.
4. Windows
a. Existing window openings should be retained. Window openings should not
be enlarged or reduced significantly to fit new units. New window openings
should not be introduced into principal elevations.
b. The size and number of panes of glass in each sash should not be altered.
c. New sash, if installed, should duplicate the existing or other appropriate
historic models. Crank-out units are not appropriate replacements for doublehung
sash, particularly where visible from the public way.
d. Historic window casings should be retained wherever possible; if replacement
is necessary, the original profile should be replicated.
e. If combination metal storms are installed, they should have a baked enamel
finish. Storm windows should not have vertical or horizontal divisions which
conflict with the divisions of the sash.
5. Entry
a. All historic entry components should be retained. Entry openings should not
be enlarged or reduced to fit a new door. New entry openings should not be
introduced into principal elevations.
b. Original or historic features of the entry, including hoods, columns, sidelights
and transoms should be retained. If replacement is necessary, historic trim
details should be replicated.
c. Wherever possible, historic paneled doors (and hardware) should be repaired
and weather-stripped rather than replaced. If replacement of original or
historic doors is necessary, the replacement should be compatible with the
material, design, and hardware of the older door. Steel-covered hollow core
doors should not be installed unless compatible with the appearance of the
house. Historic trim should not be removed from the entry for the installation of
steel doors.
d. Storm doors should be compatible with the inner door in shape and style.
e. Sliding glass doors should be confined to the rear of the building where not
visible from the public way.
6. Porches and Steps
a. Porches, steps, and handrails which are appropriate to the building and its
period(s) of development should be conserved and retained.
b. Historic porches, steps, or handrails which require complete rebuilding or
partial replacement should be reconstructed using historical research to
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 13:
Land Development Code Article 13 - Page 6 Design Standards
determine an appropriate design. Reconstruction should be compatible with
the period and style of the building in material, design, and detail. Concrete
should not be used to replace wooden porch floors or steps.
c. The original spacing, section, and profile of balusters should be maintained in
replacement or repair. Unless historical evidence indicates, reconstruction
should include a bottom rail, and balusters should not be nailed directly to the
step or deck. Metal railings should not be used to replace wooden railings.
d. If replacement is necessary, porch posts and columns should be replaced
with units that replicate the original material, size, and scale. Elaborate details
such as turning, gouging, or stamping may be simplified if necessary. Wooden
posts should not be replaced with metal posts or supports.
e. Unenclosed front porches should not be permanently enclosed.
f. Decks should be constructed only at the rear of the building or where most
inconspicuous. Railings, steps, and other deck details should be compatible
with the architectural character of the building.
7. Exterior Trim and Architectural Features
a. Exterior architectural features including finials, cornices, brackets, columns,
balustrades, railings, and window and door moldings should be retained.
b. Original trim details and other architectural features should be photographed
or otherwise recorded before they are removed for repair or replacement.
Deteriorated trim which is removed should be saved for use in making
duplicates.
c. New material used to repair or replace deteriorated trim or other features
should match the original as closely as possible. Deteriorated trim which is
unsalvageable should be replaced with trim identical or similar to the original
design. Simplified trim should approximate the old in design and placement.
d. Details should not be added in an effort to make the building look older.
However, in the case of some “pattern book” houses, the addition of certain
trim details such as those typical at the gable and porch may be acceptable
if supported by historic photos or pattern book sources.
8. Commercial and Religious Buildings
a. The original features of commercial and religious buildings when present,
should be conserved. Decorative features should be retained in repair and
renovation projects. Storefronts should not obscure the basic architectural
framework of the buildings which they occupy. Storefront design should not
reproduce styles of a period earlier than the building they occupy.
b. Masonry and other original surfaces should be conserved. Brick should not be
covered with stucco, shakes, or other veneer.
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 13:
Land Development Code Article 13 - Page 7 Design Standards
c. Windows should not be filled in with wood, brick, or any other material.
Window sizes and shapes should be maintained if removal of original units is
necessary.
d. The original roofline, including cornice, parapet and other elements, should
be maintained.
e. Signs should be compatible with the character of the building and
surrounding area. Signs should be appropriately sized and complement the
building exterior. They should not conceal architectural details or features.
Sign materials should be compatible with the materials of the building to
which they are attached. No part of the historic facade should be damaged
in the installation of the sign. Roof-top signs are inappropriate.
f. Awnings should be sized to fit the windows and storefronts behind them. They
should not greatly obscure the architectural features behind them. Canvas is
the most suitable material for most storefronts.
C. Design Guidelines for New Construction
The following design guidelines apply to any new construction within the designated
residential historic districts.
1. New Construction of Principal Building
a. Whenever possible, existing historic buildings and landscape features should
be retained and rehabilitated in plans for redevelopment.
b. New construction should reinforce the historic architectural and visual
character of the area or district.
c. New construction should be oriented toward streets which are inviting
environments for pedestrians. Parking areas should be placed at the rear of
buildings wherever possible, or screened with landscaping, low walls, or
appropriately detailed fences.
d. Wherever possible, distinctive views of the river and bluffs provided from the
public way should not be obstructed by new buildings or structures.
e. The setback of new buildings should be compatible with the setback of
existing adjacent buildings. New construction should maintain the uniform
setback of older residential, commercial and religious properties along the
street.
f. New construction should conform to the massing, volume, height, facade
proportions and scale of buildings within view of the site, and also comply
with existing zoning regulations. The gross volume of any new structure should
be visually compatible with the buildings and elements within the surrounding
area.
g. Although the architectural character of the city is varied, materials and
details should be compatible with adjacent buildings. Wood and masonry are
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 13:
Land Development Code Article 13 - Page 8 Design Standards
preferable to vinyl, metal, or hardboard siding. Imitative materials such as
artificial stone or brick veneer should not be used. The use of vinyl, metal, or
hardboard siding will be considered by the Heritage Preservation Commission
on a case-by-case basis.
h. Parking areas should be located at the side or at the rear of the buildings and
should be screened with landscaping, low walls or appropriately detailed
fences. A vegetation screening plan should accompany plans for parking
development. Residential parking areas should be confined to the rear of
existing or new buildings. Parking spaces should be screened from view from
the public street by landscaping such as hedges, grade changes, or low
fences.
i. In new construction, the skyline or roof profile should relate to the
predominant roof shapes of the surrounding area. Roofing materials used on
new buildings should be appropriate to the design of the building and the
visibility of the roof. Roof hardware such as skylights, vents, and metal pipe
chimneys should not be placed on the front roof plane.
j. Prominent first- floor display windows and distinctive entries facing the street
are typical for existing historic commercial buildings. Similarly, verticallyoriented,
double-hung sash is the predominant window type for the upper
stories of residential buildings within the city. The location, proportion, size,
rhythm and detailing of windows and entries should address these traditional
forms.
k. Signs, graphics, and lighting should be designed as part of the facade. Signs
on commercial blocks housing several adjacent businesses should be
designed to unify the facade, while providing identity for individual
businesses. Type style, sign color, and sign materials should complement the
building exterior. Lighting should be compatible with the building exterior and
signs. Internally lighted signs should not be used where they overpower the
facade or setting.
2. Additions to Buildings
a. New construction should conform to the massing, volume, height, facade
proportions and scale of surrounding structures and also comply with existing
zoning regulations. The gross volume of any new structure should be visually
compatible with the buildings and elements within the surrounding area. New
dwellings and commercial buildings should be compatible with the height of
existing adjacent buildings.
b. Materials and details should relate to those of existing nearby buildings. Wood
and masonry are preferable to vinyl, metal, or hardboard siding. Imitative
materials such as artificial stone or brick veneer should not be used. Materials
will be reviewed to determine their appropriate use in relation to the overall
design of the structure. The use of vinyl, metal, or hardboard siding will be
considered by the Commission on a case-by-case basis.
c. In new construction, the skyline or roof profile should relate to the
predominant roof shape of nearby buildings. Highly visible secondary
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 13:
Land Development Code Article 13 - Page 9 Design Standards
structure roofs should match the roof pitch of the main structure. The roofing
materials used on new buildings should be appropriate to the design of the
building and the visibility of the roof. Wherever possible, roof hardware such
as skylights, vents, and metal pipe chimneys should not be placed on the
front roof plane.
d. Vertically oriented, double-hung sash are the predominant historic window
type in the city, although there are exceptions. The proportion, size, rhythm
and detailing of windows and entries should be compatible with that of
existing nearby buildings. The rhythm of solids to voids created by openings in
the facade of the new structure should be visually compatible with
surrounding structures.
e. Porches are a standard feature of many historic houses in St. Cloud and
whether enclosed or unenclosed, they are an important part of the
streetscape. The front entry of new construction in residential areas should be
articulated with a design element such as a porch, portico, or landing which
provides a transitional zone between the semi-public and public exterior
zones and the private interior zone. This design element should be
appropriately detailed and compatible with the size and scale of the
building. Decks should be constructed at the rear of the building and should
be integrated into the overall design. Decks should be appropriately detailed
and should not be raised in a manner which makes them conspicuous.
3. Accessory Structures
a. Garages and other accessory buildings must be compatible with the overall
design and materials of the existing buildings on the lot. New garages should
be located at the rear of the site wherever possible. Garages should not be
attached to the front of the building.
b. The setback of new buildings should be compatible with the setback of
adjacent buildings.
c. Residential parking should be confined to the rear of existing or new buildings.
Parking spaces should be screened from view from the public street by
landscaping, such as a hedge, grade changes or low fences.
d. Fences which allow some visual penetration of front yard space are
preferable to complete enclosure. Cyclone fences should not be used to
enclose front yards in the front half of side yards.
13.4 COMMERCIAL HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGN GUIDELINES
A. Applicability
The following design guidelines from the “City of St. Cloud Downtown Preservation
Design Manual” apply to the designated St. Cloud Commercial Historic District listed
in this section. In addition, the full requirements and design guidelines of the “City of
St. Cloud Downtown Preservation Design Manual,” which is a separate document
from this Code, also apply to this district. The “City of St. Cloud Downtown
Preservation Design Manual” is the basis for the Heritage Preservation Commission’s
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 13:
Land Development Code Article 13 - Page 10 Design Standards
Certificate of Appropriateness review for properties and parcels within local
commercial historic districts and individual locally-designated properties.
The location of the Commercial Historic District is illustrated in Appendix C – Historic
Districts.
B. Design Guidelines
The following guidelines apply to any new construction or restoration and
rehabilitation within the designated commercial historic district.
1. Maintenance of Building Materials
The “City of St. Cloud Downtown Preservation Design Manual” contains
information and guidelines for the maintenance of masonry, wood, metal and
other building materials.
2. Storefront Design
a. A storefront should be designed to fit within the original facade opening and
not extend beyond it. The storefront might be set back slightly, such as three
(3) inches, from the plane of the facade to accentuate this sense of
containment.
b. Large display windows are a prominent feature of the traditional storefront.
The storefront should be composed primarily of glass, while the upper facade
should be more solid and contained with smaller, evenly spaced windows.
c. The color and texture of the storefront materials should be simple and
unobtrusive and should have the following characteristic:
i. The storefront frame can be wood, cast iron, or aluminum with a baked
enamel finish.
ii. The display windows should be clear glass.
iii. Transom windows may be clear, prism or stained glass.
iv. The entrance door should have a large glass panel and can be made of
wood, steel, or aluminum.
v. The base panels (bulkheads) can be of wood, polished stone, glass, tile or
aluminum-clad plywood panels.
vi. The storefront cornice can be made of wood, cast iron, or sheet metal or
sometimes the horizontal supporting beam can serve as the storefront
cap.
vii. The side piers should be of the same material as the upper facade.
d. Certain materials and design elements should never be used on a traditional
commercial building. A mansard roof with wooden shingles, rough textured wood
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 13:
Land Development Code Article 13 - Page 11 Design Standards
siding, metal siding, fake bricks or stone, and gravel aggregate materials are not
appropriate. Inappropriate historical themes should also be avoided. Small
window panes, a colonial door, and storefront shutters are 18th-century elements
that do not belong on most 19th- or 20th-century facades.
e. The fundamental storefront design should include large display windows with thin
framing members, a recessed entrance, a cornice or a horizontal sign panel
above the storefront to separate it visually from the upper facade, and low base
panels to protect the windows and define the entrance. This same basic
arrangement will be equally appropriate whether constructed using traditional or
modern materials.
3. Doors, Windows and Awnings
a. Doors and windows should be carefully maintained and repaired. Original doors
and windows must be retained if possible. Replacement of doors and windows
should duplicate the original form of the material closely. The original size and
spacing of window muntins dividing the sash are particularly important. The size
and division of window sashes should be appropriate to each building’s style.
b. Inoperable decorative metal or plastic shutters are inappropriate for use in the
district. Where buildings originally featured shutters, panels must exactly match
the size and shape of the window opening.
c. Storefront entry doors should present an attractive appearance and should be
visually appropriate for the storefront. Original doors should be retained if
possible. If a new door is to be installed, it should closely resemble the design and
proportions of the original door. Wood is the preferred material, but steel or
aluminum with a baked enamel finish are also permitted. Colonial or Early
American style aluminum doors and other very decorative door designs should
be avoided.
d. When energy efficient double-glazed aluminum or wood windows are used as
replacements, they should match the original wood windows in size and style. A
multi-pane window must not be replaced with a single large pane of glass.
Aluminum windows should have a baked enamel finish rather than the color of
clear unfinished aluminum.
e. Storm windows may be desirable on upper story windows for energy
conservation. An exterior storm window can also protect and upgrade older
wooden sashes. Storm windows should conform with the size and shape of the
existing sash and be painted to match as well. When original windows might be
obscured by the addition of exterior storm sash, interior storm windows are
preferred.
f. The following guidelines apply to all awnings:
i. Awnings must closely follow historical precedents in shape and design, and
may be either operable or fixed. Awnings must fit the storefront opening. The
use of bubble, concave or convex awning forms should be avoided.
ii. Awnings should never extend continuously across several storefronts.
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 13:
Land Development Code Article 13 - Page 12 Design Standards
iii. Water-repellent canvas or vinyl-coated canvas material are preferred
materials for awnings. Aluminum awnings or canopies are generally
inappropriate. Vinyl coated fabric, fixed metal, transparent or opaque vinyl,
or wood awnings are inappropriate.
iv. Awnings may not be backlit.
v. Awning color or color combination must coordinate with the building and
surroundings.
vi. Awnings must never cover or conceal decorative transoms containing prism
glass or stained glass.
4. Architectural Details
a. Architectural details must be retained on existing structures within the historic
downtown. New construction should mirror existing details, or display
contemporary details that harmonize with its neighbors.
b. Architectural detailing must be carefully maintained in order to ensure its longterm
survival. Modern artificial siding must not cover cornices or window trim.
5. Accessory Structures and Appurtenances
Accessory structures and appurtenances such as electric meters and boxes,
condensing units, gas meters, solar panels, air conditioners, television antennae and
satellite dishes can impair the visual qualities of historic architecture if improperly
located. All added elements should be located on the roof or to the rear of buildings
and screened by appropriate plantings or fencing. Solar panels and television aerials
should be situated as far out of public view as possible.
6. Painting
a. It is recommended that property owners keep their buildings regularly painted.
Additional guidelines for painting buildings is contained within “City of St. Cloud
Downtown Preservation Design Manual.”
b. It is recommended that the elements of a building should be painted consistently.
Trim should be painted the same color. The wall, whether masonry or frame,
should be a contrasting color. The window sash and doors can be painted a
darker color than the walls and trim.
c. Masonry that is not painted should not be painted.
7. Rear Entrances
a. Alleys should be used as attractive secondary corridors through the business
district. Development of rear entrances (double fronting) improves customer
Article Last Amended: November 10, 2008
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 13:
Land Development Code Article 13 - Page 13 Design Standards
access from parking areas and can substantially improve pedestrian circulation
throughout the downtown area.
b. Improvements to the alley façade should closely follow the street facade of the
building.
8. New Construction
a. The average height and width of the surrounding buildings determines a general
set of proportions for an infill structure or the bays of a larger structure.
b. The composition of the infill façade should be similar to that of surrounding
facades. Rhythms that carry throughout the block, such as window spacing,
should be incorporated into the new facade.
c. The size and proportion of window and door openings of an infill building should
be similar to those on surrounding facades. The same applies to the ratio of
window area to solid wall for the facade as a whole. The infill building should fill
the entire space and reflect the characteristic rhythm of facades along the
street. If the site is large, the mass of the facade can be broken into a number of
smaller bays, to maintain a rhythm similar to the surrounding buildings.
d. Infill architecture should reflect the detailing of surrounding buildings in window
shapes, cornice lines and brick work.
e. An infill facade should be composed of materials similar to adjacent facades.
The new building should not stand out from the others.
f. The colors chosen for an infill facade should relate to neighboring buildings.
g. The new facade should be flush with neighboring buildings.
9. Signs
All signs must comply with the design guidelines of Section 18.15-G (St. Cloud
Commercial Historic District).
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 14:
Land Development Code Article 14 - Page 1 Use Standards
Article 14. Use Standards
14.1 PURPOSE
14.2 USE OF LAND AND STRUCTURES
14.3 USE STANDARDS
14.4 TEMPORARY USES
14.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Article is to set forth additional requirements for specified uses of land.
These standards are intended to ensure that the use is compatible with and minimizes
the impact upon the surrounding area.
14.2 USE OF LAND AND STRUCTURES
No land or structure may be used or occupied except in conformity with the regulations
for the zoning district in which it is located. No structure may be erected, reconstructed,
extended, enlarged, altered or moved except in conformity with the regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located.
14.3 USE STANDARDS
In addition to the use standards below, all uses are required to comply with the provisions
of this Code including, but not limited to, Article 15 (On-Site Development Standards),
Article 16 (Off-Street Parking and Loading), Article 17 (Landscaping and Screening), and
Article 18 (Signs), and all other City regulations.
A. Adult Use
1. Purpose
a. The purpose and intent of the adult use regulations set forth in this Code is to
serve a substantial government interest by attempting to preserve the quality
and vitality of neighborhoods, curtail the depression of property values,
restrain increased criminal activity, and slow the spread of sexually
transmitted diseases.
b. Adult use establishments, as defined in this Code, because of their very
nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational
characteristics that have a deleterious effect upon the use and enjoyment of
adjacent areas. These secondary effects are especially evident where such
uses are concentrated.
c. The secondary effects associated with adult uses include an increased level
of criminal activity, increased risk of exposure to sexually transmitted diseases,
depression of property values, and a significant change in the character of
surrounding neighborhoods.
d. One of the Code’s objectives is to disperse adult uses by separation
requirements from other adult uses and from other significantly incompatible
uses. The Code allows adult uses only in the I-1 and I-2 Districts. In this
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 14:
Land Development Code Article 14 - Page 2 Use Standards
community, those areas are located throughout the City and provide
opportunity for sites with good visibility and access to major streets and
highways.
e. It is recognized that such regulations cannot de-facto approach prohibition,
otherwise a protected form of expression would vanish. The adult use
regulations set forth in the Code represent a balancing of competing
interests: reduction of objectionable secondary effects through the regulation
of adult uses versus the protected rights of the owners, operators, performers
and patrons of those adult uses.
2. Use Standards
An adult use establishment must be separated at least one-thousand threehundred
twenty (1,320) feet from any other adult use establishment and threehundred
fifty (350) feet from any hotel/motel, nursing home, senior housing, day
care facility, place of worship, school and/or any residential district.
B. Amusement Center
In the C-3 District, amusement centers must be separated a minimum of threehundred
fifty (350) feet from a hotel/motel, nursing home, convalescent home,
assisted living facility, independent living facility, or any residential district.
C. Bed and Breakfast Facility
Bed and breakfast facilities are subject to the following:
1. A minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot area must be landscaped.
2. A guest register showing the name, permanent address, motor vehicle license
number, and date of lodging of all guests of the bed and breakfast and subject
to hotel/motel tax is required.
3. The sale or service of intoxicating and non-intoxicating liquor is prohibited.
However, a bed and breakfast facility may provide, at no additional charge, to a
person renting a room at the facility, no more than two (2) glasses of wine
containing not more than four (4) fluid ounces of wine to be consumed only on
the premises.
4. Bed and breakfast facilities must have a minimum of one-thousand five-hundred
(1,500) square feet of land per bed and breakfast sleeping room.
5. There must be a one-thousand (1,000) foot separation between bed and
breakfast facilities in all districts, except in the RR, R-3 and R-3A Districts where
there is no separation requirement.
6. Bed and breakfasts are limited to five (5) or fewer sleeping rooms except in the R-
1, R-1A and R-2 Districts. In the R-1 and R-1A Districts, bed and breakfasts are
limited to three (3) or fewer sleeping rooms. In the R-2 District, bed and breakfasts
are limited to four (4) or fewer sleeping rooms.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 14:
Land Development Code Article 14 - Page 3 Use Standards
7. Sleeping rooms may only be offered to overnight lodging guests for a maximum
of fourteen (14) days during any consecutive thirty (30) day period.
8. No provisions for cooking may be provided in any of the sleeping rooms.
D. Car Wash
1. Car wash establishments are subject to the same limitations and conditions as
service stations (Paragraph U).
2. All wash water disposal facilities including sludge, grit removal and disposal
equipment are subject to the sewer use ordinance.
3. Total site area of a car wash must not exceed eighty-thousand (80,000) square
feet.
E. Cemetery
In the R-3 District, commercial districts and industrial districts, no cemetery or
contiguous individual cemeteries may contain less than fifty (50) acres.
F. Commercial Kennel
1. Commercial kennels must be located at least one-thousand three-hundred
twenty (1,320) feet from any residential district.
2. In commercial districts, commercial kennels may not have outdoor runs.
G. Drive-In Establishment
1. Drive-in establishments are subject to the same limitations and conditions as
service stations (Paragraph U).
2. Total site area of drive-in establishments must have a minimum total site area of
not less than twenty-thousand (20,000) square feet or six-hundred (600) square
feet per drive-in stall, whichever is greater, and a maximum site area of eightythousand
(80,000) square feet.
3. If adjacent to an R-1 or R-1A District, a drive-in restaurant may not be operated
between the hours of one (1) AM and eight (8) AM.
H. Dwelling Unit
1. All residential dwellings, with the exception of dwelling units within multi-family
structures and mixed-use buildings, used for living purposes must be at least
twenty-one (21) feet wide and at least thirty (30) feet long and placed on a
permanent foundation as prescribed in the Building Code. The exterior material
must extend to within eight inches (8”) of the ground and an opaque surface
extend from the bottom of the exterior material to the ground level, except that
when a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used the exterior
covering material need not extend below the top of foundation. The exterior
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 14:
Land Development Code Article 14 - Page 4 Use Standards
material skirting of a piered or wood foundation must be securely fastened to the
foundation via a frame or similar construction to the walls of the dwelling.
2. No more than one (1) family may be permitted to occupy a dwelling unit at one
time. See Article 21 for the definition of “family.”
I. Essential Services and Essential Service Structures
In the Scenic Rivers Overlay District, essential services and essential service structures
are subject to the following:
1. Distribution lines do not require a Scenic Rivers Construction Site Permit.
“Distribution lines” mean lines, cables or conduits, or mains or pipelines used to
distribute power, water, gas or other essential services to the utility customers. It is
recommended, however, that construction of distribution lines consider the
provisions of NR 79 for route design.
2. Essential service structures, such as electric substations, may not be constructed
without the prior written approval of the City Council.
J. Homeless Day Center
Homeless day centers are subject to the following:
1. There must be a minimum separation of at least one-thousand three-hundred
twenty (1,320) feet between homeless day centers.
2. On-site supervision and staffing is required during all hours of operation.
3. The applicant must submit a communications plan that describes how the
provider will communicate with local community, neighborhood and business
organizations, and with adjacent neighbors on a regular basis, and how
community issues or concerns will be addressed.
4. A plan to minimize loitering in the vicinity of the facility (e.g., posting of hours of
operation, appointment hours and set schedules for deliveries, interior waiting
areas prior to food service), and a litter control plan to provide for the removal of
litter in the vicinity of the facility on a regular basis (e.g., trash receptacles at
entrances, staff inspections of sidewalks and alleys) must be provided.
5. All storage of donated goods must occur within a completely enclosed building.
K. Grading and Filling Activity
Any grading and filling work done within the Scenic Rivers Overlay District must
comply with the following:
1. Grading and filling of the natural topography, which is not accessory to a
permitted or conditional use, is prohibited.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 14:
Land Development Code Article 14 - Page 5 Use Standards
2. Grading and filling of the natural topography, which is accessory to a permitted
or conditional use, is permitted by a conditional use permit and must meet the
following conditions:
a. Grading and filling of the natural topography must be performed in a manner
which minimizes earth moving, erosion, tree clearing and the destruction of
natural amenities.
b. The smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for as short a time as feasible.
c. Temporary groundcover, such as mulch, is used, and permanent
groundcover, such as sod, is planted.
d. Methods to prevent erosion and to trap sediment are employed.
e. Fill is stabilized to accepted engineering standards.
3. Excavation of material from or filling in the Scenic Rivers Overlay District, or
construction of any permanent structures or navigational obstructions, is
prohibited unless authorized by a permit from the Commissioner of Natural
Resources pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Section 105.42.
L. Hotel/Motel
Hotels and motels may have one (1) manager’s dwelling unit, which may be located
on any floor.
M. Industrial Farm
Industrial farms of small poultry and animal farms with over fifty (50) poultry or animals
per acre must be located at least one-thousand (1,000) feet from any residential
district.
N. Lodging House
A dwelling unit may not be located within the principal building used as a lodging
house.
O. Manufactured Home and Manufactured Housing Park
The purpose of this section is to define standards for manufactured housing parks,
which will provide the amenities, design and environment desirable for this form of
housing.
1. Compliance with Existing Codes
a. No manufactured home may house more persons than for which originally
designed, nor contain a greater density than permitted by other City codes.
b. All City and state codes governing the construction and installation of sanitary
and storm sewer, water and electrical lines must be complied with.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 14:
Land Development Code Article 14 - Page 6 Use Standards
c. No manufactured home may be located on any lot, tract or parcel of land
not designated as a manufactured housing park or manufactured home
sales lot, unless otherwise permitted by this Code.
2. Conditional Use Application
In addition to the requirements of this section and the conditional use permit
application, an applicant for a manufactured housing park must submit a plan
for the proposed park for review by the Planning Commission and approval by
the City Council.
3. Minimum Site Standards
a. A maximum of eight (8) manufactured homes per gross acre of a
manufactured housing park is permitted.
b. There must be a minimum area of eight (8) acres with a minimum width of
three-hundred (300) feet for any manufactured housing park.
c. Manufactured housing parks must contain five-hundred (500) square feet of
park/play area for each manufactured home, with a minimum of one (1)
park/play area in the manufactured housing park. Said park/play area(s)
may not be located in the front, interior or street side, or rear setback of any
manufactured home, but must be in a separate area of the manufactured
housing park.
4. Lot Coverage and Site Setback Requirements
a. Minimum distance between manufactured homes must be ten (10) feet.
b. When a manufactured housing park abuts a residential district, there must be
a minimum setback of fifty (50) feet between the residential property line and
the manufactured housing park, which acts as a buffer zone and must be
landscaped according to a landscape plan to be submitted at the time of
application for said park.
c. There must be a minimum setback of fifteen (15) feet from any lot line
abutting a right-of-way.
d. Lot coverage must not exceed thirty percent (30%).
5. Parking Requirements
At least two (2) off-street parking spaces must be provided for each
manufactured home, said space to be adjacent to the manufactured home.
Drive area and parking stall dimensions must meet the requirements of this Code.
6. Streets
a. Two-way streets within a manufactured housing park must be a minimum of
twenty-four (24) feet wide. One-way streets must be a minimum of sixteen (16)
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 14:
Land Development Code Article 14 - Page 7 Use Standards
feet wide. Streets must be surfaced with a bituminous or concrete surfacing
material designed to City standards.
b. Sidewalks must be a minimum of thirty (30) inches wide and constructed to
facilitate safe pedestrian traffic.
c. Access to and from a manufactured housing park must be the minimum
necessary to provide safe vehicle and pedestrian traffic.
d. All streets must have curbs and gutters and designed to provide drainage
away from manufactured homes.
7. Accessory Structures
Storage sheds or garages may be provided either adjacent to the manufactured
home or in a common, convenient location within the manufactured housing
park. Storage sheds or garages must maintain a ten (10) foot setback from the
manufactured home on an adjacent site. Storage of large items such as boats,
trailers and similar equipment must not occur at the individual manufactured
home site, but rather provided in a separate screened area of the park.
P. Micro-Brewery
The room or rooms containing the preparation and brewing process must not exceed
two-thousand four-hundred (2,400) square feet in gross floor area. Taprooms and
food service areas are not considered preparation or brewing area. Maximum
brewing production may not exceed five-thousand (5,000) barrels per year. Microbreweries
with annual production greater than five-thousand (5,000) barrels are a
conditional use.
Q. Office
In the AG District, office use is subject to the following:
1. An office must meet the minimum lot size of forty (40) acres.
2. A maximum of five (5) non-resident employees in total for all uses are allowed onsite.
3. The property owner must live and maintain his/her permanent place of residence
on-site.
4. The office use must be staffed full time by the property owner.
5. Commercial activity is prohibited on-site.
6. Permitted hours of operation are six (6) AM to nine (9) PM Monday through Friday,
and eight (8) AM to five (5) PM on Saturday.
7. One (1) sign is permitted to indicate the office use, which is a non-illuminated
nameplate not more than one (1) square foot in area and attached to the
building entrance.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 14:
Land Development Code Article 14 - Page 8 Use Standards
8. The office must comply with all other applicable provisions in this Code and other
ordinances, including off-street parking requirements.
R. On-Site Rental Office
An on-site rental office within a principal building or in an accessory recreational
building with the office area occupying less than fifty percent (50%) of the total
square feet of the accessory recreational building are subject to the following:
1. Square footage of office area allowed is based on the number of rental units that
are served by the rental office. For each rental dwelling unit served by the rental
office, the rental office is allowed three (3) square feet of office area, with a
minimum of three-hundred (300) square feet and a maximum of eight-hundred
(800) square feet permitted.
2. Office space must be used for those business transactions that are solely and
exclusively related to rental activities for those housing units located within the
principal building(s) located on the subject zoning lot or that is located within
two-thousand five-hundred (2,500) linear feet of the subject zoning lot and is
owned by the same entity.
S. Place of Worship
Offices used for religious institutions may not exceed a total of one-thousand fivehundred
(1,500) square feet per site. The office must be in conjunction with,
accessory to and located on the same premises as the place of worship.
T. Residential Facility
There must be a separation requirement of at least one-thousand three-hundred
twenty (1,320) feet from another residential facility or temporary shelter facility. Such
separation requirements do not apply to foster family homes.
U. Service Station/Convenience Store (Fuel Sales)
1. No buildings or structures, permanent or temporary, driveway surfaces, parking
areas, advertising devices, or other similar site improvements, except driveways
traversing a public road or boulevard, may be located within one-hundred ten
(110) feet of any part of a residential district boundary which is separated from
the service station by a public right-of-way, or within fifty (50) feet of a residential
district boundary if not separated by a public right-of-way.
2. Vehicle service stations without service bays and convenience stores must have a
minimum total site area of not less than ten-thousand (10,000) square feet.
Stations having service bays must have a minimum total site area of not less than
twenty-thousand (20,000) square feet.
3. Pump islands and canopies must be set back no less than fifteen (15) feet from
any street right-of-way line and no less than twenty-five (25) feet from other
property lines. If the site is adjacent to any residential district, a minimum fifty (50)
foot setback must be required.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 14:
Land Development Code Article 14 - Page 9 Use Standards
4. Hydraulic hoists, pits and all lubrication, greasing, washing, repair and diagnostic
equipment must be operated within an enclosed building.
5. Interior curbs, no less than six (6) inches in height, must be constructed to
separate driving surfaces from sidewalks, landscaped areas and streets.
6. No vehicle service station repairs and the sale of fuel on a site contiguous to any
residential district may be operated between the hours of 11 PM and 6 AM.
7. All driving surfaces must be constructed and maintained in the same manner as
required for parking lots.
V. Temporary Shelter Facility
1. Residential and Industrial Districts
A temporary shelter facility (TSF) permitted in a residential or industrial district is
subject to the following:
a. There must be a separation requirement of at least one-thousand threehundred
twenty (1,320) feet from another temporary shelter facility or
residential facility.
b. An on-site supervisor(s) is required during all hours of operation.
c. The sale, service or consumption of intoxicating and non-intoxicating liquor is
prohibited.
d. For a temporary shelter facility where no maximum occupancy size is
indicated, a temporary fifty percent (50%) increase in maximum occupancy is
permitted for up to ten (10) days in any given thirty (30) day time period when
it has been determined that all available shelter resources, including
appropriate hotel and motel rooms, are at full capacity, as determined by
the appropriate county human services department.
e. A temporary shelter facility may extend the maximum length of stay from 45
days to 90 days for no more than 10% of its occupants at any given time.
f. All other applicable codes must be complied with to assure protection of
public health, safety and welfare.
2. Commercial Districts
A temporary shelter facility permitted in a commercial district is subject to the
following:
a. Rooming units are not permitted below the second floor and non-residential
uses are not permitted on any floor above the ground floor.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 14:
Land Development Code Article 14 - Page 10 Use Standards
b. There must be a separation requirement of at least one-thousand threehundred
twenty (1,320) feet from another temporary shelter facility or
residential facility.
c. An on-site supervisor(s) is required during all hours of operation.
d. The sale, service or consumption of intoxicating and non-intoxicating liquor is
prohibited.
e. A temporary shelter facility may extend the maximum length of stay from 45
days to 90 days for no more than 10% of its occupants at any given time.
f. All other applicable codes must be complied with to assure protection of
public health, safety and welfare.
W. Transmission Services
In the Scenic Rivers Overlay District, transmission services (i.e., utility service such as
electrical power lines of a voltage of sixty-nine (69) kv or greater, or bulk gas or fuel
being transferred from station to station, and not intended for in-route consumption)
are subject to the following:
1. The owner must file maps indicating the location, alignment and type of service
proposed as requested by the Zoning Administrator. The City must act upon all
information filings within forty-five (45) days of receipt of a complete application
by the Zoning Administrator. Failure to act within the forty-five (45) day period
constitutes approval.
2. Maps and accompanying data on location and alignment of any essential
services must be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and
recommendations regarding the relationship of the essential services to urban
growth, land uses, highways, and recreation and park areas. The Planning
Commission must make a report of its findings and recommendations and file
such report with the City Council.
3. Upon receipt of the Planning Commission report, the City Council must consider
the maps and accompanying data and approve or approve with conditions.
4. Notwithstanding any other provisions, no transmission services will be permitted
within any area designated in the Scenic Rivers Overlay District until the City is
assured that the Department of Natural Resources is aware of any proposed
removal of natural vegetation in connection with the construction and
maintenance of transmission services.
5. No filing is necessary to maintain, reconstruct or relocate existing lines of facilities
where the general line and confirmation remain essentially the same. Emergency
work, which would otherwise require a filing, may be accomplished by providing
such filings as soon as possible.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 14:
Land Development Code Article 14 - Page 11 Use Standards
X. Utilities
Utilities, including telephone exchange and static transformer stations, and other
public utility buildings, must meet the following standards:
1. There is no public business office or storage yard or storage building operated in
connection with utility.
2. The exchanges, transformer stations or transformer mats are located fifteen (15)
feet from any interior property line and twenty-five (25) feet from any street
property line.
Y. Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS)
1. Purpose
Regulations governing wind energy conversion systems are established to provide
for appropriate locations for wind energy conversion systems, to ensure
compatibility with surrounding uses, and to promote safe, effective and efficient
use of wind energy conversion systems to increase opportunities for generation of
renewable energy. The ordinance is established to regulate the installation of
Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) within the City of St. Cloud, not
otherwise subject to siting and oversight by the State of Minnesota.
2. Site Design Standards
a. General Siting Standards
i. Overlay Districts. The following standards will apply to WECS in overlay
districts.
a. WECS are prohibited within the Shoreland Impact Zone and Mississippi
Scenic River District Districts.
b. Wind energy conversion systems shall comply with applicable
regulations as established by the Federal Aviation Administration.
c. No wind energy conversion system shall be permitted to be located
within Safety Zone A, Safety Zone B, or the vertical plane of Safety
Zone C.
d. Wind energy conversion systems proposed for any locally designated
historic structures or locally designated historic districts shall be subject
to all requirements of the City’s Heritage Preservation Ordinance.
ii. Right-Of-Way Encroachments. No part of any wind energy conversion
system shall extend across or over any part of a public right-of-way.
b. Siting of Building Mounted Wind Energy Conversion Systems. Notwithstanding
the height limitations of the zoning district, building mounted wind energy
conversion systems shall be subject to the following provisions:
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 14:
Land Development Code Article 14 - Page 12 Use Standards
T
c. Siting of Freestanding Wind Energy Conversion Systems
TABLE 14-2: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR FREESTANDING WECS
DISTRICTS
TOWER
TYPE
MAXIMUM
HEIGHT
MINIMUM
SETBACK
(x tower
height)
MINIMUM
LOT AREA PER
TOWER1
AG
Monopole
Self-Support /
Lattice
Guyed Tower
100’ 2.0 Ten (10) acres
RR
Monopole
Self-Support /
Lattice
100’ 1.0 Ten (10) acres
Residential
Districts
Monopole 65’ 1.0 One (1) acre
C-1 Monopole 65’ 1.0 One (1) acre
C-2 Monopole 65’ 1.0 One (1) acre
C-5,
Industrial
Districts
Monopole
Self-Support /
Lattice
Guyed Tower
130’
1.0
Ten (10) acres
Medical
Service
District
Monopole 65’ 2.0 One (1) acre
FOOTNOTES TABLE 14-2
1Parcels measuring less than the minimum lot area are allowed a single WECS.
i. All WECSs shall provide a minimum separation of 15’ between the ground
and the vertical length of any extensions, such as a rotor blade.
TABLE 14-1 STANDARDS FOR BUILDING MOUNTED WECS
WECS HEIGHT
(STRUCTURE AND
ROTORS)
SETBACK
MAXIMUM NUMBER
OF SYSTEMS PER
BUILDING
Residential Structures
Less than four (4) stories
and forty-two (42) feet in
height
Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited
Four (4) or more stories
and at least forty-two (42)
feet in height
12'
10' from front, side,
rear walls of
structure upon
which it would be
mounted
1 per 2,000 sf of roof
area
Non-Residential Structures
Less than four (4) stories
and forty-two (42) feet in
height
12'
10' from front, side,
rear walls of
structure upon
which it would be
mounted
1 per 4,000 sf of roof
area
Four (4) or more stories
and at least forty-two (42)
feet in height
12' 0
1 per 2,000 sf of roof
area
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 14:
Land Development Code Article 14 - Page 13 Use Standards
ii. WECSs towers and guy wires shall not be located in any required principal
building setback of the underlying zoning district. No WECS shall be
permitted to be located between the principal building and a required
front and/or side yard.
3. System Design Standards
a. Maximum generating capacity. Wind energy conversion systems shall have a
rated capacity of not more than the amount specified for the particular
zoning district.
b. Compatibility with nearby properties. Wind energy conversion systems shall
utilize building materials, colors and textures that are compatible with the
existing principal structure and that effectively blend the system facilities into
the surrounding setting and environment to the greatest extent possible. Rotor
blades shall be non-metallic to prevent communication signal interference.
Metal towers shall be constructed of, or treated with, corrosive resistant
material. Outside of the industrial districts, unpainted, galvanized metal, or
similar towers shall be prohibited, unless a self-weathering tower is determined
to be more compatible with the surrounding area.
c. Controls and brakes. All systems shall contain an internal governor or braking
device which engages at wind speeds in excess of forty (40) miles per hour
and minimizes the potential for wind damage to the equipment.
d. Electrical Wire. All electrical wires associated with wind energy conversion
systems shall be located within the tower and/or underground.
e. Security. Tower shall be designed to discourage unauthorized climbing from
ground level to 12' above ground level.
f. Signage. Advertising or identification of any kind on wind energy conversion
systems shall be prohibited, except for applicable warning and equipment
information signage required by the manufacturer or by federal, state or local
regulations.
g. Lighting. Wind energy conversion systems shall not be illuminated by artificial
means, except where the illumination is specifically required by the Federal
Aviation Administration or other federal, state or local regulations.
h. Noise. Wind energy conversion systems shall not emit noise in excess of the
limits established in Minnesota Rules 7030 governing noise and Section 1050 of
the St. Cloud City Code, as applicable.
i. Structural Stability. The structure upon which the proposed wind energy
conversion system is to be mounted shall have structural integrity to carry the
weight and wind loads of the wind energy conversion systems and have
minimal vibration impacts on the structure.
j. Maintenance required. All wind energy conversion systems shall be kept in
good repair and free from rust, damaged supports, framework or other
components.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 14:
Land Development Code Article 14 - Page 14 Use Standards
4. Abandoned or unused WECS.
All abandoned or unused wind energy conversion systems shall be removed
within twelve (12) months of the cessation of operations unless an extension is
approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals. If an extension is not approved, such
wind energy conversion system shall be deemed a nuisance, and the city may
act to abate such nuisance and require its removal at the property owner’s
expense. After the wind energy conversion system is removed, the owner or
operator of the site shall restore the site to its original, or to an improved,
condition.
5. Review Process.
a. In general. The zoning administrator shall have up to fifteen (15) working days
following the submittal of a complete application to approve or deny such
application. The zoning administrator may impose such conditions and
require such guarantees deemed reasonable and necessary to protect the
public interest and to ensure compliance with the standards and purposes of
this zoning ordinance and policies of the comprehensive plan.
b. Submittal requirements. In addition to the general application requirements
of Article 2. Code Administration, Section 2.8 – Zoning Administrator, the
applicant shall submit the following:
i. Scaled schematic drawings and photographic perspectives showing the
structure and the placement of the wind energy conversion system.
ii. A written certification from a licensed structural engineer that the structure
has the structural integrity to carry the weight and wind loads of the wind
energy conversion system and have minimal vibration impacts on the
structure.
iii. An analysis from a licensed engineer showing how the wind energy
conversion system shall be designed, constructed and operated in
compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, codes,
standards and ordinances.
iv. A written certification from a licensed engineer confirming that the wind
energy conversion system is designed to not cause electrical, radio
frequency, television and other communication signal interference.
v. Sufficient information demonstrating that the wind energy conversion
system shall be used primarily to reduce on-site consumption of electricity,
including but not limited to a complete listing of on-site electrical
demands.
vi. Written evidence that the electric utility service provider that serves the
proposed site has been informed of the applicant’s intent to install a wind
energy conversion system, unless the applicant does not plan to connect
the system to the electricity grid and declares so in the application.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 14:
Land Development Code Article 14 - Page 15 Use Standards
c. Appeals. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 2. Code Administration,
Section 2.8 – Zoning Administrator, decisions of the zoning administrator
regarding the administrative review of permitted wind energy conversion
systems shall be subject to appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
14.4 TEMPORARY USES
A. Temporary Uses in the C-3, C-4 and C-5 Districts
In the C-3, C-4 and C-5 Districts, temporary uses on the site of a permanent use are
permitted, subject to the following:
1. The use must be permitted in the district.
2. Hours of operation of the temporary use must substantially coincide with the
permanent use.
3. Structures and equipment for the temporary use should be allowed so long as
they meet applicable zoning regulations and all other regulations. Temporary
uses and structures are allowed for a maximum of one-hundred twenty (120) days
in a calendar year. Temporary structures and equipment must be removed from
the site when the temporary use is not in operation.
4. Parking required for the temporary use must be provided on-site.
5. The owner of the permanent use must provide a site plan to the Zoning
Administrator for approval and a signed statement identifying the hours and days
of operation for both the temporary and permanent use. The site plan must
denote the layout of all parking for the permanent use, and the location and size
of all structures and equipment for the temporary use. Said approval is valid for
one (1) calendar year.
B. Temporary Real Estate Offices in the R-1, R-1A and R-2 Districts
In the R-1, R-1A and R-2 Districts or a residential-only planned unit development, real
estate offices are allowed as a temporary use subject to the following conditions:
1. One (1) temporary real estate sales office is permitted in any recorded plat with
twenty (20) or more residential lots. The temporary real estate sales office must
close when the number of vacant lots remaining in that plat is either ten (10) lots
or twenty-five percent (25%) of the total residential lots, whichever is less.
2. The temporary real estate sales office must be located entirely within an
unoccupied model home or garage attached to a model home. If an attached
garage is utilized for sales purposes, the garage must be remodeled immediately
following discontinuance of the real estate sales office so as to meet the
minimum off-street parking requirements of this Code.
3. Hours of operation for a temporary real estate sales office are limited from eight
(8) AM to eight (8) PM.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 14:
Land Development Code Article 14 - Page 16 Use Standards
4. A maximum of four (4) employees are allowed to work within the temporary real
estate sales office.
5. The temporary sales office must be utilized for the sole purpose of facilitating
residential sales and coordinating development activities for the subdivision in
which it is located. Any developer or building utilizing a temporary real estate
office must maintain a primary office location off-site.
C. Temporary Contractor Trailers
Contractor trailers are allowed in any zoning district when accessory to a
construction project or a new development. Contractor trailers are limited to a
period not to exceed the duration of the active construction phase of such project.
These trailers must not contain any sleeping or cooking accommodations. No trailer
may be used as the general office or headquarters of any firm.
D. Temporary Storage Trailers
1. Temporary storage trailers, defined as rail shipping containers used for storage,
must not be permanently attached to the ground, serviced with permanent
utilities or stacked on the site.
2. Temporary storage trailers must be located within the rear yard and fully
screened from view from the public right-of-way. Temporary storage trailers
cannot be located within required buffer yards.
Article Last Amended: April 29, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 15:
Land Development Code Article 15 - Page 1 On-Site Development Standards
Article 15. On-Site Development Standards
15.1 PURPOSE
15.2 USE OF LAND AND BUILDINGS
15.3 LOT CONFIGURATION
15.4 EXTERIOR LIGHTING
15.5 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
15.6 PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS
15.7 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
15.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Article is to address the regulation of those other site improvements
within a zoning lot other than the regulations for the principal building. This includes site
design standards, exterior lighting, accessory structures and uses, permitted obstructions
and environmental performance standards.
15.2 USE OF LAND AND BUILDINGS
A. Number of Buildings on a Lot
Zoning lots with single-family or two-family dwellings are limited to a maximum of one
(1) principal building on the lot.
B. Applicability of Bulk Requirements
All structures erected after the effective date of this Code must meet the
requirements for the zoning district in which the structure is located. No existing
structure may be enlarged, altered, reconstructed or relocated in such a manner
that conflicts with the requirements of the zoning district in which the structure is
located.
C. Required Yards
No lot may be reduced in area so that the yards are less than required by this Code.
The yards of a structure are not considered yard space for any other structure. All
yards allocated to a structure must be located on the same zoning lot as such
structure.
D. Open Space Requirements
A yard, court or other open space provided for any structure for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of this Code must not again be used as a yard, court or
other open space for another building.
E. Building Height Appurtenances
Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, stacks, stage towers,
scenery lofts, tanks, ornamental towers and spires, wireless towers, or necessary
mechanical appurtenances may be erected to any height, not subject to zoning
district maximum height requirements but subject to other ordinances of the City.
Article Last Amended: April 29, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 15:
Land Development Code Article 15 - Page 2 On-Site Development Standards
F. View Obstruction
No fence, structure, building, hedge, berm or planting may rise over four (4) feet in
height above the level of the public sidewalk within twenty (20) feet of any street
right-of-way corner and ten (10) feet of any front property line where it will interfere
with traffic or pedestrian visibility across the driveway, alley or street. See Figure 15-1:
View Obstruction. This provision does not apply to buildings within the C-3 and C-4
Districts. However, all landscaping and signs within the C-3 and C-4 Districts must
comply with view obstruction requirements.
FIGURE 15-1: VIEW OBSTRUCTION
G. Applicability of Use Restrictions
No structure or land may be used for any use other than one allowed as either a
permitted or conditional use in the zoning district in which such structure or land is
located. Structures or land may also be used for a temporary use or accessory use, in
accordance with the requirements of Section 14.4 (Temporary Uses) and Section 15.4
(Accessory Structures and Uses).
H. Different Uses
When a use could be classified under two (2) similar but different types of uses, the
most restrictive or specific classification for that type of use will govern.
I. All Activities within an Enclosed Building
Within all districts, all activities must be conducted entirely within an enclosed
building, unless specifically permitted by this Code.
J. Street Closure
Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the
City, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way must be
Article Last Amended: April 29, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 15:
Land Development Code Article 15 - Page 3 On-Site Development Standards
automatically extended to the center of such vacation, and all area included in the
vacation is then subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended districts.
K. Areas Underwater
All areas within the corporate limits of the City, which are underwater, are subject to
all of the regulations of the zoning district, which immediately adjoins the water area.
If the water area adjoins two (2) or more zoning districts, the boundaries of each
district are construed to extend into the water area in a straight line until they meet
the other district at a halfway point.
15.3 LOT CONFIGURATION
A. Frontage on a Public or Private Street
All lots must front on a public or private street. Parcels that do not front on a public or
private street require a Common Interest Community Plat, in accordance with
Section 5.10 (CIC Plats for Lots Held in Separate Ownership), to meet street frontage
and access requirements.
B. Lot Size and Dimensions
1. All lots must have a minimum of forty (40) foot width required frontage on a
public street.
2. All lots must have a minimum of thirty (30) foot width at the minimum lot depth
mark.
3. An existing through lot must have a front yard, as required in the zoning district,
along each street lot line. Through lots, with frontage on two (2) parallel streets,
are permitted only under the following circumstances:
a. Where vehicular and pedestrian access between the lots and an arterial
street is prohibited.
b. Where topographic or other conditions render subdividing of at least twenty
(20) feet necessary in order to allow space for screen planting.
4. Side lot lines must be substantially at right angles or radial to the street line.
5. Lots abutting on a water course, drainage way, channel or stream must have an
additional depth or width, as required, to assure house sites that are not subject
to flooding at the level of the one-hundred (100) year flood return period as
determined by the City Engineer and U.S. Army Corp of Engineer records.
6. In all residential districts, the floor area in principal buildings used for parking is
exempt from the floor area ratio (FAR) limitations.
7. The setback requirements must be observed on each street side of a corner lot
provided, however, that the buildable width of a lot must not be reduced to less
than twenty-one (21) feet.
Article Last Amended: April 29, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 15:
Land Development Code Article 15 - Page 4 On-Site Development Standards
15.4 EXTERIOR LIGHTING
A. Light Trespass
1. No exterior lighting may glare into, or upon, the surrounding area or any
residential premises. In addition, no exterior lighting may be used in any manner
that could interfere with the safe movement of motor vehicles on public
thoroughfares. The light level must be no greater than one-half (0.5) foot candle
at a residential property line and one (1) foot candle at any non-residential
property line or public right-of-way line.
2. Specifically, the following types of light trespass are prohibited:
a. Any light not designed for roadway illumination that produces direct or
reflected glare that could disturb the operator of a motor vehicle.
b. Any light that may be confused with, or construed as, a traffic control device,
except as authorized by state, federal or local government.
B. Unshielded Lighting
The use of unshielded lighting, including incandescent light bulbs hung or strung on
poles, wires, or any other type of support, to illuminate buildings, structures, outdoor
sales areas, or outdoor storage or display areas are prohibited, except on a
temporary basis in areas where special events, carnivals, fairs or other similar activities
are held and only when such activities are taking place.
C. Light Pole Heights
The maximum height of light poles on private property, as measured from grade at
the base to the bottom of the luminaire, are specified below. Building-mounted
fixtures may exceed these height limitations, provided that they are fully shielded.
These standards do not apply to roadway lighting. Permitted light pole heights are as
follows:
1. Non-Residential Districts
Lights poles and building-mounted fixtures must be designed with fully shielded
luminaires. Such poles or mounts may not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height. The
Zoning Administrator may approve, in appropriate circumstances, a pole or
mount of up to twenty-four (24) feet.
2. Residential Districts
Light poles for single- and two-family dwellings may not exceed ten (10) feet in
height. Light poles for non-residential, multi-family and townhouse uses may not
exceed fourteen (14) feet in height. Lighting, including under-soffit lighting
mounted upon a single-family, two-family or townhouse residential dwelling may
not be mounted higher than twenty (20) feet above grade, as defined in this
Code. Light poles on school sites or that light outdoor recreational facilities may
not exceed twenty-four (24) feet in height.
Article Last Amended: April 29, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 15:
Land Development Code Article 15 - Page 5 On-Site Development Standards
15.5 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
A. Accessory Structure
1. Principal Structure Required
No detached accessory structure may be constructed on any residentially zoned
lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is
accessory.
2. Detached Accessory Structure Height
Detached accessory buildings are limited to a maximum height of seventeen (17)
feet.
3. Shared Accessory Structure
In residential districts, a two (2) stall garage may be used jointly and solely by the
families living on two (2) adjacent lots and may be built so as to place one (1)
stall on each side of rear lot line, provided that the two (2) stalls are separated by
a fire wall.
4. Maximum Accessory Structure Size
The maximum size accessory structures are dependent upon the land use and
zoning district and must comply with the requirements found in Table 15-1:
Maximum Accessory Structure Size.
TABLE 15-1: MAXIMUM ACCESSORY STRUCTURE SIZE
LAND USE
ZONING
DISTRICT
MINIMUM LOT
AREA
NUMBER OF ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES TOTAL MAXIMUM ACCESSORY
STRUCTURE COVERAGE
ATTACHED DETACHED
1 & 2 Family
R1 – R7
< 20,000 sq. ft. One Two 1, 2
2,000 sq. ft. maximum or 15% of lot
area
= 20,000 sq. ft. One Two 1, 2 2,500 sq. ft. maximum
RR
< 1 acre One Two 1, 2
2,500 sq. ft. maximum or 15% of lot
area
= 1 acre One Two 1, 2 3,000 sq. ft. maximum
AG
< 10 acres One Three 1, 2
3,500 sq. ft. maximum or 15% of lot
area
= 10 acres One Four 1, 2 6,500 sq. ft. maximum
Lodging,
Fraternity, &
Sorority
Houses
R3 &
R3A
< 20,000 sq. ft. One Two 1, 2
2,000 sq. ft. maximum or 15% of lot
area
= 20,000 sq. ft. One Two 1, 2
2,500 sq. ft. maximum or 15% of lot
area
Single
Family
Attached
R3 – R7
< 5,000 sq. ft.
One per
dwelling unit
One 1, 2
2,000 sq. ft. maximum or 15% of lot
area
= 5,000 sq. ft.
One per
dwelling unit
Two 1, 2
2,500 sq. ft. maximum or 15% of lot
area
Multi-Family R3 – R7 N/A
One per
dwelling unit
One per
two
dwelling
units
15% of lot area
Article Last Amended: April 29, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 15:
Land Development Code Article 15 - Page 6 On-Site Development Standards
Institutional RR – R7 N/A N/A Two 5% of lot area
Commercial C1 – C5 N/A N/A Two 5% of lot area
Industrial I1 – I3 N/A N/A Two 5% of lot area
FOOTNOTES TABLE 15-1
1 No detached accessory structures can exceed the total lot coverage of the principal structure.
Detached accessory structures located in an AG District may be up to three (3) times the total lot
coverage of the principal structure if the lot area is five (5) acres or greater. All detached accessory
structures are still subject to the remaining provisions of Table 15-1.
2 Doghouses, children’s play houses, fish houses, tree houses and other similar buildings that are less than
fifty (50) square feet in total area are not included in the maximum number of detached accessory
buildings allowed, nor in lot coverage requirements; however, total building area of all doghouses,
children’s play houses, fish houses, tree houses and other similar buildings on a zoning lot may not exceed
one-hundred (100) square feet.
5. Detached Accessory Structure Setbacks
a. Detached accessory structures located in a front, interior side or street side
setback must meet the principal building setbacks.
b. All detached accessory buildings or structures must be located a minimum of
ten (10) feet from the principal building on a lot. The distance is measured
from the walls of the building or structure.
c. Detached accessory structures located in the rear yard may be located
within the required rear setback but must comply with the setback from lot
line requirements of Table 15-2: Detached Accessory Structure Setback.
TABLE 15-2: DETACHED ACCESSORY STRUCTURE SETBACK
SETBACK FROM LOT LINES
DISTRICT PERMITTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
Rear Yard
Without Alley
Rear Yard
With Alley
AG, RR, R1, R1-A,
R-2 District
Tool houses, sheds & other structures for the storage
of domestic supplies for the principal use; detached
garages1; privately-owned recreational facilities &
equipment
5 ft 5 ft
Fenced dog kennels, dog houses & organic compost
piles
10 ft
2.5 ft from rear lot
line
10 ft from side lot
lines
R3, R4, R5 District
Storage buildings for domestic supplies used for the
principal uses; detached garages1; private
recreational facilities, cafeterias, libraries & similar uses
for private use
5 ft 5 ft
Fenced dog kennels, dog houses & organic compost
piles
10 ft
2.5 ft from rear lot
line
10 ft from side lot
lines
R6, R7 District
Storage buildings for domestic supplies used for the
principal uses; detached garages1; private
recreational facilities, cafeterias, libraries & similar uses
for private use (located entirely within the principal
use structure, accessed from interior of the building,
no advertising or display visible, & no more than 10%
of the gross floor area of a building)
5 ft 5 ft
Article Last Amended: April 29, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 15:
Land Development Code Article 15 - Page 7 On-Site Development Standards
Fenced dog kennels, dog houses & organic compost
piles
35 ft from rear lot
line
10 ft from side lot
lines
35 ft from rear lot
line
10 ft from side lot
lines
Commercial &
Industrial Districts
All detached structures1 5 ft 5 ft
FOOTNOTES TABLE 15-2
1 If a detached garage is accessed from an alley, a 10-foot setback is required or if a garage fronts onto a
side street, the minimum setback must be twenty (20) feet. (See figure 8-4: Street Side Setback – Side Street
Garage Access)
6. Detached Accessory Structure Design
a. Accessory building less than 120 square feet in area are permitted to be
constructed out of materials such as non-architectural metal, fiberglass, vinyl
resin, and plastic panels. Prohibited building materials include tarps made of
plastic, canvas, or vinyl; unpainted corrugated metal panels; and non-exterior
grade plywood or similar products.
b. Accessory buildings 120 square feet in area or greater shall be constructed
out of materials similar and/or compatible to those utilized on the principal
building in a matching color. Prohibited building materials include panels
made of non-architectural metal, fiberglass, vinyl resin, plastic; tarps made of
plastic, canvas, or vinyl; unpainted corrugated metal panels; and non-exterior
grade plywood or similar products. Metal roofs are allowed provided they
are constructed with standing seams and concealed or exposed fasteners.
7. Land Use/Zoning Permits
A property owner or their designated agent must submit plans consistent with the
requirements found in Appendix B of the Land Development Code to the St.
Cloud Planning and Zoning Department for the following structures:
a. Detached accessory structures between one hundred (100) square feet and
two hundred (200) square feet.
b. Decks and/or platforms more than seven (7) inches and less than thirty (30)
inches in height about the adjacent grade and is not attached to a structure
with footings.
B. Fences and Hedges
The following regulations apply to fences and hedges within the residential districts.
1. Fences in residential districts located within the required setback must comply
with the height and setback requirements of Table 15-3: Fence Height in
Residential Districts.
TABLE 15-3: FENCE HEIGHT IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS1
LOCATION MAXIMUM HEIGHT DISTANCE FROM LOT LINE
Front Setback 4 ft None required
Article Last Amended: April 29, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 15:
Land Development Code Article 15 - Page 8 On-Site Development Standards
Interior or Street
Side Setback
6 ft None required
Rear Setback 6 ft
None required, unless the
property abuts an alley – then
2.5 ft
FOOTNOTES TABLE 15-31 Unless otherwise permitted by Paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of this section.
2. Tennis court fences are permitted a maximum height of twelve (12) feet. The
fence must not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) opacity.
3. The maximum height of a fence or hedge may be increased to eight (8) feet in
the front, rear or street side setback, so long as the fence or hedge complies with
the view obstruction provisions of Section 15.2.F and the following conditions are
met:
a. The fence or hedge is located adjacent to a principal or minor arterial street.
b. Access to the property is prohibited from the principal or minor arterial street.
c. The fence or hedge is located within the rear yard.
4. For a through lot, the maximum height of a fence or hedge may be increased to
six (6) feet in the front setback, so long as the fence or hedge complies with the
view obstruction provisions of Section 15.2.F and the following conditions are met:
a. Access to the property is prohibited from the street where the fence or hedge
is located.
b. The fence or hedge is located within the rear yard.
5. Fences around the perimeter of a permanent swimming pool are permitted to be
up to ten (10) feet in height for multiple family properties.
C. Home Occupations
The following regulations apply to all home occupations:
1. The occupation or profession is carried on by a member of a family, residing on
the premises, and is conducted entirely within the dwelling or within a detached
garage.
2. Only one (1) non-illuminated nameplate may be used to advertise the business,
which is not more than one (1) square foot in area and attached to the building
entrance.
3. No commodity is sold upon the premises.
4. No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross floor area of any one (1)
story is used for the home occupation or professional services.
D. Gazebo
Gazebos are permitted in the rear yard, provided they comply with the following:
Article Last Amended: April 29, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 15:
Land Development Code Article 15 - Page 9 On-Site Development Standards
1. Each surface of the gazebo is at least twenty-five percent (25%) open.
2. Gazebos are limited to twelve (12) feet in height, as measured to the peak of the
roof. The gazebo platform must be no higher than four (4) feet above grade.
Gazebos are limited to one-hundred twenty (120) square feet in area.
3. The gazebo must be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from any lot line.
E. Outdoor Storage
Commercial and industrial uses are permitted outdoor storage in accordance with
the following provisions:
1. All manufacturing, assembly, repair or work activity must take place inside an
enclosed building.
2. No required off-street parking area may be used as outdoor storage.
3. No materials stored or displayed outdoors shall be of a greater height than that of
the required screening.
4. Within the commercial districts, all outdoor storage must be on a paved surface.
Within the industrial districts, outdoor storage may be on a paved or gravel
surface. Nurseries are exempted from this provision and may include the growing
of plants in the open.
F. Satellite Dish Antennas
1. General Requirements
a. Satellite dish antennas must be permanently installed on a building, in the
ground or on a foundation, and cannot be mounted on a portable or
movable structure.
b. Subject to operational requirements, the dish must be of a neutral color, such
as white or grey, and blend with the surroundings as best as possible. No
additional signs or advertising are permitted on the satellite dish itself, aside
from the logos of the satellite dish service provider or dish manufacturer.
c. Cables and lines serving ground-mounted satellite dish antennas must be
located underground.
d. All federal, state and local regulations must be followed in the construction,
installation and operation of satellite dish antennas.
d. All exposed surfaces of the antenna must be kept clean, and all supports
must be painted to maintain a well-kept appearance. Antennas no longer in
use must be removed.
Article Last Amended: April 29, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 15:
Land Development Code Article 15 - Page 10 On-Site Development Standards
2. Small Satellite Dish Antennas (One Meter or Less in Diameter)
Small satellite dish antennas are subject to the general requirements of
Paragraph 1 above. Every effort must be made to install small satellite dish
antennas in locations that are not readily visible from neighboring properties or
from the public right-of-way.
3. Large Satellite Dish Antennas (One Meter or More in Diameter)
a. Residential Districts
i. Large satellite dish antennas must be located in the rear yard and set
back a distance from all lot lines that is at least equal to the height of the
dish, but in no case less than five (5) feet from any lot line.
ii. The overall height of a large satellite dish antenna must not exceed
twelve (12) feet.
iii. A large satellite dish antenna must be located and screened so that it
cannot be readily seen from public streets or adjacent properties.
Screening includes fences, plant materials and/or earth berms located to
conceal the sides and rear of the antenna and its support structure.
b. Commercial Districts
i. A large satellite dish antenna must be located in the rear or side yard and
set back a distance from all lot lines that is at least equal to the height of
the dish, but in no case less than five (5) feet from any lot line.
ii. Roof-mounting is permitted only if the satellite dish antenna is in scale with
the overall building mass and location and must be screened by an
architectural feature. The visible portion of the dish should not comprise
more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the corresponding height or width
of the screen.
iii. Ground-mounted satellite dish antenna must be screened, which includes
fencing, berming or landscaping to accomplish the following:
(a) All ground-mounted accessory equipment and the lower part of the
support structure are completely screened.
(b) Where feasible, trees must be installed to the side and rear of the
antenna and at a height/elevation equal to the tallest portion of the
dish.
G. Swimming Pools and Spas
1. Swimming Pools.
The following standards apply to all outdoor permanent swimming pools
containing twenty-four (24) inches or more of water:
Article Last Amended: April 29, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 15:
Land Development Code Article 15 - Page 11 On-Site Development Standards
a. One of the following physical barriers must be provided for permanent
pools. A barrier is not required for temporary pools.
i. A safety fence surrounding the pool must meet the following
standards:
1. Fencing must measure six (6) feet in height. Fences around
the perimeter of a permanent swimming pool on multiplefamily
properties may measure up to ten (10) feet in height.
2. Fencing must be constructed of durable materials.
3. Fencing must extend to within 4-inches of ground level.
4. Gates must be self-closing/self-latching with latch
mechanisms located at the top of the gate.
or
ii. A properly maintained automatic pool cover complying with ASTM
(American Society of Testing and Materials) F1346-91 certification,
or successor standard, is in use at all times the pool area is not
attended.
b. Pools are permitted in the rear yard only and must be located at least five
(5) feet from any lot line.
2. Spas
a. All outdoor spas require a safety cover but do not require a safety fence.
b. Spas are permitted in the rear and side yards only and must be located at
least five (5) feet from any lot line.
H. Water Features and Man-Made Ponds
1. Water features must not be designed for, nor may an owner allow, any swimming,
wading or water-related recreation use.
2. No water feature may be located within the required front and side yard
setbacks for single and two-family dwellings. Water features located on parcels
occupied by a multiple-family dwelling must maintain a minimum five (5) foot
setback from all property lines.
I. Wireless Telecommunications
1. Purpose
In order to accommodate the communication needs of residents and businesses,
while protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of the community,
the City finds that these regulations are necessary in order to:
a. Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services to the residents
and businesses of the City.
Article Last Amended: April 29, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 15:
Land Development Code Article 15 - Page 12 On-Site Development Standards
b. Minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful design and siting
standards based on the established tower hierarchy.
c. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure.
d. Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to
accommodate new wireless telecommunication antennas in order to reduce
the number of towers needed to serve the community.
e. Encourage clustering of self-support/lattice and guyed towers in appropriate
locations.
2. Siting Requirements
a. All Towers
Tower facilities may be permitted as provided in Table 15-4: Siting
Requirements for Wireless Telecommunications Towers.
TABLE 15-4: SITING REQUIREMENTS FOR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
TOWER TYPE
PERMITTED
ZONING DISTRICTS
SETBACK FROM
PROPERTY LINES
MAXIMUM HEIGHT
SEPARATION FROM A
GUYED OR SELF
SUPPORT/LATTICE TOWER
STEALTH All zones
Same as principal
use
Same as principal
use
Same as principal use
CAMOUFLAGE All zones
Same as principal
use
65 ft or height of
principal use,
whichever is
greater
Same as principal use
MONOPOLE1
Rural Residential 30 ft 165 ft None
Agricultural 50 ft None None
Residential
Same as principal
use
50 ft. None
Commercial
Same as principal
use
None None
Industrial
Same as principal
use
None None
SELF SUPPORT/
LATTICE1
Agricultural
250 ft from a
residentially zoned
property
50 ft from all others
None
If not within 350 ft of an
existing self
support/lattice or guyed
tower, then ½ mile
Residential
Same as principal
use
50 ft.
If not within 350 ft of an
existing self
support/lattice or guyed
tower, then ½ mile
Commercial,
except C-1 & C-2
250 ft from a
residentially zoned
property
50 ft from all others
None
If not within 350 ft of an
existing self
support/lattice or guyed
tower, then ½ mile
Industrial
250 ft from a
residentially zoned
property
20 ft from all others
None
None
GUYED1 Agricultural
250 ft from a
residentially zoned
property
50 ft from all others
Anchors and guys: 20
ft
None
If not within 250 ft of an
existing self
support/lattice or guyed
tower, then ½ mile
Article Last Amended: April 29, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 15:
Land Development Code Article 15 - Page 13 On-Site Development Standards
TABLE 15-4: SITING REQUIREMENTS FOR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
TOWER TYPE
PERMITTED
ZONING DISTRICTS
SETBACK FROM
PROPERTY LINES
MAXIMUM HEIGHT
SEPARATION FROM A
GUYED OR SELF
SUPPORT/LATTICE TOWER
Industrial
250 ft from a
residentially zoned
property
20 ft from all others
Anchors and guys: 20
ft
None
If not within 350 ft of an
existing self
support/lattice or guyed
tower, then ½ mile
FOOTNOTES TABLE 15-4
1 Subject to co-location requirements found in Paragraph b below.
b. Shared Use/Collection
An application for a new monopole, self support/lattice or guyed tower may
not be approved unless the City finds that the equipment plans for the
proposed tower cannot be accommodated by an existing or approved
tower or building within a one-half (½) mile search radius of the proposed
tower due to one (1) or more of the following reasons:
i. The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing or approved tower, as documented by a qualified and licensed
professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be
reinforced, modified or replaced to accommodate planned or
equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost.
ii. The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting
the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower as
documented by a qualified professional, and the interference cannot be
prevented at a reasonable cost.
iii. Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius cannot
accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function
reasonably as documented by a qualified professional.
iv. Other unforeseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the planned
equipment upon an existing or approved tower or building.
A proposed tower must be designed (structurally and electronically) in all
respects, to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and
equipment together with the antennas and equipment for at least one (1)
additional user. The tower must be designed to allow for future
rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas
mounted at various heights.
c. Additional Standards
i. One non-commercial tower and antennas is allowed as an accessory use
to a Permitted or Conditional use in the applicable zone. Bulk standards
are established as identified in Table 15-3: Siting Requirements for Wireless
Communications Towers.
Article Last Amended: April 29, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 15:
Land Development Code Article 15 - Page 14 On-Site Development Standards
ii. Communication towers may be located on lots containing another
principal use, including another communication tower. Separation
between communication towers and other uses on the lot must comply
with applicable building and fire codes. Towers may occupy a leased
parcel.
iii. Any structure accessory to communication towers, other than peripheral
supports and guy anchors, must conform to the setback requirements for
the district in which it is located.
iv. The separation distance between an existing and a proposed tower is
measured at grade in a direct lineal fashion between the closest points of
the base of the existing and the base of proposed towers.
v. A fence or wall, a minimum of eight (8) feet in height measured from
finished grade, must be constructed around each guy anchor. Access to
the tower must be through a locked gate. The fence material must blend
with and suit the character of the neighborhood or surrounding property.
vi. Landscaping and buffering is required around the perimeter of the tower,
accessory structures and guy anchors, unless waived by the Zoning
Administrator when the proposed landscaping would not be visible from
adjacent lots or rights-of-way. Landscaping must be installed along the
exterior side of the required fence. Landscaping must include, at
minimum, evergreen type trees with a separation between trees of a
maximum of twenty (20) feet. Trees must have a minimum trunk diameter
of two (2) inches at one (1) foot above the ground at time of planting.
Trees are only required on that side of the tower property adjacent to a
residential district or right-of-way. Trees as a landscaping element are not
required when the use of trees is shown to be incompatible with the
proposed antenna and tower design (i.e. a series-fed AM directional
antenna array) as documented by a qualified professional. Nonvegetation
landscape design may be chosen where it better suits the
architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood with the
agreement of the Zoning Administrator. Stealth and camouflage towers
are not subject to the perimeter buffering requirements of this section.
vii. All abandoned or unused towers, or portions of towers, and associated
above-ground facilities must be removed within twelve (12) months of the
cessation of operations of an antenna facility at the site unless a time
extension is approved by the Zoning Administrator. Any ordinary time
extension must not exceed sixty (60) days. In the event that a tower is not
removed after twelve (12) months, the City may remove the tower and
associated facilities, and the costs or removal must be assessed against
the property. Tower operators must provide, at the time of application, a
copy of the lease or other instrument obligating them to remove tower(s)
and associated facilities upon ceasing of operations at any site.
viii. In addition to the required review processes, a building permit is required
for all towers, support and accessory structures, and antenna
attachments, except as otherwise provided by State or local law.
Article Last Amended: April 29, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 15:
Land Development Code Article 15 - Page 15 On-Site Development Standards
ix. The placement of any signs or appurtenances for advertising or business
purposes on any tower, including the company name, is prohibited.
x. Towers, and the antennas they support, must be designed to blend into
the surrounding environment to the maximum extent possible through the
use of color, except in instances where the color is dictated by federal or
state authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration.
xi. Towers must comply with Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
standards for non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER). All
appurtenances and accessory equipment or structures must comply with
FCC standards for NIER.
xii. Towers must not be a hazard to air navigation, as determined by the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
xiii. A tower may not be illuminated by artificial means and may not display
strobe lights unless such lighting is specifically required by the FAA or other
state or federal authority for a particular tower. When lighting is required,
the least intensive nighttime method of illumination acceptable to the
FAA or other authority may be utilized. All required lighting must be
maintained on an as-needed basis by the owner of the tower.
xiv. All towers must be inspected in compliance with FCC regulations or as
required by the Building Inspector.
xv. As provided by the FCC, towers may not interfere with the normal
operation of electrical or mechanical equipment located within
surrounding properties.
xvi. No new or existing telecommunications service may interfere with public
safety or private telecommunications including, but not limited to, radio,
television and personal communications, in accordance with rules and
regulations of the FCC. Before the introduction of a new service, or
change in existing service, telecommunication providers must notify the
City at least ten (10) days in advance of such changes and allow the City
to monitor interference levels during the testing process.
xvii. All towers shall be designed as such to inhibit climbing by unauthorized
person(s) at all times.
d. Accessory Structures
The size of an accessory structure(s) may be increased to accommodate colocation.
The expansion is subject to review through the building permit
process and approval by the Zoning Administrator.
15.6 PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS
An obstruction is the extension or placement of any structure or building, or component
of such, into a required setback. Additional restrictions on permitted obstruction,
including additional setback requirements and bulk regulations, can be found in Section
Article Last Amended: April 29, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 15:
Land Development Code Article 15 - Page 16 On-Site Development Standards
15.5 (Accessory Structures and Uses) above. Permitted obstructions are found in Table 15-
5: Permitted Obstructions.
TABLE 15-5: PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS
Y= PERMITTED // N= NOT PERMITTED
TYPE OF OBSTRUCTION
YARDS WHERE PERMITTED
FRONT OR STREET
SIDE SETBACK
INTERIOR SIDE SETBACK REAR SETBACK
Above Ground Fuel Storage Tank
- Permitted only in the rear yard
- Minimum of 10’ from side lot line
N N N
Accessibility Ramp Y Y Y
Air Conditioner Window Unit
- No more than 18” into any required yard
Y Y Y
Arbor or Trellis
Y, but no more than
4’ into required
setback
Y, but no more than 2’
into required setback
Y
Awning & Canopy (Residential Use)
Y, but no more than
4’ into required
setback
Y, but no more than 2’
into required setback
Y, but no more than 4’
into required setback
Balcony
Y, but no more than
4’ into required
setback
Y, but no more than 4’
into required setback
(3’ in R-1A & R2
Districts)
Y
Bay Window
- Must be located 18” above the ground
Y, but no more than
2.5’ into required
setback
Y, but no more than
2.5’ into required
setback (2’ in R-1A &
R2 Districts)
Y
Chimney
- No more than 18” into a required yard
Y Y Y
Compost Pile N N Y
Deck
- No higher than the first floor of a structure
Y, but no more than
4’ into required
setback
Y, but no more than 4’
into required setback
(3’ in R-1A & R2
Districts)
Y
Dog House & Dog Run N N Y
Eaves (Principal Building)
Y, but no more than
4’ into required
setback
Y, but no more than 4’
into required setback
(3’ in R-1A & R2
Districts)
Y
Exterior Stairwells N N Y
Fire Escape N N Y
Firewood Storage & Trash Receptacles
- Does not include trash receptacles
temporarily placed on the lot for trash
collection
N
Y, if screened from
street
Y
Flagpole
- No more than 3 per zoning lot
- Not to exceed 40’ in height
Y Y Y
Garage, Detached N N Y
Gazebo N N Y
Greenhouse, Detached N N Y
Article Last Amended: April 29, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 15:
Land Development Code Article 15 - Page 17 On-Site Development Standards
TABLE 15-5: PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS
Y= PERMITTED // N= NOT PERMITTED
TYPE OF OBSTRUCTION
YARDS WHERE PERMITTED
FRONT OR STREET
SIDE SETBACK
INTERIOR SIDE SETBACK REAR SETBACK
Mechanical Equipment, Ground-Mounted (Air
Conditioners, Pool Equipment, etc.)
N Y Y
Ornamental Lighting, Lamp Posts, &
Permanently Anchored Lawn Furniture &
Decorations
(Benches, statues, birdbaths, sculptures, etc.)
- Subject to view obstruction and exterior
lighting regulations
Y Y Y
Outdoor Boiler
- Permitted only in the rear yard
- Minimum of 10’ from side lot line
N N N
Outdoor Fireplaces & Fire Pits N N Y
Patio Y Y Y
Playground & Recreational Equipment N N Y
Porch N N N
Sills, belt course, cornices & ornamental features
of the principal building
Y, but no more than
2.5’ into required
setback
Y, but no more than
2.5’ into required
setback (2’ in R-1A &
R2 Districts)
Y
Stoop
- Maximum width of 5’
Y, maximum of 4’
into required
setback
Y, maximum of 4’ into
required setback
Y, maximum of 4’ into
required setback
Swimming Pool N N Y
Tennis Court N N Y
Window Light Well
Y, but no more than
4’ into required
setback
Y, but no more than 4’
into required setback
(3’ in R-1A & R2
Districts)
Y
15.7 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
All uses must comply with the performance standards established in this section unless
any federal, state, county or local law, ordinance or regulation establishes a more
restrictive standard, in which case, the more restrictive standard will apply.
In order to assure compliance with the performance standards set forth above, the City
Council may require the owner or operator of any permitted use to have made such
investigations and tests as may be required to show compliance with these performance
standards. Such investigation and tests as are required to be made may be carried out
by an independent testing organization as may be agreed upon by all parties
concerned, or if there is failure to agree, by such independent testing organization as
may be selected by the City Council after thirty (30) day notice. The costs incurred in
having such investigations or tests conducted will be shared equally by the owner or
operator and the City, unless the investigation and tests disclose non-compliance with
the performance standards, in which event the entire investigation or testing cost will be
paid by the owner or operator. The procedure stated above does not preclude the City
Article Last Amended: April 29, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 15:
Land Development Code Article 15 - Page 18 On-Site Development Standards
from making any tests and investigations it finds appropriate to determine compliance
with these performance standards.
A. Landscaping
All open areas of any zoning lot must be graded to provide proper drainage and,
except for areas used for parking, drives or storage, landscaped with trees, shrubs or
planted groundcover in accord with Article 17 (Landscaping, Buffering and
Screening). It is the owner’s responsibility to see that this landscaping is maintained in
an attractive and well-kept condition. All vacant lots must be properly maintained.
B. Noise
Noise will be measured on any property line of the zoning lot on which the operation
is located. Noise must be muffled so as not to become objectionable due to
intermittence, beat frequency, shrillness or intensity.
C. Vibration
Vibration must not be discernible at any property line to the human sense of feeling
for three (3) minutes or more in duration in any one (1) hour.
D. Wastes
All solid waste material, debris, refuse or garbage must be kept within a completely
enclosed building or properly contained in closed containers and stored in racks
designed for such purpose. All liquid wastes containing any organic or toxic matter
must be discharged in the manner prescribed by the Health Department.
E. Air Pollution
Any activity or operation must conform with the City and state regulations relating to
ambient air quality standards and air pollution control regulations.
Article Last Amended: June 4, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 16:
Land Development Code Article 16 - Page 1 Off-Street Parking and Loading
Article 16. Off-Street Parking and Loading
16.1 PURPOSE
16.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS
16.3 COMPUTATION
16.4 COLLECTIVE PROVISIONS
16.5 LAND BANKED FUTURE PARKING
16.6 EXEMPTION FROM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
16.7 LOCATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
16.8 DESIGN STANDARDS
16.9 OFF-STREET PARKING ACCESS
16.10 ACCESSIBLE PARKING
16.11 STACKING SPACES FOR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES
16.12 PARKING AND STORING OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND OVERSIZED VEHICLES
16.13 REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
16.14 DESIGN OF OFF-STREET LOADING
16.15 REQUIRED OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES
16.1 PURPOSE
The off-street parking and loading regulations of this Article are intended to provide
accessible, attractive, secure and well-maintained off-street parking and loading areas
with the appropriate number of spaces in proportion to the needs of the proposed use,
increase public safety by reducing congestion of public streets, and encourage the use
of alternative modes of transportation where appropriate.
16.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS
The provisions of this Article apply as follows:
A. Existing Facilities
1. The existing number of off-street parking and loading spaces cannot be reduced
below the requirements of this Article. If the number of such existing spaces is
already less than the requirements of this Article, it may not be further reduced.
2. Existing off-street parking and loading areas which do not conform to the
requirements of this Article, but were in conformance with the requirements of this
Code at the time the parking or loading facilities were established, are permitted
to continue as a legal nonconforming structure.
3. If a building permit for a building or structure was lawfully issued prior to the
effective date of this Code, the number of off-street parking and loading spaces
must be provided in the amount required for the issuance of said building permit,
regardless of what may be required by this Article.
B. Damage or Destruction
When a building is reconstructed or repaired after being damaged or destroyed, offstreet
parking and loading facilities must be restored or maintained in an amount
equivalent to that at the time of such damage or destruction. However, it is not
Article Last Amended: June 4, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 16:
Land Development Code Article 16 - Page 2 Off-Street Parking and Loading
necessary to restore or maintain parking and loading facilities in excess of the
applicable requirements of this Section.
C. Change in Land Use
When the existing use of a building, structure or parcel of land is changed to a new
use, parking and loading spaces must be provided as required for the new use.
Additional parking or loading spaces are required in the amount by which the
requirements for the new use exceed the requirements for the existing use.
D. Change in Intensity of Use
1. When the intensity of use of any building, structure or parcel of land is increased,
additional parking and loading spaces must be provided. The number of
additional parking and loading spaces is based on the increase in the number of
dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other unit of measurement
used to calculate the number of required number of parking or loading spaces.
2. When the intensity of use of any building, structure or parcel of land is decreased,
the number of parking and loading spaces may be reduced so long as the
parking requirements of this Article are met for the entire building, structure or
parcel of land as modified.
E. Provision of Additional Spaces
Nothing in this Article is deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off-street
parking or loading facilities, provided that all regulations governing the location,
design and control of such facilities must be in accordance with this Article.
F. Limitations on Use
No motor vehicle repair work of any kind is permitted in conjunction with exposed offstreet
parking facilities, except for minor repair on vehicles owned by the occupant
or resident of the principal use for which the parking space is intended. In that case,
all such minor repair work must be done within an enclosed garage. No temporary
use may occupy required off-street parking areas.
G. Site Plan
All plans submitted for a building permit requiring parking spaces or loading facilities
must show or designate the area, number of spaces, type of surfacing, screening,
and drainage to be performed. Such site plan is a part of the building permit, and no
certificate of occupancy will be issued until all items shown on the site plan for
parking and loading facilities have been completed.
16.3 COMPUTATION
The total number of required parking and loading spaces is based upon the
requirements for the principal use(s) of the lot. When more than one (1) use occupies the
same lot, the number of required spaces is to be the sum of the separate requirements
for each use. All off-street parking facilities must be completed before occupancy of the
Article Last Amended: June 4, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 16:
Land Development Code Article 16 - Page 3 Off-Street Parking and Loading
building or structure served. In computing the number of off-street parking or loading
spaces required by this Section, the following standards for computation apply:
A. Space allocated to any off-street loading space cannot be used to satisfy the
requirement for any off-street parking space or access aisle, or portion thereof.
Conversely, the area allocated to any off-street parking space must not be used to
satisfy the replacement for any off-street loading space or portion thereof.
B. A fraction of less than one-half (½) may be disregarded, and a fraction of one-half
(½) or more is counted as one (1) parking or loading space.
C. In places of assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or similar
seating facilities, each twenty (20) inches of such seating facility is counted as one (1)
seat for the purpose of determining the requirement for off-street parking facilities.
D. Except as otherwise specified, parking or loading spaces required on an employee
basis is based on the maximum number of employees normally present on the
premises at any one time. When the determination of the number of parking spaces
is based on the number of employees, the owner and/or manager is counted as an
employee(s).
16.4 COLLECTIVE PROVISIONS
A. Off-street parking spaces for separate uses may be provided collectively if the
aggregate number of spaces provided is not less than the sum of the spaces
required for each use separately. No parking space may serve as the required space
for more than one (1) use with the exception of the following shared parking
arrangement described in Paragraph B below.
B. An off-street parking facility may be shared between two (2) or more uses, provided
that use of such facility by each user does not occur at the same time. No shared use
of parking spaces are permitted unless:
1. The users of the shared parking facility sign an agreement, approved by the City
Attorney, expressing the intent to share parking facilities and file this agreement
with the City.
2. Approval is obtained from the Zoning Administrator that confirms that the use of
such facility by each user does not take place at the same hours during the same
days of the week.
3. The location and design requirements of this section are met.
4. Any subsequent change in use requires proof that the minimum parking
requirements, per this Article, have been met for each use. The owner of a
building or use has one-hundred eighty (180) days within which to accommodate
all required off-street parking or to apply for a variance. As an alternative to a
variance, a new shared parking agreement may be arranged in accordance
with this Article.
Article Last Amended: June 4, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 16:
Land Development Code Article 16 - Page 4 Off-Street Parking and Loading
16.5 LAND BANKED FUTURE PARKING
The Zoning Administrator may permit land banking of up to twenty-five percent (25%) of
the required parking spaces.
A. Sufficient evidence must be provided by the applicant that supports the reduced
parking needs.
B. The area proposed for land banking of parking spaces must be an area suitable for
parking at a future time.
C. Landscaping of the land banked area must be in full compliance of the zoning
regulations and at a minimum landscaped with turf. The Zoning Administrator may
require additional landscaping of the land-banked area.
D. The land banked area cannot be used for any other use. The landscaped area
reserved for parking is not counted as part of the total site area required to be
landscaped, if such a provision is applicable.
E. The applicant must show the area to be banked on the site plan and marked as
“Land Banked Future Parking.”
F. The Zoning Administrator, on the basis of increased parking demand for the use, can
require the conversion of all or part of the land-banked area to off-street parking
spaces. Land banked area must be converted within ninety (90) days of receipt of
the Zoning Administrator’s written order.
16.6 EXEMPTION FROM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
A. In any commercial or industrial district, an establishment that has paid a special
assessment or special tax for the provision of off-street City parking lot is exempt from
providing the required number of off-street parking.
B. The “Central Business District,” as defined in this Code, is exempt from providing the
required number of off-street parking, so long as municipal off-street parking is
provided to serve the area.
16.7 LOCATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
A. All required parking spaces for residential uses must be located on the same lot as
the building or use served. For non-residential uses, off-street parking areas provided
on a site other than the lot upon which the principal use is located, must be within
one-hundred fifty (150) feet of the site of the principal use. The users and owners of
the off-site parking area must sign an agreement, approved by the City Attorney,
expressing the intent to accommodate required off-street parking at the site and file
this agreement with the City.
B. Tuck-under parking within the principal structure of a multi-family residential structure,
lodging house, or fraternity or sorority house that would require ingress/egress to the
parking area through the front yard is prohibited.
Article Last Amended: June 4, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 16:
Land Development Code Article 16 - Page 5 Off-Street Parking and Loading
C. In all residential districts, MD, C-1 and C-2 Districts, required front and interior or street
side setbacks may not be used for parking or storing of motor vehicles, recreational
camping vehicles, recreational equipment and/or trailers.
D. In all residential districts, that portion of a driveway that directly accesses a parking
stall may not be located within the required interior or street side setback, and must
be at least ten (10) feet from the side lot line. See Figure 16-1: Residential Driveway
Setback.
FIGURE 16-1: RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY SETBACK
E. Driveways for places of worship in residential districts may not be located within the
required front, interior or street side setbacks.
F. In the C-3, C-4, C-5, I-1, I-2 and I-3 Districts, parking and outdoor storage may be
located in all required setback areas, except where the district boundary is within at
least one-hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential district, MD, C-1 or C-2 District, in
which case no parking or storage may be located within what would be the required
setback of the residential district, MD, C-1 or C-2 District.
G. No parking, obstructions or driveway intersections are allowed within twenty (20) feet
of any street intersection and ten (10) feet from any alley intersection, except in the
C-3 and C-4 Districts.
Article Last Amended: June 4, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 16:
Land Development Code Article 16 - Page 6 Off-Street Parking and Loading
16.8 DESIGN STANDARDS
All off-street parking facilities must comply with the following standards:
A. Dimensions
Off-street parking spaces must be designed in accordance with Figure 16-2: Off-
Street Parking Dimensions.
B. Construction of Parking Area
All off-street parking areas, except uses in the AG District, must be surfaced using one
(1) or more of the following materials: asphalt, concrete, interlocking brick, pervious
pavers, or mortared stone or brick. All parking areas including driveways must be well
drained, and maintained in a sightly and well-kept condition.
C. Striping
All non-residential and multi-family off-street parking areas where four (4) or more
spaces are required must be marked by a durable painted stripe designating the
parking spaces.
D. Landscaping and Screening
All parking lots must be landscaped in accordance with Article 17 of the Land
Development Code.
E. Bumper/Tire Barriers
Bumper/tire stops or similar barriers must be placed so as to prevent encroachment
along property lines for parking lots, loading areas, or the storage of motor vehicles,
campers, boats, etc. that abut a public street or avenue where three (3) or more
encroachment violation notices are issued within a two (2) year period.
16.9 OFF-STREET PARKING ACCESS
A. The driveway and curb cut restrictions in Table 16-1: Driveway and Curb Cut Size
apply to all off-street parking facilities. Any changes to these requirements requires
approval by the Engineering Department and the Planning Division. The full width of
an alley, but no part of a public street, shoulder or sidewalk, may be used in
calculating access aisle width.
TABLE 16-1: DRIVEWAY AND CURB CUT SIZE
USE
DRIVEWAY & CURB CUT
MINIMUM SIZE
DRIVEWAY & CURB
CUT MAXIMUM SIZE
Single-Family & Two-Family
Residential
16 ft 24 ft
Multi-Family Residential & Other
Uses Allowed in Residential
Districts
24 ft 30 ft
Commercial & Industrial Uses 24 ft 30 ft
One-Way Drive Aisles 16 ft 30 ft
Article Last Amended: June 4, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 16:
Land Development Code Article 16 - Page 7 Off-Street Parking and Loading
B. Off-street parking must not be designed so that backing movements are necessary
for ingress or egress, with the exception of entering or exiting an individual parking
space.
C. The top of a driveway apron must be no less than five (5) feet from any property line.
D. The public right-of-way cannot be used for circulation within off-street parking
facilities.
E. One-way driveways must be clearly marked with appropriate entrance and exit signs
and/or pavement marking. If traffic conditions warrant the restriction of turning
movements or access, additional signs and access/circulation modifications may be
necessary. The Engineering Department and the Planning and Zoning Department
may also impose additional restrictions based upon state and/or federal
requirements or good engineering practice.
FIGURE 16-2: OFF-STREET PARKING DIMENSIONS
FIGURE 16-2 DIMENSIONS
Parking
Angle
Stall Width (W) Stall Length (L)
Aisle Width
(A)
Single Loaded
Module1 Width
(SL)
Double Loaded
Module1 Width
(DL)
0? 9’ 19’ 12’ 21’ 40’
45? 9’ 18’ 12’ 30’ 48’
60? 9’ 19’ 15’ 34’ 53’
75? 9’ 19’ 17’ 38’ 57’
90? 9’ 19’ 24’ 43’ 62’
1 A module is defined as a drive aisle with automobiles parked on at least one side of the drive aisle.
Article Last Amended: June 4, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 16:
Land Development Code Article 16 - Page 8 Off-Street Parking and Loading
F. The City may require driveways designed to prohibit left turns in and out. Such must
have a channelizing island, as shown in Figure 16-3: Channelizing Island. Limited turn
driveways are subject to the following requirements:
1. Channelizing island width, measured parallel to the street: Forty (40) feet
2. Channelizing island length: Twenty-five (25) feet
3. Channelizing island offset: Five (5) feet
4. Driveway Width: Thirty (30) feet
FIGURE 16-3: CHANNELIZING ISLAND
G. Commercial or office developments that possess dedicated parking areas are
encouraged to provide a cross-access drive to allow circulation between sites. For
new commercial uses, a system of joint use driveways and cross-access easements is
encouraged where feasible. If cross-access will be provided, the Zoning Administrator
may require that the owner provide documentation that adjacent property owners
have been contacted, in writing, regarding the provision of cross-access. Joint use
driveways and cross-access easements must incorporate the following:
1. A minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet to ensure two-way travel aisles to
accommodate automobiles, service vehicles and loading vehicles.
2. Bump-outs and other design features to make it visually obvious that the abutting
properties are tied together.
3. A unified access and circulation plan for coordinated or shared parking areas.
16.10 ACCESSIBLE PARKING
A. Required Number of Spaces
The number of accessible parking spaces must be included in the total number of
required parking spaces. The number of accessible spaces is as required in Table 16-
2: Ratio of Accessible Spaces, and in accordance with the applicable requirements
of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and the Minnesota State Building Code,
as amended from time to time, and all additional governing codes and applicable
laws.
Article Last Amended: June 4, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 16:
Land Development Code Article 16 - Page 9 Off-Street Parking and Loading
TABLE 16-2: RATIO OF ACCESSIBLE SPACES
TOTAL
SPACES
1-
25
26-
50
51-
75
76-
100
101-
150
151-
200
201-
300
301-
400
401-
450
451+
TOTAL
ACCESSIBLE
SPACES1
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 2% of total
MINIMUM
VAN
ACCESSIBLE
SPACES1
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2
1 per 8
accessible
spaces
FOOTNOTES TABLE 16-2
1Accessible Spaces include van accessible spaces. Van spaces are not restricted to vans.
B. Dimensions and Design
1. Such spaces must comply with the design standards of the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990 and the Minnesota State Building Code, as amended from
time to time.
2. Such spaces must be identified by a sign and pavement markings indicating
parking for the disabled only.
3. Such spaces must be the spaces located on the shortest accessible route of
travel to the main entrance of the building or structure, and connected by a
paved surface designed to provide safe and easy access.
4. Accessible parking must not be located on slopes exceeding 1:50.
16.11 STACKING SPACES FOR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES
A. Design
1. Stacking spaces provided for drive-through uses must be a minimum of nine (9)
feet in width, as measured from the outermost point of any service window to the
edge of the driveway, and nineteen (19) feet in length. (See Figure 16-4:
Measurement of Drive-Through and Figure 16-5: Stacking Spaces)
FIGURE 16-4: MEASUREMENT OF DRIVE-THROUGH
Article Last Amended: June 4, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 16:
Land Development Code Article 16 - Page 10 Off-Street Parking and Loading
FIGURE 16-5: STACKING SPACES
2. Stacking spaces provided for drive-through uses must be placed in a single line
behind the drive-through facility and located so that, when in use, they do not
obstruct ingress or egress to the site and do not obstruct access to required
parking or loading spaces.
3. Stacking spaces begin behind the vehicle parked at a last point of service, such
as a window or car wash bay.
B. Required Spaces
Every drive-through facility must provide a minimum of two (2) stacking spaces per
bay.
C. Reduction of Required Stacking Spaces
The number of required stacking spaces may be reduced by the Zoning
Administrator if the petitioner presents a study done by a traffic engineer with
quantifiable evidence (e.g., comparable information) which demonstrates that a
different requirement should be imposed. The approval of a reduced number of
stacking spaces applies only to the specific business for which the study was
conducted.
16.12 PARKING AND STORAGE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND OVERSIZED VEHICLES
A. Storage in all Zoning Districts. The following provisions apply to the storage and
parking of recreational vehicles in all zoning districts:
Article Last Amended: June 4, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 16:
Land Development Code Article 16 - Page 11 Off-Street Parking and Loading
1. Recreational vehicles and equipment shall not be used for living, sleeping or
housekeeping while parked or stored. Recreational vehicles shall not be used
for commercial storage or other non-residential purposes.
2. Except on properties which are valid motor vehicle dealers, recreational vehicles
shall have a current license and registration.
3. Recreational vehicles shall be in operable condition. No recreational vehicle
shall be parked or stored in a location other than a building unless it is in a
condition for the safe and effective performance of its intended function. No
recreational vehicle which is in a state of visible external disrepair shall be
parked or stored outside of a building.
B. Storage in Residential Zoning Districts. The following provisions, in addition to those
cited by Article 16.12A, will apply to the storage of recreational vehicles in residential
districts.
1. Number. The maximum number of recreational vehicles permitted to be
parked or stored outside of a building in a residential district will be two (2).
No more than one (1) recreational vehicle may be parked or stored in the
front yard. No more than one Class A motorhome may be parked or stored
on a residentially zoned property. Class A motorhomes typically resemble a
bus, are entirely constructed on a specially designed motorhome chassis, and
often include multiple slide-out sections, living space, kitchens, bathrooms,
and entertainment centers.
2. Size.
a. No recreational vehicles greater than 45 feet in length shall be permitted
on any residential lot in the city.
b. The total lot coverage of all recreational vehicles stored outside may not
exceed 10% of the lot area.
3. Location. Recreational vehicles may be parked or stored on a parcel which
contains a permitted principal use in a residential zoning district, subject to
the following regulations:
a. Surfaces. All recreational vehicles shall be parked or stored on the
following surfaces:
i. Recreational vehicles must be stored upon an improved surface within
the front yard.
ii. Recreational vehicles stored in the side or rear yard may be on a
landscaped surface, including a maintained gravel surface.
b. Location. All recreational vehicles shall be parked or stored in
accordance with the following:
Article Last Amended: June 4, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 16:
Land Development Code Article 16 - Page 12 Off-Street Parking and Loading
i. Recreational vehicles may be parked or stored in the front yard,
interior side yard, street side yard, and rear yard provided that a five
(5) foot setback is maintained.
ii. Recreational vehicles may not be parked or stored within twenty feet
(20’) of any street right-of-way corner where it will interfere with traffic
or pedestrian visibility across the driveway, alley or street.
4. General Regulations.
a. Ownership and Guest Parking. All recreational vehicles parked or stored
shall be owned or leased by an occupant of the premises where parked
or stored. Guests of the occupant of the premises may park on a
driveway on the premises for a period not exceeding seven (7) days in
any 30 consecutive day period. No nuisances, including noise, light and
odor created by such guest parking are permitted.
b. Repairs. No major mechanical overhaul or repair shall be performed on
recreational vehicles unless conducted within a completely enclosed
building.
C. Prohibited Vehicles in Residential Districts. The following vehicles and/or
equipment shall not be permitted to be stored or parked in any residentially
zoned property:
1. Licensed vehicles with a license decal greater than “D” or in excess of 6,000
pounds as described in Minnesota State Statute 188.013. Examples are cargo
(step) vans, buses, boom trucks, dump trucks, tank trucks, construction
equipment, truck-tractor semi-trailer combinations, and any other such similar
equipment/vehicles.
2. Unlicensed commercial vehicles or equipment such as race cars, farm
implement backhoes, bobcats, drilling and/or landscaping equipment, and
any other such similar equipment/vehicles.
D. Oversized Vehicles Allowed in Residential Districts. The following vehicles and/or
equipment may be parked on a residentially zoned property in accordance with
the following:
1. Any licensed vehicle with a license decal greater than “D” or in excess of
6,000 pounds as described in Minnesota State Statute 188.013 being used in
conjunction with a legitimate service being provided to the residential
property.
2. Any number of oversized vehicles/equipment are allowed if parked or stored
in a completely enclosed building subject and related to a home occupation
as defined by this ordinance.
Article Last Amended: June 4, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 16:
Land Development Code Article 16 - Page 13 Off-Street Parking and Loading
16.13 REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
A. Table 16-3: Required Off-Street Parking lists parking requirements for the uses listed
within the districts. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces to be provided
for the designated uses is described in Table 16-3.
B. In some cases, more specific uses which are considered part of a permitted or
conditional use category are listed with specified parking requirements. These
specific uses are listed only for the purposes of this Article to delineate specific
parking requirements and do not indicate whether such uses are permitted or
conditional uses within any district.
C. For uses not specifically listed in this table, the Zoning Administrator will determine the
number of required parking spaces based upon the most similar use listed in Table 16-
3.
D. The off-street parking requirement for the commercial uses listed in Table 16-3 are
reduced by 25% within the C4, Fringe Central Business District.
TABLE 16-3: REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING
USE REQUIRED NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
Residential Uses
Assisted Living Facility .50 spaces per dwelling unit
Convalescent Home 1 space for each 4 beds
Dormitory 1 space for lodging unit (bed)
Dwelling, Multi-Family: Excluding R-3
& R3A Districts
2 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, Two Family & Multi-Family:
R-3 &
R-3A Districts
1-Bedroom: 2 spaces per dwelling unit
2-Bedroom: 2 spaces per dwelling unit
3+ Bedroom: 3 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, Single-Family 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, Townhouse 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, Two-Family 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Fraternity/Sorority House .75 space per lodging unit (room)
Independent Living Facility 1.25 spaces per dwelling unit.
Lodging House .75 space per person
Manufactured Housing Park 2 spaces per manufactured home
Manufactured Home 2 spaces per home
Nursing Home
1 space per 4 beds + 1 space per 3 employees on the
major shift
Residential Facility 1 space per 4 beds
Temporary Shelter Facility .25 space per bed
Institutional and Public Uses
Homeless Day Center
1 space per full-time employee or volunteer on largest
shift + 1 space per 10 persons based on maximum
occupancy
Museum 1 space for each 800sf of gross floor area
Places of Assembly: Auditorium,
Stadium, Gymnasium, Community
Center & Place of Worship
1 space per 4 seats in the largest area of assembly + 1
space per 300 sf of gross floor area of office
School
Elementary, Middle & Junior High School: 1 space per
faculty and staff member on the largest work shift
High School: 1 space per 3 students based on the design
Article Last Amended: June 4, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 16:
Land Development Code Article 16 - Page 14 Off-Street Parking and Loading
TABLE 16-3: REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING
USE REQUIRED NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
capacity, plus 1 space per faculty and staff member on
the largest work shift
Commercial Uses
Animal Hospital 1 space per 600sf of gross floor area
Art Gallery 1 space for each 800sf of gross floor area
Beauty/Barber Shop 2 spaces per chair + 1 per three employees
Bed & Breakfast Facility 2 spaces + 1 space per sleeping room
Bowling Alley 5 spaces for each lane or alley
Car Wash
1 space per wash lane + 1 space per employee on
largest shift
Club
1 space per lodging unit + spaces equal to 20% capacity
of club or lodge
Commercial Kennel 1 space per 600sf of gross floor area
Dance Establishment
1 space per 4 persons based on design capacity + 1
space for every employee on the largest work shift
Day Care Facility (More Than 16
Persons)
1 space for each 10 persons
Drive-In Establishment 1 space per 2 employees + customer spaces
Dry Cleaner 1 space per 300sf of gross floor area
Financial Institution 1 space per 250sf of gross floor area
Furniture Stores
Retail Floor Space Less Than 100,000sf: 1 space per
1,000sf of gross floor area
Retail Floor Space More Than 100,000sf: 1 space per
1,200sf of gross floor area
Hospital
1 space per 4 beds + 1 space per 3 employees on
largest shift
Hotel/Motel 1 space per lodging unit
Laundromat 1 space per 300sf of gross floor area
Medical/Dental Office
6 spaces for each doctor/dentist
Mortuary
1 space per 4 seats in the largest area of assembly + 1
space per 300 sf of gross floor area of office
Office 1 space per 300sf of gross floor area
Personal Services Establishment:
Heavy Commercial Use
1 space per 600sf of gross floor area
Personal Services Establishment:
Light Commercial Use - 20,000sf of
gross floor area or less
1 space per 300sf of gross floor area
Restaurant (Excluding Drive-In
Establishment)
1 space per 4 seats + 1 per 2 employees
Retail Goods Establishment: Heavy
Commercial Use
1 space per 600sf of gross floor area
Retail Goods Establishment: Light
Commercial Use - 20,000sf of gross
floor area or less
1 space per 300sf of gross floor area
Shopping Center
1 space for each 300sf of gross floor area
Service Station
3 spaces per each service stall + 1 space per each
attendant on the major shift
Tavern
1 space per 100sf of gross floor area + 1 space per
employee based on the largest shift
Industrial Uses
Manufacturing & Assembly 3 spaces per 1,000 sf of gross floor area+ 1 space per 300
Article Last Amended: June 4, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 16:
Land Development Code Article 16 - Page 15 Off-Street Parking and Loading
TABLE 16-3: REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING
USE REQUIRED NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
sf of gross floor area of office
Print Shop
Buildings Less Than 5,000sf: 1 space per 300sf of gross floor
area
Buildings 5,000sf – 25,000sf: 1 space per 450sf of gross floor
area
Buildings More Than 25,000sf: 1 space per employee on
largest shift + 1 space per company vehicle
Warehousing, Wholesale &
Distribution
Buildings up to 10,000sf of gross floor area: 1 space per
1,000 sf of gross floor area;
Buildings from 10,001sf to 50,000sf of gross floor area: 1
space per 2,500 sf of gross floor area;
Buildings larger than 50,000sf of gross floor area: 1 space
per 4,000 sf of gross floor area;
+ 1 space per 300 sf of gross floor area of office
16.14 DESIGN OF OFF-STREET LOADING
A. Location
All required loading or unloading into or out of trucks in excess of three-quarter (3/4)
ton capacity, or railroad cars, must be conducted at facilities specifically designed or
designated for that purpose. These facilities must be located upon the zoning lot of
the principal use requiring them. One (1) berth may be located within areas used for
off-street parking. Any additional berths must be separated from areas used for offstreet
parking.
B. Access
Each required off-street loading berth must be designed to avoid undue interference
with other vehicular or rail access, or use of public streets, alleys or other public
transport system.
C. Surfacing
All off-street loading areas, including loading berths and maneuvering areas, must be
surfaced with asphalt, concrete, interlocking brick, mortared stone, or brick as the
surfacing material, and be well drained, landscaped and maintained in a sightly and
well kept condition.
D. Design
Tractor-trailer loading berths must be sixty (60) feet in length and twelve (12) feet in
width. All loading areas must consist of a maneuvering area in addition to the berth
and may not use any of that portion of the site containing parking stalls.
Maneuvering areas must be of such size as to permit the backing out of truck tractors
Article Last Amended: June 4, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 16:
Land Development Code Article 16 - Page 16 Off-Street Parking and Loading
and coupled trailers into a berth, without blocking the use of other berths, drives or
maneuvering areas.
16.15 REQUIRED OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES
Off-street loading spaces must be provided for a building, structure or use which requires
the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or other vehicles in
accordance with Table 16-4: Off-Street Loading Requirements.
TABLE 16-4: OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS
LAND USE REQUIRED OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES
Animal Hospital & Kennel 1 space for each 50,000sf of gross floor area
Bowling Alley
1 space for each structure over 20,000sf of gross floor
area
Clubs and Lodges
1 space for each structure over 20,000sf of gross floor
area
General Office Building & Public
Administration Office
1 space for buildings between 30,000sf & 100,000sf of
gross floor area +
1 space for each additional 100,000sf of gross floor
area
Financial Institution
1 space for buildings between 30,000sf & 100,000sf of
gross floor area +
1 space for each additional 100,000sf of gross floor
area
Heavy Commercial Uses – Excluding Uses
Specifically Listed
Zoning Administrator determination
Hospital, Nursing Home & Similar Uses
1 space + 1 additional space for each 100,000sf of
gross floor area
Hotel/Motel
1 space for each structure over 20,000sf of gross floor
area
Light Commercial Use (20,000sf of Gross
Floor Area or Less) – Excluding Uses
Specifically Listed
Zoning Administrator determination
Mortuary
1 space for each structure over 100,000sf of gross floor
area
Places of Assembly: Auditorium, Stadium,
Gymnasium, Community Center & Place
of Worship
1 space for each structure over 100,000sf of gross floor
area
Restaurant (Excluding Drive-In
Establishments)
1 space for each structure over 10,000sf of gross floor
area
Warehousing/Manufacturing 1 space for each 50,000sf of gross floor area
Article Last Amended: March 26, 2012
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 17
Land Development Code Article 17 - Page 1 Landscaping, Screening & Buffering
Article 17. Landscaping, Screening and
Buffering
17.1 PURPOSE
17.2 ENFORCEMENT
17.3 LANDSCAPING
17.4 SCREENING
17.1 PURPOSE
The landscaping and screening requirements established by this Article are intended to
preserve and enhance the appearance, health, safety and welfare of the City by
fostering an aesthetically pleasing development. Proper landscaping contributes to the
City by enhancing its character and scenic beauty, providing clean air, reducing noise,
preventing erosion of topsoil, reducing the rate of stormwater runoff, providing habitat for
wildlife, conserving energy, and providing shade and windbreaks. These regulations are
also intended to increase the compatibility of adjacent uses, and minimize the adverse
impact of noise, dust, motor vehicle headlight glare and other artificial light intrusions,
and other objectionable activities or impacts conducted on, or created by, adjoining or
neighboring uses.
17.2 ENFORCEMENT
A building permit or certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any lot or use unless
all the requirements of this Section have been fulfilled within the landscape plan. All
landscaping is subject to periodic inspection by the City.
17.3 LANDSCAPING
A. Landscaping Requirements for Yards
1. Residential Zoning Districts and Medical District:
All exposed ground areas surrounding a principal or accessory use which are not
devoted to drives, sidewalks, patios, and parking lots, or other such uses shall be
covered primarily with grass. Shrubs, trees, and other ornamental landscape
materials may be added to complement the yard.
2. Commercial, Industrial, and Agricultural Zoning Districts.
All exposed ground areas surrounding a principal or accessory use which are not
devoted to drives, sidewalks, patios, and parking lots, or other such uses shall be
covered with grass, shrubs, trees, and other ornamental landscape materials.
3. All zoning districts:
a. All landscaping areas and other ground areas on the property shall be kept
neat, clean and uncluttered.
Article Last Amended: March 26, 2012
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 17
Land Development Code Article 17 - Page 2 Landscaping, Screening & Buffering
b. Owners of newly constructed structures shall be allowed one (1) year from the
date of the building permit to complete the landscaping.
c. No parking or storing of motor vehicles shall be allowed on landscaped areas.
d. No fill may be placed or removed, nor shall ground elevation be altered,
within any portion of a lot that is subject to a public utility or drainage easement,
without the expressed written consent of the City Engineer.
17.4 SCREENING
A. Commercial and Industrial Screening
All off-street parking, loading facilities, drive lanes, and outdoor service areas
upon commercial and industrial property must be screened from abutting
residential uses to a height of six (6) feet with a minimum opacity of 90%. The
required screening may consist of one or a combination of the following materials:
wood, plastic, masonry, earthen berming, or coniferous plant material.
B. Refuse Screening
For multiple residential properties, all refuse containers shall be screened on all sides
by a six foot (6’) high fence that produces an opacity of one hundred percent
(100%). Said fence shall be constructed using one or more of the following materials:
wood, brick, concrete, or other material approved by the Zoning Administrator.
C. Residential Parking Screening
All parking areas of eight (8) or more stalls within residential zones shall be subject to
the screening requirements of 17.4A.
D. I1 District Storage Screening Requirements
1. All storage adjacent to or across the street, avenue, or alley from a residential
district shall be screened with an eight foot (8’) high fence of one hundred
percent (100%) opacity.
2. Storage shall not be allowed in a truck, trailer, or similar container.
E. I2 District Storage Screening Requirements
1. All storage adjacent to or across the street, avenue, or alley from a residential
district shall be screened with an eight foot (8’) high fence of one hundred
percent (100%) opacity.
2. Dismantling of or storage of dismantled vehicles, farm equipment, household
appliances, commercial or industrial equipment, or similar uses shall be enclosed
in an eight foot (8’) high fence of one hundred percent (100%) opacity.
Article Last Amended: March 26, 2012
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 17
Land Development Code Article 17 - Page 3 Landscaping, Screening & Buffering
F. I3 District Storage Screening Requirements
1. All storage, including trucks or other vehicles in excess of three quarter (3/4) ton
capacity or equipment shall be screened with an eight foot (8’) high fence of
one hundred percent (100%) opacity.
2. Storage shall not be allowed in a truck, trailer, or similar container.
Article Last Amended: September 9, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 18:
Land Development Code Article 18 - Page 1 Signs
Article 18. Signs
18.1 PURPOSE
18.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS
18.3 SIGNS IN AGRICULTURAL AND RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
18.4 SIGNS IN C-1 AND C-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS AND MD MEDICAL
DISTRICT
18.5 SIGNS IN THE C-3 AND C-4 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
18.6 SIGNS IN THE C-5 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT, I-1, I-2, AND I-3 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
18.7 LICENSES AND PERMIT FEES
18.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of these sign regulations is to establish a set of standards to control the erection
and use of on-premise and off-premise advertising devices, symbols, markings, or devices
within the City of St. Cloud.
18.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS
The following regulations shall apply to all signs hereinafter permitted in all districts.
A. Illuminated signs giving off intermittent or rotating concentrated or directional beams
or flashing shall not be permitted in any district. Electronically controlled changing
time and temperature signs are not to be considered as an intermittent, rotating
concentrated, directional beam, or flashing sign.
B. Signs painted on a building shall be governed by the sign surface area limitations
specified in the appropriate zoning district. These shall be kept in good condition or
removed when not maintained.
C. No signs shall project into a public way and/or area except in the C-3 and C-4 districts
where a sign attached to a building may project twenty-four inches (24”) into the
right-of-way, if the bottom of the sign is at least eight feet (8’) above the ground or
sidewalk.
D. The square footage of all signs shall be calculated on sign surface area.
E. No signs shall be placed that resemble any official marker erected by a governmental
agency or display such as “stop” or “danger.”
F. All height requirements for signs shall be measured from average grade at the
building line to the top of the sign.
G. No sign located outside a building shall be permitted to obstruct any window, door,
fire escape, stairway, or opening intended to provide light, air, ingress, or egress for
any building or structure.
Article Last Amended: September 9, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 18:
Land Development Code Article 18 - Page 2 Signs
H. Political signs may be permitted subject to these requirements:
1. The signs refer to a candidate or issue to be locally voted upon.
2. The political sign shall be permitted for a period of not more than ninety (90) days
before and ten (10) days after the election.
3. Political signs shall be set back from any public thoroughfare right-of-way a
minimum distance of ten feet (10’).
4. Political signs shall not exceed sixteen square feet (16 sq. ft.) in area nor ten feet
(10’) in height in all residential districts and thirty-two square feet (32 sq. ft.) in area
nor ten feet (10’) in height in all other districts.
I. The owner, lessee, or manager of any ground sign, and the owner of the land on
which the same is located, shall keep grass, weeds, and other growth cut and debris
and rubbish cleaned up and removed from the lot on which the sign is located.
J. Advertising signs, business signs, and nameplate signs which may be or may hereafter
become rotted, unsafe, or unsightly shall be repaired or removed by the licensee,
owner, or owner of the property upon which the sign stands upon notice by the
Zoning Office.
K. Where any sign is illuminated, the illumination therefrom shall not produce illumination
upon any residence in a residential zone beyond the foot-candle limitations imposed
by the pertinent ordinances or regulations of the City.
L. No sign shall be located that obstructs traffic visibility.
M. All signs may be illuminated unless otherwise noted.
N. Rotating signs shall not be permitted, except in the I-1, Light Industrial District, and I-2,
General Industrial District, as a conditional use where a determination is made that
the sign will not be a visual distraction or detriment to the motoring public or
surrounding area.
O. Other temporary business signs not listed under Section 18.3.G shall be allowed as
follows, except temporary business signs shall not be allowed in any residential district:
1. Maximum Height - freestanding sign - six feet (6’): wall sign - not above the
roofline.
2. Maximum Area - thirty-two square feet (32 sq. ft.).
3. Setback – ten feet (10’) from all property lines or street/sidewalk easement lines,
whichever is greater, for freestanding sign(s).
4. Illumination shall not be allowed.
Article Last Amended: September 9, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 18:
Land Development Code Article 18 - Page 3 Signs
5. Duration –
a. On parcels measuring five (5) acres or less in size, one (1) banner, portable
sign, balloon sign, temporary pole sign or temporary wall sign may be
displayed for a total of sixty (60) days per calendar year with a maximum of
two (2) display periods of no more than thirty (30) days in that same
calendar year.
b. On parcels measuring greater than five (5) acres in size, one (1) banner,
portable sign, balloon sign, temporary pole sign or temporary wall sign may
be displayed for a total of ninety (90) days within a calendar year with a
maximum of three (3) display periods of no more than thirty (30) days in that
same calendar year.
6. Sign Permit - the owner of temporary sign structures, excluding banners and
pennants, is required to secure a permit for each temporary sign structure and
adhere the permit to the structure; the owner of said temporary sign structure must
register each sign structure’s proposed location and the time for display with the
City of St. Cloud Building Safety Department with said registration received at least
five (5) days prior to the starting date for display. All banners and pennants are
required to have a permit; if the sign is moved or removed, another sign permit is
required for placement of sign. For single tenant parcels: one (1) sign permit may
be issued for up to three (3) different display times per twelve (12) month period.
For multiple tenant parcels: one (1) sign permit may be issued for one display time
per twelve (12) month period.
7. All temporary/portable business sign structures shall meet eighty mile per hour (80
mph) wind load requirements from Sec. 469:50 of the 1977 St. Cloud Code of
Ordinances (thirty (30) pounds per foot). Placing sand bags, bricks, chains, or
other such materials to meet the load requirements described above or to secure
the temporary/portable business sign shall not be allowed.
8. All temporary/portable banners and pennants that are anchored to a building
shall be anchored to the building in a manner that meets the building code by
cords that have a minimum tensile strength of eighty (80) pounds.
P. Advertising sign structures that are placed/constructed on property which is adjacent
to a principal arterial, minor arterial, or collector street/road shall have a minimum
setback of fifteen feet (15’) from the property line or street/road/sidewalk easement
lines (whichever is greater) adjacent to the principal arterial, minor arterial, or
collector street/road. The setback shall apply to all portions of the sign face/sign
structure, including sign supports, poles, etc.
Q. Electronic Signs (Electronic Display Screens and Electronic Message Signs) the
following requirements shall apply to all electronic signs, except advertising signs:
1. Electronic signs shall not be used for off-premise advertising purposes.
2. Each message or image displayed on the electronic sign must be static or
depicted for a minimum of eight (8) seconds. Each text message displayed on an
electronic message sign or electronic display screen must remain static for a
reasonable amount of time for the average reader to read the message, as
Article Last Amended: September 9, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 18:
Land Development Code Article 18 - Page 4 Signs
determined by the Zoning Administrator; however, based on sign area, text
messages displayed on an electronic display screen may scroll in order to
accomplish the same result.
3. No text message may blink, flash or mimic strobe-lighting effects.
4. Electronic signs shall not glare into any residential properties or interfere with the
safe movement of motor vehicles.
5. In commercial and industrial zoning districts, electronic signs must not exceed a
maximum illumination of five-thousand (5,000) nits during daylight hours, and a
maximum illumination of five-hundred (500) nits between dusk to dawn, as
measured from the sign’s face at maximum brightness. In agricultural and
residential zoning districts, electronic signs must not exceed a maximum
illumination of four-thousand five-hundred (4,500) nits during daylight hours, and a
maximum of illumination of three-hundred fifty (350) nits between dusk and dawn.
Brightness shall be measured at the sign face during maximum brightness.
Electronic message centers must be shut off from 10:00PM to 7:00AM. The
electronic message center shall have ambient light monitors, which shall
automatically adjust the brightness level of the electronic sign based on ambient
light conditions.
6. Electronic signs are not permitted to have any audio speakers or audio
components.
18.3 SIGNS IN AGRICULTURAL AND RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
A. In Agricultural and Residential Districts, the following requirements shall apply to all
signs:
1. No sign shall project higher than ten feet (10’) above average grade.
2. No sign shall be placed closer than ten feet (10’) to any property line, except
directional signs which have a zero foot (0’) setback.
3. No sign shall be placed in any interior side yard.
4. No sign shall be mounted on the roof of a building.
5. Advertising signs shall not be permitted.
B. One (1) identification sign identifying the owner or occupant of a building or dwelling
unit or one (1) sign pertaining to the lease or sale of a building or property, provided
the surface area does not exceed five square feet (5 sq. ft.). Such signs shall not be
illuminated.
C. One (1) identification sign, not to exceed thirty square feet (30 sq. ft.) in surface area
for the following uses: crop farms, vegetable farms, general farms, nurseries/tree
farms, roadside stands, or similar uses. Such signs shall be solely for the purpose of
displaying the name of the activities or services.
D. Places-of-worship, schools, day care facilities (excluding in-home day care providers),
community centers, elderly care facilities, public buildings, or similar uses are
permitted to attach identification signs to the walls of the principal building that faces
a public street right-of-way. The maximum area of identification signs attached to the
Article Last Amended: September 9, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 18:
Land Development Code Article 18 - Page 5 Signs
wall shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the exposed wall area upon which the wall
signs are attached. No more than one sign per wall.
Additional freestanding (pole or monument) identification signs are permitted on any
side of the lot that has frontage on a public street right-of-way. Freestanding
identification signs shall not exceed the sum of one half square foot (0.5 sq. ft.) per
lineal foot of lot frontage or thirty-two square feet (32 sq. ft.), whichever is greater. No
freestanding identification sign is permitted to exceed fifty square feet (50 sq. ft.) in
sign area. All freestanding identification signs are required to meet the setback and
height requirements listed above.
Institutional uses are permitted one wall identification sign and one freestanding
(pylon or monument) sign per street frontage, which a maximum of two frontages,
including corner and multi-frontage lots.
E. One (1) nameplate sign for a multiple dwelling unit complex not to exceed thirty
square feet (30 sq. ft.) in surface area. Such sign may indicate the names and
addresses of the buildings or it may be a directory for occupants.
F. One (1) identification sign not to exceed ten square feet (10 sq. ft.) in surface area for
the following uses: fraternities, sororities, dormitories, lodging houses, in-home day care
facilities, residential facilities, and bed and breakfast facilities.
G. Directional signs in any parking area necessary for the orderly movement of traffic,
provided that such sign shall not be used as advertising space. No sign shall exceed
five square feet (5 sq. ft.) in area.
H. Temporary signs shall be allowed as follows:
1. A new subdivision or development shall be allowed one (1) sign not to exceed fifty
square feet (50 sq. ft.) in surface area. Such sign shall be removed when seventyfive
percent (75%) of the lots are developed. Such sign shall not be illuminated.
2. A sign identifying an engineer, architect, contractor, bank, or product engaged in
or used in the construction of a building or utility provided such sign shall not
exceed ten square feet (10 sq. ft.) in surface area. Such signs shall be removed
prior to occupancy of the building or completion of the project. Such sign shall not
be illuminated.
I. Temporary shelter facilities (TSFs) shall be allowed one (1) non-illuminated
identification sign attached to the building entrance which is not more than ten
square feet (10 sq. ft.) in area.
J. One (1) & Two (2) Family Residential Identification Signs: For each single family
subdivision containing at least twenty-five (25) lots and each two (2) family subdivision
containing a potential for at least fifty (50) dwellings, identification signs are permitted
which comply with the following standards:
1. One (1) freestanding sign on one (1) or both sides of an entrance per abutting
collector or arterial street.
2. Forty square foot (40 sq. ft.) maximum copy and graphic area per sign.
Article Last Amended: September 9, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 18:
Land Development Code Article 18 - Page 6 Signs
3. One hundred ten square foot (110 sq. ft.) maximum total monument area per sign
face with an aggregate of two-hundred twenty square feet (220 sq. ft.) if double
faced.
4. Ten foot (10') maximum height.
5. Single or double faced. If double faced, the angle of the sign faces shall not
exceed thirty degrees (30°).
6. Only external illumination allowed.
7. The sign shall be located on a parcel held in common ownership or located within
a dedicated permanent sign easement and shall be perpetually maintained by a
homeowners’ association or responsible property owners.
8. Sign content shall be solely for displaying the name of the subdivision or
development.
18.4 SIGNS IN C-1 AND C-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS AND MD MEDICAL DISTRICT
A. In the C-1 and C-2 Commercial Districts, and the MD, Medical District, business signs
and nameplate signs shall be permitted subject to the following regulations:
1. Signs as permitted and regulated in Residential Districts R-1 through R-7.
2. C-1 District. One (1) pylon business sign for each building or building complex; such
sign shall not exceed thirty square feet (30 sq. ft.) in sign surface area. Wall signs
shall not exceed a total of fifteen percent (15%) of the exposed wall area upon
which the wall signs are mounted or painted. No sign attached to the building
shall project above the roof or parapet line. Such signs shall display only the name
and address of the building, occupant, or management.
3. C-2 District. The total surface area of all pylon business signs on a lot shall not
exceed the sum of one-quarter square foot (1/4 sq. ft.) per lineal foot of lot
frontage, or thirty square feet (30 sq. ft.), whichever is greater. In no case shall
pylon signs exceed one hundred fifty square feet (150 sq. ft.). In addition, building
walls may display wall signs provided that all wall signs do not exceed a total of
fifteen percent (15%) of the exposed wall area upon which the sign(s) is located.
No sign attached to the building shall project above the roof or parapet line.
4. MD District. All signs shall be regulated by the approved general development
plan and approved site plan for the MD property. Sections B through F of Article
18.4 shall not apply to the MD property.
B. Advertising signs shall not be permitted.
C. No sign shall be mounted on the roof of any building.
D. No sign shall exceed twenty feet (20’) in height.
E. All signs shall maintain a minimum setback of twenty feet (20’) from all property lines.
F. One (1) “For Sale” or “For Lease” sign which shall not exceed twenty square feet (20
sq. ft.).
Article Last Amended: September 9, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 18:
Land Development Code Article 18 - Page 7 Signs
18.5 SIGNS IN THE C-3 AND C-4 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
A. In the C-3 and C-4 Commercial Districts, business signs, nameplate signs, and
advertising signs are permitted subject to the following regulations:
1. The total surface area of all pylon business signs on a lot shall not exceed the sum
of one square foot (1 sq. ft.) per lineal foot of lot frontage, or seventy-five square
feet (75 sq. ft.), whichever is greater. In addition, building wall areas may display
wall signs provided that all wall signs do not exceed a total of fifteen percent
(15%) of the exposed building wall area upon which the sign(s) is located.
2. Advertising sign structures shall not be placed or erected any closer than seven
hundred fifty feet (750’) from any other advertising sign structure. No advertising
sign structures shall project higher than forty feet (40’) above average grade. Such
structure may not contain more than two (2) signs per facing nor exceed fifty-five
feet (55’) in total length and four hundred square feet (400 sq. ft.) in sign surface
area. No advertising sign may be erected within two hundred feet (200’) of a
residentially zoned property.
B. Wall signs shall not project above the roof or parapet wall. Said wall shall not exceed
ten feet (10’) in height from the point the building wall meets the roof, nor shall a sign
be mounted on the roof of any building. Ground or pylon signs shall not exceed fifty
feet (50’) in height.
C. One (1) “For Sale” or “For Lease” sign which shall not exceed thirty-two square feet (32
sq. ft.).
D. There shall be no setback required for business signs unless the district boundary is
adjacent to a residential district in which case the setback shall be the same as
required on the residential lot line.
18.6 SIGNS IN THE C-5 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT, I-1, I-2, AND I-3 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
A. Within the C-5 Commercial District, the I-1, I-2, and I-3, business signs, nameplate signs,
and advertising signs are permitted subject to the following regulations.
1. The total surface area of all pylon business signs on a lot shall not exceed the sum
of two square feet (2 sq. ft.) per lineal foot of lot frontage, or two hundred square
feet (200 sq. ft.), whichever is greater. In addition, building wall areas may display
wall signs provided that all wall signs do not exceed a total of fifteen percent
(15%) of the exposed building wall area upon which the sign(s) is located.
2. Advertising sign structures shall not be placed or erected any closer than seven
hundred fifty feet (750’) from any other advertising sign structure. No advertising
sign structures shall project higher than forty feet (40’) above average grade. Such
structure may not contain more than two (2) signs per facing nor exceed fifty-five
feet (55’) in total length and four hundred square feet (400 sq. ft.) in sign surface
area. No advertising sign may be erected within two hundred feet (200’) of a
residential zoned property.
B. Wall signs shall not project above the roof or parapet wall. Said wall shall not exceed
ten feet (10’) in height from the point the building wall meets the roof, nor shall a sign
Article Last Amended: September 9, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 18:
Land Development Code Article 18 - Page 8 Signs
be mounted on the roof of any building. Ground or pylon signs shall not exceed fifty
feet (50’) in height.
C. Setbacks: All business signs and lighting fixtures in the C-5, I-1, and I-2 districts may be
located in all setback areas. However, the bottom of the business signs must be at
least eight feet (8’) above the ground grade line or sidewalk, and the business sign
shall not interfere with traffic visibility across any street or alley corner. All business signs
must maintain a setback when the district boundary is adjacent to a residential
district. The setback requirement shall be the same as required on the residential lot
line, except if the C-5, I-1, or I-2 property is at least 100’ from the residential property;
then the normal non-residential setback shall apply. All business signs in the I-3 district
shall maintain a minimum setback of twenty feet (20’) from all property lines.
D. One (1) “For Sale” or “For Lease” sign which shall not exceed fifty square feet (50 sq.
ft.).
18.7 LICENSES AND PERMIT FEES
All signs shall be subject to permit procedures as set forth in Article 4 of this Ordinance and
other inspection and fee procedures as set forth in City ordinances.
Article Last Amended: July 15, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 19:
Land Development Code Article 19 - Page 1 Off-Site Development Standards
Article 19. Off-Site Development Standards
19.1 PURPOSE
19.2 STREETS
19.3 STREET IMPROVEMENTS
19.4 SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS
19.5 GRADING
19.6 EASEMENTS
19.7 BLOCK STANDARDS
19.8 LOT STANDARDS
19.9 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES
19.10 SANITARY SEWER
19.11 WATER SUPPLY
19.12 DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS
19.13 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
19.14 PUBLIC UTILITIES
19.15 STREET TREES
19.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of these off-site development standards is:
A. To protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. To provide for the orderly, economic and safe development of land.
C. To preserve agricultural lands.
D. To promote the availability of housing affordable to persons and families of all
income levels.
E. To facilitate adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewage, storm drainage,
schools, parks, playgrounds, and other public services and facilities.
19.2 STREETS
A. The arrangement, character, extent, width and location of streets shall conform to
the Comprehensive Plan, the approved standard street sections and all applicable
ordinances, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets,
reasonable circulation of traffic, topographical conditions, runoff of stormwater,
public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed
uses of the area to be served.
B. Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown in the Comprehensive Plan and where
not shown shall be no less than the dimensions indicated in Table 19-1: Right-of-Way
Widths.
Article Last Amended: July 15, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 19:
Land Development Code Article 19 - Page 2 Off-Site Development Standards
TABLE 19-1: RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTHS
ROAD TYPE
MINIMUM
WIDTH
Rural Principal Arterial 150 feet
Urban Principal Arterial /Or
Parkway
120 feet
Rural Minor Arterial 120 feet
Urban Minor Arterial &/Or Rural
Collector
100 feet
Urban Collector 80 feet
Local Non-Residential 66 feet
Cul-De-Sac or Local Residential 60 feet
Alleys; Residential 16 feet
Alleys; Non-Residential 24 feet
Walkway 10 feet
Pedestrian/Bicycle Trail 20 feet
C. The Planning Commission and City Council may require right-of-way widths in excess
of that shown in Table 19-1 if and when additional right-of-way is deemed necessary
to satisfy the transportation needs of the proposed subdivision. The Planning
Commission and City Council may also require a right-of-way width that is less than
shown in Table 19-1 if and when it is deemed necessary to satisfy or achieve an
outcome provided for in a City goal, policy or ordinance (e.g. affordable housing
initiatives, natural resource protection).
D. Street intersections, insofar as practical, shall be at right angles.
E. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one-hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall
be avoided.
F. A tangent of at least one-hundred (100) feet long shall be introduced between
reverse curves on arterial and collector streets, and fifty (50) feet on other streets.
G. Where horizontal street lines within a block deflect from each other at any one point
more than ten degrees (10?), there shall be a connecting curve with a radius
adequate to insure a sight distance of not less than two-hundred (200) feet for minor
and collector streets, and of such greater radii as the Planning Commission shall
determine for special cases.
H. Property lines of street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of at least twenty
(20) feet or with comparable cutoffs or chords in place of rounded corners.
I. Proposed centerline grades of streets and alleys shall be shown. Street grades,
wherever feasible, shall not exceed seven percent (7%), and in no case shall they be
less than four-tenths percent (0.4%).
J. Different connecting street gradients shall be connected with vertical parabolic
curves. Minimum length in feet of these curves for collector streets shall be twentyeight
(28) times the algebraic difference in the percent of grade of the two adjacent
slopes. For local streets, the minimum length shall be fifteen (15) times the algebraic
difference in the percent of grade of the two adjacent slopes.
K. Minor streets shall be so aligned that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
Article Last Amended: July 15, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 19:
Land Development Code Article 19 - Page 3 Off-Site Development Standards
L. Cul-de-sac streets, designed to be so permanently, shall not be longer than sixhundred
(600) feet, measured along the centerline from the intersection of origin to
end of right-of-way. Each cul-de-sac shall have a terminus of nearly circular shape
with a minimum right-of-way diameter of one-hundred (100) feet and a minimum
outside roadway diameter of eighty (80) feet, unless otherwise approved. The
property line at the intersection of the turnaround and the straight portion of the
street shall be rounded at a radius of not less than twenty (20) feet.
M. Half-streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development
of the subdivision in conformity with other requirements of these regulations and
where the Planning Commission finds that it will be practical to require the dedication
of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided.
N. Streets that dead end at the property line of the tract shall be allowed only as a
temporary measure to facilitate the future continuation of the street, when the
adjoining property is subdivided or improved.
O. Within the Scenic Rivers District, a conditional use permit shall be required for any
construction or reconstruction of public roads. Such construction or reconstruction
shall be subject to the standards and criteria of Natural Resources Regulations
NR79(j)(2). A conditional use permit is not required for minor public streets, which are
streets intended to serve primarily as an access to abutting properties.
P. Within the Floodplain Overlay District, railroad tracks, roads and bridges located
within the floodplain shall comply with the requirements of the FW and FF Districts.
Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be provided where failure
or interruption of these transportation facilities would result in danger to the public
health or safety, or where such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the
area. Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation
where failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public
health or safety.
19.3 STREET IMPROVEMENTS
A. The full width of the right-of-way shall be graded, including the stabilized gravel base
of the areas to be paved.
B. Street pavement, curb and gutter, and sidewalks shall be installed covering all streets
in the subdivision.
19.4 SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS
A. The intent of this section is to create a comprehensive and fully interconnected
public pedestrian system consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and Complete
Streets Policy.
B. At the time of initial installation of any roadway sidewalk shall be installed along both
sides of the roadway. In the event that an off-street pedestrian facility such as a
bike/pedestrian trail is contained as part of the land development sidewalk may be
considered for deletion from one side of local residential streets. Sidewalk shall be
installed along both sides of all collector and arterial roadways.
Article Last Amended: July 15, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 19:
Land Development Code Article 19 - Page 4 Off-Site Development Standards
C. At the time of reconstruction of an existing roadway any existing sidewalks shall be
brought into compliance with current codes and any missing segments of adjacent
sidewalk shall be constructed. Sidewalk shall be installed along both sides of
collector and arterial roadways concurrently with reconstruction of the roadway.
Sidewalk shall be installed along at least one side of all other roadways with the
exception of cul-de-sacs less than 200 feet in length.
D. Sidewalk location will be dependent upon the available right-of-way as well as
physical conditions of the available right-of-way. Where ever possible a minimum
boulevard width of 5 feet shall be maintained to provide for snow storage,
establishment of turf and tree planting. When the minimum 5 foot boulevard width
cannot be achieved a 2 foot hard surface boulevard and 5 foot sidewalk may be
installed to the back of curb.
E. Minimum widths for sidewalks separated from the roadway via boulevard are
established at 5 feet adjacent to residential properties and 6 feet adjacent to
commercial and industrially zoned properties.
F. The adjacent properties shall be assessed the full cost associated with the installation
of sidewalk when sidewalk is installed concurrently with the initial installation of the
roadway. When sidewalk is installed concurrently with a roadway reconstruction
project commercial and industrially zoned properties shall be assessed the full cost
associated with the installation of the sidewalk. When sidewalk is either
reconstructed and/or installed for the first time concurrently with a roadway
reconstruction project there will be no assessments levied against abutting
residentially zoned properties.
19.5 GRADING
A. Street Grades
The proposed centerline elevation, calculated to the nearest one-half (0.5) foot, shall
be shown at street intersections, at the center point of cul-de-sacs, at relative high
and low points, and at two-hundred (200) foot intervals (maximum) along all street
and alley segments. The direction of slope and percent grade shall be shown
between street and alley elevation points.
B. Lot Grading Plan
The proposed grading and direction of slope of each lot shall be shown. The entire
area of each lot must be sloped to drain to an adjoining public street, wetland
(subject to wetland regulations), water body, water course, drainage easement or
other public drainage way. The direction of slope and percent grade shall be shown
for any proposed drainage swales or easements.
C. Slope of Driveways
The maximum permissible driveway slope, as measured from the proposed garage
floor to the proposed ground elevation at the street right-of-way line, shall be ten
percent (10%), unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
Article Last Amended: July 15, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 19:
Land Development Code Article 19 - Page 5 Off-Site Development Standards
19.6 EASEMENTS
A. Easements for utilities and drainage shall be provided at least ten (10) feet wide
along the front lot line, and at least five (5) feet wide along side and rear lot lines. If
necessary for the extension of water main, sewer lines or similar utilities, easements of
greater width may be required along lot lines or across lots. Easements shall have
continuity of alignment from block to block and at deflection points. Easements for
poleline anchors shall be provided.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed or occupied by a watercourse, water body, wetland,
drainage way, channel or stream, a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way
conforming substantially with the lines of such water courses shall be provided,
together with such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the
stormwater drainage of the area.
C. Within the Shoreland Overlay District, when a land or easement dedication is a
condition of subdivision approval, the approval must provide easements over natural
drainage or ponding areas for management of stormwater and significant wetlands.
19.7 BLOCK STANDARDS
The maximum length of blocks shall be one-thousand eight-hundred (1,800) feet. Blocks
over nine-hundred (900) feet long may require pedestrian ways at least ten (10) feet
wide at their approximate centers. The use of additional access ways to schools, parks
and other destinations may be required.
19.8 LOT STANDARDS
Lot size, dimensions and design requirements shall conform with the requirements in this
Code.
19.9 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES
A. All residential subdivisions shall dedicate land for public use, such as parks,
playgrounds, open spaces, natural sites or other uses, according to the following
schedule, except for plats that create a maximum of two (2) lots and that already
have one (1) existing single-family home on the property, the park fee shall not be
required for the lot with the single-family home. The plans shall be reviewed by the
Parks Department.
1. Single-Family Development: Six-hundred ten (610) square feet per lot
2. Two-Family or More Development: Four-hundred eighty (480) square feet per lot
B. For subdivisions incorporating a mix of uses and/or densities, the public use areas shall
be determined by applying the appropriate dedication requirement for each use
listed in this section.
C. Where a proposed public site or open space, as shown on the Comprehensive Plan,
is located, in whole or in part, in a subdivision, the Planning Commission may require
Article Last Amended: July 15, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 19:
Land Development Code Article 19 - Page 6 Off-Site Development Standards
the dedication or reservation of such within the subdivision in those cases in which
the Planning Commission deems such requirements to be reasonable.
D. Land reserved for public sites and open spaces shall be of a character and location
suitable for the intended use, as determined by the Planning Commission. Public sites
and open spaces shall have a total frontage on one (1) or more streets of at least
two-hundred (200) feet, and no other dimension of the site shall be less than twohundred
(200) feet in depth unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission.
E. Under Minnesota Statute Section 462.358 Subd. 2.b guidelines, in the event the
Planning Commission determines a subdivision is too small, does not include a park
area as shown on the Comprehensive Plan, and/or the need for funds to develop
existing park land in the area is more important, the applicant shall pay to the City
such sum of money as set out in Section 520:00 of City Code of Ordinances.
F. The City Finance Director shall establish a separate fund into which all cash
contributions received from applicants in lieu of conveyance of dedication of land
for such public purposes shall be deposited. The deposit shall be used by the City for
the acquisition of public sites and/or open space, or the development of parks and
open space, that will be available to, and benefit the persons in, the subdivision for
which payment was made.
G. Property taxes due and payable on dedicated properties must be paid by subdivider
prior to recording of the subdivision according to Minnesota State Statute 272-02.
19.10 SANITARY SEWER
A. Sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve all properties in the subdivision where a
connection to the City sewer system is available at the boundary of the subdivision.
B. Individual sewage treatment systems may be accepted if the following conditions
are met:
1. The proposed subdivision does not constitute a premature subdivision
2. Public sewer facilities are not available to serve the proposed subdivision
3. Applicable minimum lot size standards are satisfied. The lot size requirement shall
be based on the most stringent minimum lot area and width between this Code,
and any other applicable ordinances of the City. If limiting factors are present,
the area and width shall increase. Limiting factors are defined as:
a. Percolation rate of less than one-tenth (0.10) minute per inch, or sixty-one (61)
to one-hundred twenty (120) or more minutes per inch.
b. Mottled soil or water table depth.
c. Bedrock depth.
d. Slope of the treatment area.
Article Last Amended: July 15, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 19:
Land Development Code Article 19 - Page 7 Off-Site Development Standards
e. Table 19-2: Limiting Factors describes the area and width requirements based
on limiting factors
TABLE 19-2: LIMITING FACTORS
# LIMITING
FACTOR
MINIMUM
LOT AREA
MINIMUM
LOT WIDTH
0 0.5 acre 100 ft
1 1 acre 150 ft
2 2 acres 200 ft
3 3 acres 250 ft
4 4.5 acres 300 ft
4. The lot shall contain sufficient area for two (2) soil treatment areas and comply
with all requirements of Minnesota Rule 7080. For the purpose of platting smaller
lots and to comply with this section, additional adjoining lots may be used to
satisfy the area and width requirements provided they are under single ownership
and may not be detached until public sewer facilities are available.
C. Within the Floodplain Overlay District, where public utilities are not provided, new or
replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems
into flood waters, and they shall not be subject to impairment or contamination
during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment system designed in accordance with
the state’s current statewide standards for on-site sewage treatment systems shall be
determined to be in compliance.
19.11 WATER SUPPLY
A. Where a connection to the City water system is presently available at the boundary
of the subdivision, water distribution facilities, including fire hydrants, shall be installed
to serve all properties within the subdivision.
B. Within the Floodplain Overlay District, where public utilities are not provided, on-site
water supply systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the system.
19.12 DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS
A. Storm drains shall be constructed to serve all properties in the subdivision where a
connection to the public storm sewer system is available at the boundary of the
subdivision.
B. Where public storm sewer system is not available at the boundary of the subdivision,
or where the introduction of said public system is deemed inappropriate by the City
Council, provisions for stormwater drainage shall be accomplished in accordance
with the requirements of the City Engineer and the St. Cloud Drainage Plan.
C. Post Construction Stormwater Standards:
1. The following volume control standards shall be met as described below for all
construction activities. Construction activities are land disturbing activities where
Article Last Amended: July 15, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 19:
Land Development Code Article 19 - Page 8 Off-Site Development Standards
one half (1/2) acre or more new impervious surfaces is created and/or
redeveloped, or one (1) acre of land disturbance occurs. Construction activity
includes land disturbing activities that are part of a larger common plan of
development.
a. All new development projects shall retain, on-site (i.e. infiltration or other
volume reduction practices) and not discharge off-site, a runoff volume equal
to 1 inch from the proposed increase of impervious surfaces.
b. All redevelopment projects shall retain, on-site (i.e. infiltration or other volume
reduction practices) and not discharge off-site, a runoff volume equal to ¼
inch from all redeveloped impervious surfaces. Newly added impervious
surfaces must meet the new development standard of 1 inch.
TABLE 19-3: VOLUME CONTROL REQUIREMENTS
*Volume reduction required when a combination of ½ acre or more new
impervious surfaces is created and/or redeveloped OR 1 acre of land is
disturbed
Type Impervious Surfaces
New Development 1” from the proposed increase
Redevelopment 1/4” for all redeveloped
1” for all expansion
*See definitions section of the Land Development Code
c. To the maximum extent practicable, volume control measures should be
distributed evenly throughout the development areas.
d. Green infrastructure techniques and practices (including, but not limited to,
infiltration, evapotranspiration, reuse/harvesting, conservation design, urban
forestry, green roofs), shall be given preference as design options consistent
with zoning, subdivision and PUD requirements.
e. Best management practices must meet design specifications as outlined and
incorporated in Appendix F of this Code – Permanent Stormwater Design
Checklist.
f. For linear projects, a reasonable attempt must be made to obtain right-ofway
during the project planning process for volume control practices. For
linear projects where the lack of right-of-way precludes the installation of
volume control practices, exceptions, as described in this Code, Article 19,
Section 19.12.D. Post Construction Stormwater Standards, Exceptions and
Mitigation, can be applied.
g. Wetlands/ponds are considered to be an impervious surface. While subject
to rate control requirements, rainfall on wetlands/ponds is not subject to
volume control standards.
h. As sites redevelop, the proposed site modifications must meet or exceed the
stormwater volume standards that were previously achieved.
2. The following rate control standards shall be met as described below:
Article Last Amended: July 15, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 19:
Land Development Code Article 19 - Page 9 Off-Site Development Standards
a. Discharge rates shall be derived using the standards methods of the Natural
Resources Conservation Service TR-55 or TR-20 as defined in the current
Hydrology Guide for Minnesota.
b. In cases where the downstream conveyance system is a clearly defined manmade
system of limited capacity, the allowable discharge will be limited to
the prorated share of the property to the overall service area. Typically, this
type of system will require the 100-year post-development rate of discharge
to be equal or less than the 5-year post-development rate of discharge, but it
may be considerably less with no correlation to a given rainfall event
frequency.
c. In cases where the downstream conveyance system is a natural system,
features shall be incorporated into the stormwater management plan to
meet the following requirements: 100-year post-development rate of
discharge to be equal or less than the 10-year pre-development rate of
discharge.
d. For receiving systems where rates are of limited concern, the rate of
discharge after development/redevelopment must be equal or less than the
existing rate of discharge for the following rainfall events: 2-yr., 10-yr., 100-yr.
3. All stormwater design calculations, specifications, site plans and supporting
hydraulic modeling are subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer
or its designee.
4. Property owner shall maintain all stormwater facilities in proper condition
consistent with the performance standards for which they were originally
designed.
D. Post Construction Stormwater Standards, Exceptions and Mitigation
1. Projects shall fully attempt to comply with the volume control requirements in
Article 19, Section 19.12.C. Post Construction Stormwater Standards. A reduced
volume control on the site of the original construction activity may be applied, at
the discretion of the City, under the following circumstances:
a. The owner and/or operator of the construction activity is precluded from
infiltrating stormwater through a designed system due to limitations as
specified and incorporated in Appendix F of this Code – Permanent
Stormwater Design Checklist; and,
b. The owner and/or operator of the construction activity implements to the
maximum extent practicable volume reduction techniques, other than
infiltration, on the site of the original construction activity that reduces
stormwater discharge volumes.
2. If the owner and/or operator of a construction activity is granted a volume
control exception, alternatives 1, 2, 3 and 4 are required to be followed as
specified and incorporated in Appendix G of this Code – Alternative Stormwater
Treatment Options. This process includes mitigation provisions for requirements
that cannot be met on the site of the original construction activity.
Article Last Amended: July 15, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 19:
Land Development Code Article 19 - Page 10 Off-Site Development Standards
3. The owner and/or operator of a construction activity must provide appropriate
documentation to the City as support for volume control exceptions and/or
mitigation provisions as specified and incorporated in Appendix G of this Code –
Alternative Stormwater Treatment Options.
E. Post Construction Maintenance and Inspections of Structural Stormwater BMPs
Any structural stormwater BMP that the City determines to be private shall meet the
following requirements:
1. A permanent public easement shall be provided to the City for access for
inspection and/or maintenance purposes. Costs incurred by the City for any
maintenance of private systems will be billed and/or assessed to the owner per
Article 19, Section 19.12.G. Violations and Enforcement.
2. The owner shall enter into a recorded Maintenance Agreement with the City.
The agreement shall include as an attachment an inspection and maintenance
plan. The terms and conditions of the Maintenance Agreement with
attachments shall be binding upon, and shall insure to the benefit of the parties
and their respective successors and assigns.
3. The permanent public easement and Maintenance Agreement shall be
recorded with the County Recorder or Registrar of Titles in the respective County
where the Structural Stormwater BMP is located. A copy of the recorded
permanent public easement and Maintenance Agreement shall be provided to
the City prior to the certificate of occupancy or one (1) year after the site’s land
disturbance permit is approved, whichever comes later.
4. The inspection and maintenance plan shall be developed, approved, and
included as an attachment with the Maintenance Agreement. At a minimum,
maintenance plans must include the following information:
a. Responsible person(s) for completing inspections and conducting
maintenance;
b. Frequency of inspections of maintenance; and
c. Inspection checklist and type of maintenance anticipated
5. If site configurations or structural stormwater BMPs change, decreasing BMP
effectiveness, new or improved structural stormwater BMPs must be designed and
implemented to meet the requirements of this section. New and/or improved
BMP plans must be submitted to the City Engineer for review and approval.
6. The property owner shall maintain all structural stormwater BMPs in proper
condition consistent with the performance standards for which they were
originally designed.
7. The property owner shall keep on file all structural stormwater BMP annual
inspection and maintenance records for 5 years and submit to the City as
requested.
Article Last Amended: July 15, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 19:
Land Development Code Article 19 - Page 11 Off-Site Development Standards
F. Public Structural Stormwater BMPs and Drainage Easements
Alterations affecting the function of a public structural BMP, and/or drainage easement,
must be approved by the City Engineer.
G. Violations and Enforcement
This section only applies to violations related to Article 19, Section 19.12, Drainage
Improvements, of the Land Development Code, incorporated Appendices and the
recorded Easements, Maintenance Agreements and plans for private structural
stormwater BMPs.
1. Violation Enforcement
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of
the requirements of this Code Article 19, Section 19.12, incorporated Appendices
and recorded Maintenance Agreement. Any person who has violated or continues
to violate the provisions of Article 19, Section 19.12
a. Immediate Danger
Whenever in the judgment of the Public Utilities Director or designee charged
with enforcement, it is determined upon investigation the violation constitutes
an immediate danger to the public health or public safety, an administrative
citation may immediately be issued to the property owner. In other instances
where an immediate public health or safety threat does not exist, the
enforcement official may issue a notice and order to correct pursuant to St.
Cloud City Ordinance Section 110, subd. 4.
b. Notification
Upon the issuance of an immediate administrative citation, the Public Utilities
Director or designee will also send written notification of the violation to the
person committing or maintaining the violation, and require the person to
terminate and abate the violation within 24 hours or such other period
specified by the enforcement official. The written notice will be served upon
the person committing or maintaining the violation in person or by first class
mail, or if unknown, then by posting a copy of the notice on the site.
2. Abatement of Violation
If the violation is not corrected as described in the notice and order to correct, the
abatement of the violation will be under the direction of the Public Utilities Director, or
designee. The expenses for the abatement will include a $75.00 administrative fee in
addition to the actual costs of the abatement. Abatement actions that require the
presence of City staff for more than one hour during the abatement or other
extraordinary coordination efforts will be billed to the property owner at the rate of
$60.00 per hour. If abatement expenses are not paid, they will be levied against the
property as a special assessment and collected as in the case of other special
assessments.
Article Last Amended: July 15, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 19:
Land Development Code Article 19 - Page 12 Off-Site Development Standards
A $50.00 charge will be added to all accounts certified to the County Auditor’s office
for collection. This fee is to be considered separate and distinct from any penalty or
interest that may be charged by the County as a result of the certification.
3. Penalties
Any person who is found to have violated any provision of this Code Article 19,
Section 19.12, or permits, agreements, and orders issued hereunder, shall be fined in
an amount not to exceed $1,000 per violation. Each calendar day on which
noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate distinct
violation. Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall constitute a lien against the
subject property. Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a request pursuant to
the administrative hearing procedure established in St. Cloud City Ordinance § 1100,
Sec. 12 which is incorporated herein by reference.
4. Costs
In addition to the penalties provided herein, the City may recover court costs, court
reporter’s fees and other expenses of litigation by an appropriate action against the
person found to have violated this Code Article 19, Section 19.12 shall become liable
to the City for any expense, loss or damage. The Public Utilities Director may add to
the violator’s charges and fees, the costs assessed for any cleaning, repair or
replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. Additional inspections
caused by noncompliance will be billed to the affected property owner at 2.5 times
the base hourly salary of the inspector.
A.13 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
A. All land disturbing activities are subject to the City’s erosion and sediment control
requirements located in the Stormwater System Use Code Ordinance, Section 365. A
City Land Disturbance Permit must be obtained as necessary.
B. Erosion and sediment control plan shall be developed for all land disturbing activities
as needed and submitted for approval as part of the land disturbance permit review
process. The Stormwater Compliance Specialist reviews all land disturbance permit
applications.
C. Erosion and siltation control measures shall be coordinated with the different stages
of construction. Appropriate control measures shall be installed prior to, and
maintained during, development. Dirt and soil must be retained on a construction
site. Land shall be developed in increments of workable size such that adequate
erosion and siltation controls can be provided as construction progresses. When soil is
exposed, the exposure shall be for the shortest feasible time.
19.14 PUBLIC UTILITIES
A. All electrical distribution systems, telephone transmission systems and community
antenna television systems serving subdivisions which are platted pursuant to the
provisions of this Code shall be installed underground, unless the City Council, by
resolution, determines that one of the following applies:
Article Last Amended: July 15, 2013
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 19:
Land Development Code Article 19 - Page 13 Off-Site Development Standards
1. Such requirement would result in unnecessary duplication of facilities where the
property to be served abuts an existing development already served by
overhead facilities.
2. Based upon engineering considerations, underground installation of such facilities
is not feasible in a particular plat or in a portion thereof.
3. That the size of the subdivision is too small to justify the underground installation of
such facilities.
B. All public utilities and facilities in the Floodplain Overlay District, such as gas,
electrical, sewer and water supply systems, to be located in the floodplain shall be
flood-proofed in accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to above the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
19.15 STREET TREES
Street trees shall be planted in conformance with a planting plan and standards
approved by the Parks Department.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 20:
Land Development Code Article 20 - Page 1 Nonconformities
Article 20. Nonconformities
20.1 PURPOSE
20.2 GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY
20.3 NONCONFORMING USE
20.4 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
20.5 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD
20.6 NONCONFORMING SIGNS
20.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Article is to provide for the regulation of nonconforming uses,
structures and lots, and to specify those circumstances and conditions under which
nonconforming structures and uses must be eliminated.
20.2 GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY
A. Authority to Continue
Any use, structure or lot that existed as a lawful nonconformity at the time of the
adoption of this Code, and any use, structure or lot that has been made
nonconforming because of the terms of this Code or its subsequent amendments,
may continue subject to the provisions of this Article so long as it remains otherwise
lawful. A structure or use that is illegal at the time of the adoption of this Code,
remains illegal if it does not conform with each and every requirement of this Code.
B. Burden on Property Owner to Establish Legality
In all cases, the burden of establishing the legality of a nonconformity under the
provisions of this Code is upon the property owner of the nonconforming use,
structure or lot.
C. Safety Regulations
The City may permit an expansion to a nonconforming use, in accordance with
Section 20.3.D.2 below, or impose upon nonconformities reasonable regulations to
prevent and abate nuisances and to protect the public health, welfare and safety.
All police power regulations enacted to promote public health, welfare and safety
including, but not limited to, all building, fire and health codes, apply to
nonconforming structures.
D. Exceptions to Nonconformity Regulations
1. The City shall regulate the repair, replacement, maintenance, improvement or
expansion of nonconforming uses and structures in floodplain areas to the extent
necessary to maintain eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program and to
avoid an increase in flood damage potential or increase the degree of
obstruction to flood flows in the floodway.
2. The nonconformity provisions of this Article do not prohibit the City from enforcing
an ordinance that applies to nonconforming adult uses (adult bookstores, adult
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 20:
Land Development Code Article 20 - Page 2 Nonconformities
theaters or similar adult use businesses). The City may enact, amend or enforce
an ordinance providing for the elimination or termination of adult uses (adult
bookstores, adult theaters or similar adult use businesses) by amortization, even if
such use was lawful at the time of its inception.
20.3 NONCONFORMING USE
A. Definition of Nonconforming Use
A nonconforming use is the use of land or structures that, as of the effective date of
this Code, or amendment thereto, are used for purposes that are not permitted in the
zoning district in which they are located. Uses that were specifically authorized as a
conditional use are not considered nonconforming uses even if the use is no longer
permitted within that zoning district. Such use will be considered a conditional use.
B. Ordinary Repairs and Maintenance
Normal repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance or improvement may be
performed on any structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming
use, provided it will not create any new nonconformity or increase the bulk or density
of the nonconforming use.
C. Structural Alterations
Structural alterations to a structure containing a nonconforming use are permitted so
long as they do not create any new nonconformity or increase the bulk or density of
the nonconforming use. In addition, the following exceptions apply:
1. When the alteration is required by law or is necessary to restore the building or
structure to a safe condition upon the order of any official charged with
protecting the public safety.
2. When the alteration is for the purpose of bringing the use into conformity.
D. Expansion of Use
1. Unless a nonconforming use is granted a special exceptions permit per Article
4.17 of the Land Development Code, a nonconforming use of land or a structure
may not be expanded. An expansion of a nonconforming use to any land area
or structure not currently occupied by such nonconforming use or to any portion
of the floor area that was not occupied by such nonconforming use is prohibited.
2. In certain cases, nonconforming uses may be permitted to expand where it can
be shown that such action will not be harmful and will be beneficial to the
surrounding properties, the neighborhood and the community. An exception,
granted by ordinance, may be issued for an existing nonconforming use by the
Zoning Board of Appeals only where the applicant demonstrates that the
proposed activity will comply with all of the following criteria.
a. Standards for Approval
i. The use occurs entirely within an existing site.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 20:
Land Development Code Article 20 - Page 3 Nonconformities
ii. The use is not detrimental or injurious to other uses permitted within the
district.
iii. The use is appropriate and consistent with the general welfare of the
community and the enjoyment of adjacent property.
iv. The off-street parking is adequate to serve the use.
v. The use is in substantial agreement with the Comprehensive Plan.
vi. Hardship would result if the use were not allowed to expand.
vii. Rezoning the property would result in “spot zoning” or zoning
inappropriate to surrounding land uses.
viii. The minimum zoning standards applicable to the zoning in which the
nonconforming use is located apply.
b. Eligibility
Only the following nonconforming uses are eligible:
i. Single-family, two-family, multi-family and townhouse residential, lodging
house, fraternity or sorority house, residential facility or temporary shelter
facility located in a commercial district.
ii. Any commercial use in an industrial district.
iii. Uses permitted in the I-1 District, except for solid waste handling facilities,
located in a C-5 District.
iv. General, medical and dental office uses in residential districts.
v. Music, art, photographic, and interior decorating studios in all residential
districts and the C-1 District.
vi. Private schools for dance, music, physical sciences and similar disciplines
located in all residential districts and the C-1 District.
vii. Any residential use in an industrial district.
E. Change of Use
Unless a nonconforming use is granted a special exceptions permit per Article 4.17 of
the Land Development Code, a nonconforming use must not be changed to any
use, other than one permitted within the zoning district in which it is located. When
such a nonconforming use has been changed, in whole or in part, to a conforming
use, the whole or part which has been made to conform may not be changed back
to a nonconforming use. A change of use is deemed to occur when an existing
nonconforming use has been terminated and another use has commenced. Any
change in use in violation of this Code is deemed an abandonment of the previously
existing lawful nonconforming use.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 20:
Land Development Code Article 20 - Page 4 Nonconformities
F. Discontinuation or Abandonment
If a nonconforming use or occupancy is discontinued for a continuous period of one
(1) year, such nonconformity or occupancy is deemed to be abandoned and may
not be reestablished or resumed regardless of the intent to resume or to continue the
use. Any subsequent use of such land or structure must conform to all regulations of
the zoning district in which such land or structure is located. The period of such
discontinuance caused by government action, acts of god, or other acts without
any contributing fault by the user, must not be included in calculating the length of
discontinuance for this section.
G. Damage or Destruction
1. If a structure and/or property devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use
is damaged or destroyed to the extent fifty percent (50%) or less of the market
value at that time, then the structure and/or property may be repaired,
reconstructed or restored and the nonconforming use continued, provided that
no new nonconformities are created and that the existing degree of
nonconformity is not increased. A building permit must be obtained for such
rebuilding, restoration, repair or reconstruction within one (1) year of the date of
damage or destruction, and construction must be completed within one (1) year
of issuance of the building permit. If a building permit is not obtained within one
(1) year, then the nonconforming use cannot be continued.
2. If a nonconforming structure and/or property devoted in whole or in part to a
nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed to the extent of greater than fifty
percent (50%) of its market value at that time and no building permit has been
applied for within one-hundred eighty (180) days of when the property is
damaged, the nonconformity may not be continued, repaired or replaced. The
City may impose reasonable conditions upon a building permit issued under this
section in order to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent property.
20.4 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
A. Definition of Nonconforming Structure
Structures which at one time conformed to applicable zoning regulations, but
because of subsequent amendments to the Code no longer conform to applicable
yard, height, lot coverage or other dimensional or bulk provisions or do not meet
other on-site development standards, such as an insufficient number of parking
spaces, of this Code, are considered nonconforming structures.
B. Ordinary Repairs and Maintenance
Normal repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance or improvement may be
performed on any nonconforming structure. No repairs or reconstruction are
permitted that would create any new nonconformity, increase the degree of any
previously existing nonconformity, or increase the bulk or density of the structure in
any manner.
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 20:
Land Development Code Article 20 - Page 5 Nonconformities
C. Structural Alterations
Structural alterations to a structure containing a nonconforming use are permitted so
long as they do not create any new nonconformity or increase the degree of any
existing nonconformity. In addition, the following exceptions apply:
1. When the alteration is required by law or is necessary to restore the building or
structure to a safe condition upon the order of any official charged with
protecting the public safety.
2. When the alteration is for the purpose of bringing about a conforming use.
D. Additions and Enlargements
A structure that is nonconforming with respect to its bulk may not be added to or
enlarged.
E. Relocation
A nonconforming structure may not be relocated, in whole or in part, to any other
location on the same zoning lot or parcel unless brought into full compliance with this
Code. A nonconforming structure may be relocated to another zoning lot or parcel if
the structure conforms to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is relocated.
F. Damage or Destruction
1. If a nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed to the extent of less than
fifty percent (50%) of the market value at that time, then the structure and/or
property may be repaired, reconstructed or restored and the nonconforming use
continued, provided that no new nonconformities are created and that the
existing degree of nonconformity is not increased. A building permit must be
obtained for such rebuilding, restoration, repair or reconstruction within one (1)
year of the date of damage or destruction, and construction must be completed
within one (1) year of issuance of the building permit.
2. If a nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed to the extent of greater
than fifty percent (50%) of its market value, and no building permit has been
applied for within one-hundred eighty (180) days of when the property is
damaged, the nonconformity may not be continued, repaired or replaced. The
City may impose reasonable conditions upon a building permit issued under this
section in order to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent property.
G. Nonconforming Structures within the Floodplain and/or Floodway
1. No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way which
increases its nonconformity.
2. Any structural alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure or
nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood damage potential
of that structure or use shall be protected to the Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or floodproofing
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 20:
Land Development Code Article 20 - Page 6 Nonconformities
techniques (i.e., FP-1 thru FP-4 floodproofing classifications) allowable in the State
Building Code, except as further restricted in numbers 3. and 4. below.
3. The cost of all structural alterations or additions to any nonconforming structure
over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50 percent of the market value of
the structure unless the conditions of this Section are satisfied. The cost of all
structural alterations and additions must include all costs such as construction
materials and a reasonable cost placed on all manpower or labor. If the cost of
all previous and proposed alterations and additions exceeds 50 percent of the
market value of the structure, then the structure must meet the standards of this
Article, Section 12.1, Section F., 2. Floodway District and Section 12.1, Section F., 3.
Flood Fringe District of this Code for the new structures depending upon whether
the structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively.
4. If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in Article 21 of the Land
Development Code, from any combination of a building addition to the outside
dimensions of the existing building or a rehabilitation, reconstruction, alteration,
or other improvement to the inside dimensions of an existing nonconforming
building, then the building addition and the existing nonconforming building must
meet the requirements of this Article, Section 12.1, Section F., 2. Floodway District
and Section 12.1, Section F., 3. Flood Fringe District of this Code for new structures,
depending upon whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District,
respectively.
5. If any nonconforming use or structure is substantially damaged, as defined in
Article 21 of the Land Development Code, it shall not be reconstructed except in
conformity with the provisions of the Land Development Code. The applicable
provisions for establishing new uses or new structures in this Article, Section 12.1,
Section F., 2. Floodway District and Section 12.1, Section F., 3. Flood Fringe
District of this Code or Section 12.1, Section F., 4. General Floodplain District of this
Code will apply depending upon whether the use or structure is in the
Floodway, Flood Fringe, or General Flood Plain District, respectively.
20.5 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD
This section regulates lots of record which at one time were conforming, but which no
longer conform to the lot area requirements of the zoning district in which they are
located.
A. If there are two (2) or more lots of record with contiguous frontage in common
ownership, and one (1) or more of the lots does not meet the requirements for lot
width or lot area as established by this Code, the land so involved is considered a
single undivided zoning lot for the purposes of this Code. If such zoning lot is
comprised of existing lots of record that each meet ninety percent (90%) or more of
the required lot width or lot area of the district in which they are located, such lots of
record may be used, transferred or conveyed, so long as the remaining lots of record
within that zoning lot meet ninety percent (90%) or more of the required lot width or
lot area.
B. A use that is permitted within a zoning district is allowed to be erected upon an
existing nonconforming lot of record. A single-family dwelling erected on a single
nonconforming lot of record must meet all other zoning district bulk requirements. In
Article Last Amended: June 3, 2019
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 20:
Land Development Code Article 20 - Page 7 Nonconformities
addition, the regulations of Table 20-1: Single-Family Lot Coverage on Nonconforming
Lots of Record apply to nonconforming lots of record under six-thousand (6,000)
square feet:
TABLE 20-1: SINGLE-FAMILY LOT
COVERAGE ON NONCONFORMING LOTS
OF RECORD
Lot Area
Maximum Lot
Coverage
5,760 - 5,999sf 31%
5,520 - 5,759sf 32%
5,280 - 5,519sf 33%
5,040 - 5,279sf 34%
0 - 5,039sf 35%
20.6 NONCONFORMING SIGNS
1. Signs existing on the effective date of this Code, or any amendments thereto, that do
not conform to the regulations of this Code are deemed nonconforming.
Nonconforming signs are subject to the regulations of Section 20.4 (Nonconforming
Structures).
2. Nonconforming signs may be continued through normal repair, replacement,
restoration, maintenance or improvement; no repair or reconstruction may be made
that would create any new nonconformity or increase the degree of any previously
existing nonconformity including by increasing the number of nonconforming signs, or
the nonconforming sign area or height.
3. No nonconforming sign can be altered so that the nonconformity is increased or
moved to a new location without being brought into compliance with the
requirements of this Code.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 1 Definitions
Article 21. Definitions
21.1 PURPOSE
21.2 INTERPRETATION
21.3 USE DEFINITION RULES OF INTERPRETATION
21.4 USE DEFINITIONS
21.5 GENERAL TERMS DEFINITIONS
21.1 PURPOSE
This Article contains definitions for terms used throughout the Code.
21.2 INTERPRETATION
The language set forth in the text of this Code is interpreted in accordance with the
following rules of construction:
A. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
B. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future tense includes
the present.
C. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
D. Whenever a defined word or term appears in the text of this Code, its meaning is
construed as set forth in the definition. Any word appearing in parenthesis, between
a word and its definition herein, is construed in the same sense as that word. Words
not defined are interpreted in accordance with the definitions considered to be
normal dictionary usage.
E. If a definition contains a regulation and the use is inconsistent with that regulation,
the use is prohibited.
21.3 USE DEFINITION RULES OF INTERPRETATION
A. Certain terms in this Article are defined to be inclusive of many uses in order to
eliminate overly detailed lists of uses in the zoning districts established by this Code.
These terms are referred to as generic use definitions.
B. A use that is not specifically listed in a zoning district or does not fall within a generic
use definition as defined in this Article is prohibited.
C. If a use is listed specifically, it cannot be considered part of a generic use definition.
21.4 USE DEFINITIONS
Activity Center. A facility offering social, physical and mental rehabilitation or training of persons
with disabilities.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 2 Definitions
Adult Use. An adult use includes, but is not limited to: adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult
cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, or sexual encounter establishment.
1. Adult Arcade. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one (1) or more
motion picture projectors, slide projectors or similar machines for viewing by five (5) or
fewer persons each are used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
other photographic reproductions that are characterized by an emphasis upon the
depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
2. Adult Bookstore. An establishment that has as a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade
and offers for sale, for any form of consideration, any one (1) or more of the following:
books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representation that are characterized by
an emphasis upon the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas,” or instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use
in connection with “specified sexual activities.”
3. Adult Cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar establishment that regularly features
live performances characterized by the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by
“specified sexual activities,” or films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time
is devoted to the showing of material that is characterized by an emphasis upon the
depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
4. Adult Motion Picture Theater. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown,
and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the
showing of material characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
5. Adult Theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment characterized
by activities featuring the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by “specified
sexual activities.”
6. Sexual Encounter Establishment. An establishment other than a hotel, motel or similar
establishment offering public accommodations, which, for any form of consideration,
provides a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate or consort in
connection with “specified sexual activities” or the exposure of “specified anatomical
areas.” This definition does not include an establishment where a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
sexual therapy.
7. Specified Anatomical Areas. “Specified anatomical areas” means and includes any of
the following: 1) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of
the areolae; or 2) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
8. Specified Sexual Activities. “Specified sexual activities” means and includes any of the
following: 1) the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 2) sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse,
oral copulation, sodomy; 3) masturbation, actual or simulated; or 4) excretory functions
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 3 Definitions
as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in 1 through 3 of this
definition.
Agricultural Service Establishment. A use where the primary activity is to provide goods or
services to general or industrial farm operations including, but not limited to, fertilizer, seed and
feed supply companies, grain elevators, milling operations, implement dealerships, processing
and packaging of agricultural products, cold storage plants, and livestock sales excluding
slaughter houses.
Airport. Any premises which are used, or intended for use, for the landing and takeoff of aircraft,
and any appurtenant areas which are used, or intended for use, for building incidental to
aircraft services, together with all buildings and structures thereon.
Ambulance Operations Facility. A facility for the dispatch, storage and maintenance of
emergency medical care vehicles.
Amusement Center. Any room, place or space available for public patronage, operated as a
business, together with any contiguous private parking areas of the business, which has five (5)
or more pieces of equipment or games including, but not limited to, pool or billiard tables, table
tennis tables, foosball tables, pinball machines, or any mechanical or electronic amusement
device. The presence of amusement equipment or games as a secondary or ancillary use does
not constitute an amusement center. An amusement center as defined in this section does not
include intoxicating or non-intoxicating, on- or off-sale liquor establishments licensed pursuant to
Section 800 or Section 810 of the City Code of Ordinances.
Assisted Living Facility. A facility that provides daily assistance and long-term residence for
disabled or elderly individuals. This includes a combination of housing, supportive services,
personalized assistance and health care designed to respond to the individual needs of those
who need help with activities of daily living, such as dressing, grooming, bathing, etc.
Athletic Field. Outdoor sites, often requiring equipment, designed for formal athletic competition
in field sports (e.g., softball, soccer, football).
Bakery. An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of baked products for consumption
off-site. The products may be prepared either on or off site. Such use may include incidental
food service.
Bed and Breakfast Facility. A transient lodging establishment, generally located in a single-family
dwelling, providing overnight or temporary lodging (no individual cooking facilities) for the
general public and may provide meals for compensation.
Best Management Practices (BMPs). Erosion and sediment control and water quality
management practices that are the most effective and practicable means of controlling,
preventing and minimizing degradation of waters of the state, including avoidance of impacts,
prohibitions of practices, general housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational
practices, operating and maintenance procedures, and other applicable management
practices.
Blacksmith Shop. A business where iron and other metals are shaped and repaired, typically
using a forge.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 4 Definitions
Bottling Works & Distribution. A business where drinks intended for sale for human consumption
are prepared, mixed, cooked, bottled or packed, and/or shipped.
Building Materials Sales & Storage. Retail establishments that sell lumber and other large building
materials, and also including paint, wallpaper, glass, fixtures, nursery stock, lawn and garden,
etc.
Car Wash. A building, or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing more than one (1)
motor vehicle using steam cleaning or other mechanical devices.
Carpet Cleaning Establishment. A business that specializes in the cleaning of carpet and
upholstery, which makes use of cleaning products designed for the purpose of eliminating dirt
and stains on rugs, carpeting and/or household furniture or objects upholstered or covered with
fabrics such as wool, cotton, nylon or other synthetic fabrics, as well as the treatment of the
same with products that make fabric protectant claims.
Cemetery/Memorial Garden. Land used or dedicated to the burial of the dead, including
crematoriums, mausoleums, and necessary sales and maintenance facilities. Mortuaries may be
included when operated within the boundary of such cemetery.
Club. A membership organization and its premises that holds regular meetings and caters
exclusively to members and their guests for social, intellectual, recreational or athletic purposes.
A club may, subject to other regulations controlling such uses, maintain dining facilities, possess a
liquor license, or engage professional entertainment for the enjoyment of dues-paying members
and their guests.
Cold Storage Plant. The business where food is stored or preserved for a period of thirty (30) days
or more in which ice, refrigerating machinery or other artificial means of cooling.
Commercial Kennel. An establishment where pet animals owned by another person are
temporarily boarded for pay or remuneration of any sort. Kennel does not apply to zoos or
animal hospitals operated by veterinarians duly licensed under the law where the boarding of
animals is accessory to medical treatment.
Commercial Outdoor Recreation Facility. Predominantly participant recreational uses
conducted almost wholly outdoors, including miniature golf, go-kart tracks, water parks,
amusement parks, and similar uses.
Common Plan of Development. A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct land
disturbing activities may be taking place at different times, on different schedules, but under
one proposed plan. One plan is broadly defined to include design, permit application,
advertisement or physical demarcation indicating that land disturbing activities may occur.
Communications Facility. Any creation, transmission, emission, storage-retrieval or reception of
signals, images, sounds, or intelligence of any nature, by wire, radio, television, optical or other
means.
Community Center. A building used as a place of meeting, recreation, or social activity and not
operated for profit, and in which neither alcoholic beverages nor meals are normally dispensed
or consumed.
Construction Activity. A land disturbing activity where one half (1/2) acre or more new
impervious surfaces is created and/or developed, or one (1) acre of land disturbance occurs.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 5 Definitions
Construction activity includes land disturbing activities that are part of a large common plan of
development.
Convalescent Home. A building where, for compensation, nursing care is provided for persons
suffering from illness, other than mental or contagious, which is not of sufficient severity to require
hospitalization, or persons requiring further institutional care after being discharged from a
hospital other than a mental hospital.
Convenience Store. A retailer offering automotive fuel and accessories in addition to
convenience food items and personal goods, but not offering mechanical repair or services.
Dance Establishment. A room, place or space open to general public patronage, where
dancing is the principal use, which the public may participate in, whether or not there is a
charge for admission, either directly or indirectly.
Day Care Facility. Any facility, public or private, which for gain or otherwise regularly provides
one (1) or more persons with care, training, supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation or
developmental guidance on a regular basis, for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per
day, in a place other than the person’s own home. Day care facilities include, but are not
limited to, family day care homes, group family day care homes, day care centers, day
nurseries, nursery schools, developmental achievement centers, day treatment programs, adult
day care centers and day services.
Distribution. The storage, wholesale and distribution of manufactured products, supplies and
equipment.
Dormitory. A structure with sleeping and living accommodations, excluding cooking facilities, for
more than twenty-five (25) persons.
Drive-In Establishment. A facility selling, serving or offering goods directly to customers either
waiting in parked motor vehicles or to customers who return to their vehicles to consume or use
the goods on-premise of the principal use.
Drive-Thru Facility. A facility selling, serving or offering goods directly to customers waiting in a
parked motor vehicle who consume or use the goods off-premise of the principal use.
Driving Range. An area equipped with distance markers, clubs, balls and tees for practicing the
striking of golf balls, which may include a snack-bar and pro-shop. Miniature golf courses are
considered a commercial outdoor recreation facility and not a driving range.
Dry Cleaner. A business maintained for the pickup and delivery of dry cleaning and/or laundry,
which may maintain or operate laundry or dry-cleaning equipment or machinery on the
premises.
Dwelling, Above the Ground Floor. Dwelling units within multi-story buildings located above nonresidential
uses on the ground floor.
Dwelling, Multi-Family. A dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units, designed so that
each dwelling unit is connected to a common corridor or entranceway, originally constructed
for said purposes. Multi-family dwelling does not include converted dwellings or townhouses.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 6 Definitions
Dwelling, Single-Family Detached. A detached dwelling containing accommodations for, and
occupied by one (1), family.
Dwelling, Townhouse. An independent dwelling unit which is attached on one (1) or both sides
to another independent dwelling unit(s) or attached garage, and where more than one (1)
principal structure can be located on the same zoning lot with common open space for all
independent dwelling units on the zoning lot. Each townhouse must have a separate entrance.
See Figure 21-1: Townhouse Dwelling.
FIGURE 21-1: TOWNHOUSE DWELLING
Dwelling, Two Family. One (1) principal structure containing two (2) dwelling units on a zoning lot.
Engraving Facility. A facility where incised or raised patterns, characters, lines, etc. are
produced upon a hard material, such as metal plates or blocks of wood.
Escape Room. A building or room in which a physical adventure game is played, where the
players are locked in a room and have to use elements of the room to solve a series of puzzles
and escape within a set time limit.
Essential Service Structure. Structures and buildings necessary for the operation of essential
services including, but not limited to, telephone buildings, telephone booths, gas regulator
stations, substations, electrical stations, water tanks and lift stations. Facilities that are staffed are
not considered essential service structures. Essential service structures do not include wireless
communication towers and their associated buildings.
Essential Services. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or
municipal departments of underground or overhead telephone, gas, electrical, communication,
water or sewer transmission, distribution, collection, supply or disposal systems, including poles,
wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith for the
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 7 Definitions
furnishing of adequate service by such private or public utilities or municipal departments.
Wireless telecommunications towers and antennas are not classified as essential services.
Financial Institution. A bank, savings and loan, credit union, mortgage office, or automated
teller machine (ATM).
Food Processing. The preparation, processing, or canning and packaging of food products.
Fraternity House. A building occupied, or to be occupied, by an organized group of male
students, and providing for a succession of memberships therein, where lodging or board, or
both, are provided only for its members and guests of its members, when approved and
recognized as such by the administrative authorities.
Game Refuge. Areas reserved for public or private hunting of wildlife, fishing, and accessory
structures in support of those activities.
General Farming. An area of at least five (5) acres, or an area eligible for protection under the
Green Acres Act, on which crops are grown, livestock are fed, and/or dairy cattle are
maintained for the purpose of preparing the crops, and/or livestock (excluding fur-bearing
livestock), and/or milk for sale and/or for use as feed. General farming does not include
industrial-type farming operations, e.g. large poultry operations, where force-feeding or
confinement techniques are predominant or where the majority of feed utilized is harvested
from land not owned or leased by the farm property owner.
Green Infrastructure. A wide array of practices at multiple scales that manage wet weather and
that maintains or restores natural hydrology by infiltrating, evapotranspiration, or harvesting and
using stormwater. On a regional scale, green infrastructure is the preservation or restoration of
natural landscape features, such as forests, floodplains and wetlands, coupled with policies such
as infill and redevelopment that reduce the overall imperviousness in a watershed. On a local
scale, green infrastructure consists of the site and neighborhood-specific practices such as
bioretention, trees, green roofs, permeable pavements and cisterns.
Golf Course. A place where the game of golf is played on a minimum nine (9) hole, par three (3)
course, where the sale and consumption of alcohol (on-sale) is allowed on the property. Sale of
alcohol to be taken off the premises is not permitted on the property. Property may contain a
clubhouse, maintenance building(s) and other structures/buildings common to a golf course.
Miniature, putt-putt, etc. type golf does not qualify as a golf course. Driving ranges are permitted
as a part of a golf course, but stand-alone driving ranges do not qualify as a golf course.
Heliport. Any area used or to be used for the landing or take-off of helicopters, or other
steep-gradient aircraft capable of hovering, but does not afford refueling, maintenance or repair
facilities, and accommodates only a single helicopter.
Hobby Farm. An area on which crops are grown and or livestock (excluding fur-bearing
livestock) are raised.
Homeless Day Center. Any facility whose primary purpose is to provide service to those
experiencing homelessness, such as day center, free meals or snacks, free clothing, personal
hygiene facilities, information and referral, counseling, mail and/or telephone services. Overnight
shelter is prohibited.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 8 Definitions
Hotel/Motel. A structure occupied as a temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged
with or without meals.
Impervious Surface. A constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards the entry of
water into the soil and causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities and at an
increased rate of flow than prior to the development. Examples include rooftops, sidewalks,
patios, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, compacted gravel, concrete, asphalt, or gravel
roads.
Independent Living Facility. A residential complex containing dwellings where the occupancy is
limited to persons who are fifty-five (55) years of age or older; or, if two (2) persons occupy a unit,
at least one (1) must be fifty-five (55) years or older. Such facilities may include common areas
for meals and socializing, offer minimal convenience services, but exclude institutional care such
as medical or nursing care.
Industrial Farming. An area where, in addition to general farming uses, livestock (including furbearing
livestock) may be fed and maintained for the purpose of preparation for sale or
breeding, and/or where force-feeding or confinement techniques are predominant, and/or
where the majority of feed utilized is harvested from land not owned or leased by the farm
property owner.
Institutional Use. Educational facilities, golf courses, sports arenas, religious institutions, athletic
fields and publicly owned property. For the purpose of this section, parks and cemeteries,
whether publicly or privately owned, shall not be included in this definition.
Junk/Scrap Yard. Land or buildings where waste, discarded, or salvaged materials are bought,
sold, stored, exchanged, cleaned, packed, disassembled or handled including, but not limited
to, scrap metal, rags, paper, hides, rubber products, glass products, lumber products, and
products resulting from the wrecking of motor vehicles and the storing of wrecked motor
vehicles. Junk/scrap yard includes motor vehicle wrecking yards where the dismantling or
wrecking of used motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled,
partially dismantled, or wrecked motor vehicles or their parts occurs.
Laboratory. A facility for scientific laboratory research in technology-intensive fields, such as
biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, genetics, plastics, polymers, resins, coatings, fibers, fabrics,
films, heat transfer, and radiation research facilities.
Land Disturbing Activity. Any activity that results in a change or alteration in the existing ground
cover (both vegetative and non-vegetative) and/or the existing soil topography. Land
disturbing activities include, but are not limited to, development, redevelopment, demolition,
excavating, grading, clearing, filling, stockpiling, hauling, construction, reconstruction, and
borrow pits. Routine vegetation management, and mill and overlay/resurfacing activities that
do not alter the gravel material beneath the pavement base, are not considered land
disturbances.
Lodging House. A structure where only sleeping rooms are provided, with a common entrance,
internal access to all rooms, one (1) or more bathrooms, and one (1) or more kitchens to provide
lodging for five (5) or more persons distinguished from dwelling units and motels, hotels open to
transients. Bathrooms and bedrooms may have locks on the doors.
Machine Shop. A facility where material is processed or treated by machining, cutting, grinding,
welding, or similar processes.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 9 Definitions
Manufactured Housing Park. Any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which two (2) or more
occupied manufactured homes are located, either free of charge or for compensation, and
includes any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the
equipment of the manufactured home park.
Manufacturing. The mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new
products, including the assembling of component parts, the creation of products, and the
blending of materials including, but not limited to oils, plastics, resins, etc.
Massage Facility. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, massage, alcohol rub,
fomentation, electric or magnetic treatment, or similar treatment or manipulation of the human
body is administered, unless such treatment or manipulation is administered by a medical
practitioner, chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist, or similar professional person
licensed by the state. This definition does not include an athletic club, health club, school,
gymnasium, salon, spa, or similar establishment where massage or similar manipulation of the
human body is offered as an incidental or accessory service.
Medical/Dental Office. Medical instruction featuring the examination and discussion of actual
cases, and the diagnosis and treatment of outpatients, such as doctor, dentist or similar offices.
Meteorological Tower. For the purposes of this WECS ordinance, meteorological towers are
those towers which are erected primarily to measure wind speed and directions plus other data
relevant to siting WECS. Meteorological towers do not include towers and equipment used by
airports, the Minnesota Department of Transportation, or other similar applications to monitor
weather conditions.
Micro-Brewery An establishment where beer, ale, etc. are brewed, typically in conjunction with
tavern or restaurant use.
Mineral Extraction. The use of land for surface or subsurface removal of sand, gravel, rock,
industrial minerals, other nonmetallic minerals, and peat not regulated under Minnesota Statutes,
Sections 93.44 to 93.51.
Motor Vehicle Dealership. Any business establishment that sells or leases new or used
automobiles, trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles, boats, motorcycles or farm vehicles, or
other similar motorized transportation vehicles. An automobile dealership may maintain an
inventory of the vehicles for sale or lease either on-site or at a nearby location, and may provide
on-site facilities for the repair and service of the vehicles sold or leased by the dealership.
Motor Vehicle Rental/Leasing Facility. A business that stores motor vehicles on-site for short or
long-term rental or leasing.
Motor Vehicle Parts Retail Establishment. A retail goods establishment that specializes in the sale
of motor vehicle parts.
Motor Vehicle Repair, Major. Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn or damaged
motor vehicles or trailers, collision service including body, frame or fender straightening or repair,
and overall painting of vehicles.
Motor Vehicle Repair, Minor. Incidental repairs, replacement of parts, and motor service to
automobiles, but not including any operation specified under major motor vehicle repair.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 10 Definitions
New Development. All construction activity that is not defined as redevelopment.
Nursery. An operation for the cultivating, harvesting, and sale of plants, shrubs, trees and other
nursery items grown on site or established in the ground prior to sale, and related accessory sales
and uses.
Nursing Home. A licensed home to provide care for the aged or infirmed persons requiring or
receiving nursing care, which includes care or treatment requiring technical knowledge. The
term nursing home also includes convalescent home.
Office. A use that engages in the processing, manipulation or application of business information
or professional expertise. Such an office may or may not offer services to the public. An office is
not materially involved in fabricating, assembling or warehousing of physical products for the
retail or wholesale market, nor is an office engaged in the repair of products or retail services. It is
characteristic of an office that retail or wholesale goods are not shown on the premises to a
customer. Examples include, but are not limited to, professional offices for non-profit
organizations, advertising, accounting, investment services, insurance, contracting, architecture,
engineering, legal services and real estate services.
Office, Headquarters. An establishment primarily engaged in providing internal office
administration services as opposed to customer service in a single building or a campus setting -
for example, the headquarters, regional offices or the administrative offices for a corporation.
Generally the majority of the traffic generated from corporate offices comes from employees
and not the general public.
Open Space. An area that is intended to provide light and air, and is designed for either
environmental, scenic or recreational purposes. Open space may include, but is not limited to,
lawns, walkways, active and passive recreation areas, playgrounds, wooded areas and water
courses. Open space does not include driveways, parking lots, or other surfaces designed or
intended for vehicular travel.
Parking Garage (Principal Use). A structure composed of one (1) or more levels or floors used for
the parking or storage of motor vehicles. A parking garage may be totally below grade, as in an
underground parking garage, or either partially or totally above grade with those levels being
either open or enclosed.
Parking Lot (Principal Use). An open, hard-surfaced area, other than street or public way,
available to the public, to be used for the storage, for limited periods of time, of operable
passenger automobiles and commercial vehicles. Such storage may be for compensation, free
or as an accommodation to residents of a multi-family dwelling, or clients and customers of a
business.
Personal Services Establishment. An establishment or place of business primarily engaged in the
provision of frequent or recurrent needed services of a personal nature. Typical uses include, but
are not limited to, beauty shops, barbershops, tanning salons, massage parlors, shoe repair,
laundromats, dry cleaners and tailors.
Place of Worship. A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons
regularly assemble for religious purposes and related social events and which building, together
with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized
to sustain religious ceremonies and purposes.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 11 Definitions
Power Generating Station. A facility that converts one (1) or more energy sources, including but
not limited to, water power, fossil fuels, nuclear power or solar power, into electrical energy or
steam.
Print Shop. A business which consists of duplicating and printing services using photocopy,
blueprint, or other reproduction methods, not including offset printing equipment, including small
scale publishing, binding, and engraving.
Public Building. A building held, used or controlled exclusively for public purposes by any
department or branch of government (state, county or local), without reference to the
ownership of the building or of the realty upon which it is situated.
Public Park/Recreation Area. A non-commercial, not-for-profit facility designed to serve the
recreation needs of the residents of the community. Parks include, but are not limited to,
ballfields, football fields, soccer fields, basketball courts, playgrounds and park district field
houses that may have indoor recreation facilities.
Publicly Owned Property. Land, buildings or structures owned by any governmental body or
public agency including city, county, state or federally owned properties, other than public
rights-of-way.
Publishing. A business which produces large volumes of printed materials using photocopy,
blueprint and other reproduction methods, including offset printing equipment.
Railroad Repair Shop. A repair facility consisting of tracks and shop buildings for the purpose of
repairing, inspecting, testing, painting, maintaining, servicing and storing cars, engines, trucks,
locomotives, switch engines, rolling stock and equipment as well as all equipment and facilities
utilized to accomplish the foregoing activities.
Railyard. An area of land, a portion of which is covered by a system of tracks that provide for
the making up of trains by one (1) or more railroads or private industry concerns. Functions of a
railyard include, but are not limited to, the classifying, switching, storing, assembling, distributing,
consolidating, moving, repairing, weighing or transferring of cars, trains, engines, locomotives
and rolling stock.
Raising of Livestock. A parcel of land where animals, other than household pets, are kept and
maintained for commercial production and sale or family food production. Accessory sales of
products that have been produced or grown by the owner of the land on which the use is
located, are included as part of raising of stock activities.
Redevelopment. Any construction activity where, prior to the start of construction, the areas to
be disturbed have 15 percent or more of impervious surface(s).
Residential Facility. Any facility, public or private, which for gain or otherwise regularly provides
one (1) or more persons with a twenty-four (24) hour per day substitute for care, food, lodging,
training, education, supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation and treatment they need but, for any
reason, cannot be furnished in the person’s own home. Residential facilities include, but are not
limited to, state institutions under the control of the commissioner of human services, foster
homes, residential treatment centers, maternity shelters, group homes, residential programs,
supportive living residences for functionally impaired adults, or schools for handicapped
children.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 12 Definitions
Restaurant. A place, structure or enclosure where meals are prepared for service on the premise
or elsewhere.
Retail Goods Establishment. A commercial enterprise that provides physical goods, products or
merchandise directly to the consumer, where such goods are typically available for immediate
purchase and removal from the premises by the purchaser.
Roadside Stand. A temporary structure used for the display or sale of farm products produced
on the premises upon which such roadside stand is located.
School. A public, private or parochial education facility offering instruction at the elementary,
junior and/or senior high school levels.
Service Station. Any building or premises used for the dispensing or sale of motor vehicle fuel,
lubricating oil or grease, tires, batteries or minor motor vehicle accessories. Services offered may
include the installation of tires, batteries and minor accessories, minor motor vehicle repairs, and
greasing or washing of individual motor vehicles. When sales, services and repairs as detailed
here are offered as incidental to the conduct of a service station, the premises is classified as a
service station. Motor vehicle service stations do not include the sale or storage of junk motor
vehicles or motor vehicle wrecking.
Shopping Center. A group of commercial establishments planned, developed, owned and
managed as a unit related in location, size and type of shops that the unit serves.
Sign Sales and Service. An establishment where the primary use is the retail sale and service of
signs, banners, or similar items.
Sorority House. A building occupied, or to be occupied, by an organized group of female
students and providing for a succession of memberships therein, where lodging or board or
both, are provided only for its members, when approved and recognized as such by the
administrative authorities.
Stable. An area on which the primary use is for the raising, boarding, training and/or grooming of
horses.
Stone, Marble & Granite Grinding, Dressing & Cutting. Manufacturing establishment primarily
engaged in cutting, shaping, and finishing marble, granite, slate and other stone for building
and miscellaneous uses. Also includes establishments primarily engaged in buying or selling
partly finished monuments and tombstones.
Stormwater Runoff. Rainwater runoff, snow melt, and subsurface runoff and drainage.
Structural Stormwater BMPs. Stationary and permanent BMPs designed, constructed and
operated to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants in stormwater.
Tavern. An establishment where the principal business is the on-sale of alcoholic and nonalcoholic
beverages. Accessory uses to a bar can include food service, dancing and
amusement devices, subject to all other provisions of City regulations.
Taxidermy. The business of preparing, stuffing and mounting the skins of animals.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 13 Definitions
Temporary Shelter Facility (TSF). Any facility, public or private, which, for gain or otherwise,
commonly known to regularly provide one (1) or more persons with a temporary abiding place
for an individual(s) for a maximum of forty-five (45) consecutive days, who are lodged with or
without meals, with or without compensation to the facility, in which no provisions are made for
cooking in any individual sleeping area(s), in contradistinction to a hotel/motel or lodging house.
Tennis Club. A commercial or noncommercial establishment that provides facilities for playing
tennis on a membership basis.
Theater. A structure used for dramatic, operatic, motion pictures or other performance, which
charges an admission fee for entry.
Tree Farm. A parcel of land used to raise or harvest trees for wood products, such as lumber,
posts and poles, fuel wood and Christmas tress, where forest products are sold on-site or
transported to market. Accessory sales of products that have been produced or grown by the
owner of the land on which the use is located, are included as part of tree farms.
Truck Terminal. A building or area in which freight brought by truck is assembled and/or stored
for routing in intrastate shipment by truck.
University. An educational institution, other than a trade school, that provides full-time or parttime
education beyond high school.
Utilities. Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board fully authorized to furnish,
and furnishing under municipal regulation, to the public, electricity, gas, steam, communication
services, transportation or water. For the purpose of this Code, commercial wireless
telecommunication service facilities are not considered a public utility use.
Veterinary Office (Large Animal). An establishment for the care and treatment of the diseases
and injuries of animals and where animals may be boarded during their convalescence. Large
animals are considered those larger than the largest breed of dogs. This term includes horses,
cows, and other mammals customarily kept in corrals or stables.
Veterinary Office/Animal Hospital (Small Animal). An establishment for the care and treatment
of the diseases and injuries of animals and where animals may be boarded during their
convalescence. A veterinary office/animal hospital for small animals may not contain an
outdoor run. Small animals are considered those no larger than the largest breed of dogs. This
term includes fish, birds and mammals customarily kept in kennels.
Warehousing. The storage, wholesale and distribution of manufactured products, supplies and
equipment.
Wholesale. An establishment primarily engaged in selling and/or distributing merchandise to
retailers, to industrial, commercial, institutional or professional business users or other wholesalers,
or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such
individuals or companies. This is not considered a commercial use.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 14 Definitions
21.5 GENERAL TERMS DEFINITIONS
Accessory Structure. A structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and
subordinate to, the principal structure. See Figure 21-2: Accessory Structure.
FIGURE 21-2: ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
Accessory Use. A use on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and
subordinate to, the principal use.
Alley. A public right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear
of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other street.
Alteration. Any construction, addition, demolition, relocation or material change affecting the
exterior of a Heritage Preservation Property that requires a building permit.
Antenna. Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or transmitting
electromagnetic waves including, but not limited to, directional antennas, such as panels,
microwave dishes, satellite dishes and omni-directional antennas, such as whip antennas.
Awning. A roof-like cover, made of canvas or other material, designed and intended for
protection from the weather and/or as a decorative embellishment, and which projects from a
wall or roof of a structure, typically over a window or door. See Figure 21-3: Awning.
FIGURE 21-3: AWNING
Balcony. An accessory use structure consisting of a railed deck or open porch that is at least
eight (8) feet above the average grade of the ground surface below the structure.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 15 Definitions
Basement. A story having part, but no more than fifty percent (50%), of its height below the
average level of the adjoining finished grade. See Figure 21-4: Basement.
FIGURE 21-4: BASEMENT
Basement (floodplain). Means an area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or
base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the depth of excavation
below ground level.
Bay Window. A window projection protruding from an exterior wall of a building, located at least
two (2) feet above ground. See Figure 21-5: Bay Window.
FIGURE 21-5: BAY WINDOW
Billboard. See “off-premise sign.”
Biodiversity. The variety of life forms that inhabit the earth. Biodiversity includes the number of
different species of living things found in an area and the number of different ecosystems found
in an area.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 16 Definitions
Block. A tract of land bounded by streets, or a combination of streets and public parks,
cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines, waterways or boundary lines of the corporate limits
of the City.
Blockface. That portion of a block or tract of land facing the same side of a single street and
lying between the closest intersecting streets. See Figure 21-6: Blockface.
FIGURE 21-6: BLOCKFACE
Bluff. A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff or embankment having the following
characteristics:
1. Part, or all, of the feature is located in a shoreland area.
2. The slope rises at least twenty-five (25) feet above the ordinary high water level of the
waterbody.
3. The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point twenty-five (25) feet or
more above the ordinary high water level averages thirty percent (30%) or greater.
4. The slope must drain toward the waterbody.
An area with an average slope of less than eighteen percent (18%) over a distance of fifty (50)
feet or more is not considered part of the bluff.
Bluff Impact Zone. A bluff and the land located within twenty (20) feet from the top of a bluff.
Bluffline. A line along the top of a slope connecting the points at which the slope becomes less
than thirteen percent (13%). This applies to those slopes within the Scenic Rivers Overlay District
that are beyond the setback provision from the ordinary high-watermark.
Boathouse. A structure used solely for the storage of boats or boating equipment and does not
contain a sanitary facility.
Breezeway. A roof covered walkway or structure providing a physical connection between
structure(s).
Buffer. Buffers are areas of secondary protection, established on a case-by-case basis, for each
Environmentally Sensitive Area. The width of a buffer is anticipated to vary around the perimeter
of each ESA.
Buildable Area. The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum setback requirements of
this Code have been met.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 17 Definitions
Building. A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls. When separated by division
walls without openings, each portion of such building is deemed a separate building.
Building, Detached. A building surrounded by open space, with the open space located on the
same zoning lot as the building.
Building, Height of. The vertical distance measured from the curb level to:
1. The highest point of the roof surface in a flat roof
2. The deck line of mansard roofs
3. The mean height level between eaves and ridge of gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
For buildings set back from the street line, the height of the building is measured from the
average elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building, provided its setback
from the street line is not less than the height of such finished grade above the established curb
level. See Figure 21-7: Building Height and Figure 21-8: Height Measured from Grade.
FIGURE 21-7: BUILDING HEIGHT
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 18 Definitions
FIGURE 21-8: HEIGHT MEASURED FROM GRADE
Building Line. The inner edge of any required setback, and the corresponding outer edge of the
buildable area. Except as specifically provided by this Code, no portion of any building or
structure may be extended to occupy any portion of a lot outside its building lines.
Building, Unit Group. Two (2) or more buildings, other than dwellings, grouped upon a lot and
held under single ownership, such as universities, hospitals, institutions and industrial plants.
Bulk. The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of structures and their location.
Bulk Materials. Uncontained solid matter, such as powder, grain, stone, sand, sulphur, etc., which
has a tendency to become airborne.
Bus. Every motor vehicle designed to carry more than fifteen (15) passengers, including the
driver, and used for transporting persons.
Caliper. The American Association of Nurserymen standard for trunk measurement of nursery
stock, as measured at six (6) inches above the ground for trees up to and including four (4) inch
caliper size, and as measured at twelve (12) inches above the ground for larger sizes.
Camping Area. An area accessible by vehicle and containing campsites or camping spurs for
tents and trailer camping.
Canopy. A roof-like cover, made of canvas or other material, with supports extending to the
ground from underneath the hood, and placed so as to extend outward from the building
providing a protective shield for building entrances. See Figure 21-9: Canopy.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 19 Definitions
FIGURE 21-9: CANOPY
Cargo (Step) Van. A vehicle of box-like design with no barrier or separation between the
operator’s area and the remainder of the cargo-carrying area used for transporting supplies
rather than passengers, and with a manufacturer’s nominal rated carrying capacity of threefourths
(3/4) ton or less.
Cellar. A story having more than fifty percent (50%) of its height below the curb level or below
the highest level of the adjoining ground. See Figure 21-10: Cellar.
FIGURE 21-10: CELLAR
Central Business District. For the purpose of this Code, the Central Business District is located
within the defined boundaries:
Beginning at the intersection of the center of the Mississippi River and the center of the rightof-
way line of the DeSoto Bridge; thence northerly along the centerline of the Mississippi River
to the center of the right-of-way line of the Veterans Memorial Bridge; thence westerly along
the center of the right-of-way line of the Veterans Memorial Bridge and continuing west
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 20 Definitions
along the center of the right-of-way line of First Street North to the center of the right-of-way
line of Sixth Avenue North; thence northerly along the center of the right-of-way line of Sixth
Avenue North to the center of the right-of-way line of the Burlington Northern Railroad;
thence northwesterly along the center of the right-of-way line to the center of the right-ofway
line of Second Street North; thence westerly along the center of the right-of-way line of
Second Street North to the center of the right-of-way line of 11th Avenue North; thence
south along the center of the right-of-way line of 11th Avenue North and continuing south
along the center of the right-of-way line of 11th Avenue South to the center of the right-ofway
line of Second Street South and continuing south to the center of the right-of-way line of
T.H. 52 and 23; thence easterly along the center of the right-of-way line of T.H. 52 and 23 to
the point of beginning.
Certificate of Appropriateness. A certificate issued by the Zoning Administrator evidencing the
review and authorization by the Heritage Preservation Commission of plans for alteration of a
Heritage Preservation Property or nominated property under interim protection.
City. The City of St. Cloud, Minnesota.
Clear Cutting. The removal of an entire stand of trees and/or vegetation.
Cluster Development. A development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific
areas on a site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space and
preservation of Environmentally Sensitive Areas.
Commercial Message. A message that contains advertising for any business, retail goods,
service or product.
Commercial Use. The principal use of land or structures for the sale, lease, rental or trade of
products, goods and/or services.
Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Services. Licensed commercial wireless
telecommunication services, including cellular, personal communication services (PCS),
specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR) paging, and
similar services.
Complex. Two (2) or more Environmentally Sensitive Areas adjacent to each other.
Concept Plan. As part of the Environmentally Sensitive Area Site Plan Review, a non-engineered
plan for a property proposed for development. The Concept Plan must include enough detail to
analyze the proposed development and its relation to the environmentally sensitive areas
located on the property.
Conditional Use. A specific type of use that may be allowed only after a review procedure and
with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in this Code.
Corridors. Corridors are strips or blocks of land that form connections between two (2) separated
areas of similar natural habitat. These corridors allow plants and animals to disperse and travel
from one "island" of suitable habitat to another.
Curb Level. The level of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center of
such front. Where a building faces on more than one (1) street, the curb level is the average of
the levels of the curbs at the center of the front of each street. Where no curb elevation has
been established, the City Engineer will establish such curb levels.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 21 Definitions
Day. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, when used in this Code, “day” means one (1)
calendar day.
Deck. A horizontal, unenclosed platform, with or without attached railings, seats, trellises or other
features, attached or functionally related to a principal structure and, at any point, raised more
than seven (7) inches above the ground. A deck is not roofed.
Design Review Guidelines. Specific design criteria adopted by the Heritage Preservation
Commission for Historic Districts to be used in reviewing applications for Certificates of
Appropriateness.
Dog House. An accessory building, or portion of a building, whose principal purpose is for the
housing of a dog or dogs.
Dry Well. A hole made in porous ground and filled with gravel or rubble to receive water, such as
drainage from a roof, and allow it to percolate away.
Dwelling. A structure, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy,
including single-family, two-family, townhouse and multi-family dwellings, but not including
hotels/motels, dormitories or lodging houses.
Dwelling, Detached. A dwelling entirely surrounded by open space with the open space
located on the same zoning lot as the dwelling.
Dwelling Site. A designated location for residential use by one (1) or more persons using
temporary or movable shelter, including camping and recreational vehicle sites, excluding
manufactured homes.
Dwelling Unit. One (1) or more rooms in a dwelling designed for occupancy by one (1) family for
living purposes, and having its own permanently installed kitchen and bathroom facilities.
Easement. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land for public purposes of
constructing and maintaining utilities and transportation ways including, but not limited to,
electric lines, telephone lines, storm sewer or storm drainage ways and gas lines.
Enlargement. To increase physical land or structural floor area or volume than currently exists.
Equal Degree of Encroachment. A method of determining the location of floodway boundaries
so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are capable of conveying a proportionate
share of flood flows.
Exception. Modification to existing bulk and use standards within a zoning district granted as part
of a development approval process, such as the ESA Site Plan Review Process.
Expansion. An increase in the physical land or structural area of use, the addition of equipment
or machinery of a structural nature, and/or the adding of a substantially new or different
product, service or activity to an existing use.
Exotic Species. A species that is foreign or introduced into an area due to European settlement.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 22 Definitions
Extension. An action to prolong a use or cause the continued existence of a use that would not
otherwise have been reasonably able to continue.
Family. Persons living together on the premises in a single dwelling unit under one (1) of the
following conditions:
1. Four (4) or fewer unrelated persons.
2. Any number of persons related by blood or marriage.
3. Any number of persons related by blood or marriage and two (2) unrelated persons.
Farm Crop. An area of more than one (1) acre which is used for the growing of usual farm crops
such as vegetables, fruit trees and grains, and for the packing or storage of the products
produced on the premises. Farm crop does not include the raising of farm animals or laboratory
animals such as mice, rats, rabbits, etc.
Flood. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage of a wetland or lake
that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
Flood Frequency. The frequency for which it is expected that a specific flood state or discharge
may be equaled or exceeded.
Flood Fringe. That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway. Flood fringe is synonymous
with the term “floodway fringe” used in the Flood Insurance Studies.
Floodplain. The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or watercourse that have
been or may be covered by the regional flood.
Flood-Proofing. A combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and
structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages.
Floodway. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining floodplain that are reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood
discharge.
Floor Area, Gross (GFA). The gross floor area of a building is the sum of the gross horizontal areas
of the floors of the building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls.
Floor Area (Livable). Livable floor area excludes all areas occupied by garages, porches, attics,
stairways and storage, and utility and heating rooms.
Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The floor area ratio of the building or buildings on any zoning lot is the
floor area of the building or buildings on that zoning lot divided by the area of such zoning lot or,
in the case of planned unit developments, by the net side area. The floor area ratio
requirements determine the maximum floor area of both principal and accessory buildings in
direct ratio to the gross area of the zoning lot. In all residential districts, the floor area in principal
buildings used for parking are exempt from the floor area ratio (FAR) limitations.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 23 Definitions
Foot Candle. A unit of illumination intensity.
Forest Land Conversion. The clear cutting of forested lands to prepare for a new land use other
than reestablishment of a subsequent forest stand.
Forestry. The use and management, including logging, of a forest, woodland or plantation, and
related research and educational activities, including the construction, alteration or
maintenance of woodroads, skidways, landings and fences.
Frequency. The number of oscillations per second in a sound wave and an index of the pitch of
the resulting sound.
Frontage. All the property fronting on one (1) side of a street between the nearest intersecting
streets, or between a street and a right-of-way, waterway or other similar barrier.
Garage, Private. An accessory building designed or used for the storage of motor vehicles
owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory.
Garage, Public. Any premises used for the storage or care of motor vehicles, or premises where
any such vehicles are equipped for operation, are repaired, or are kept for remuneration, for
hire or for sale.
Garage, Truck. A building which is used or intended to be used for the storage of motor trucks,
truck trailers, tractors and commercial vehicles exceeding one and one-half (1.5) ton capacity.
Grade, Street. The elevation of the established street in front of the building measured at the
center of such front. Where no street grade has been established, the City Engineer will establish
such street grade or its equivalent for the purpose of this Code.
Heavy Commercial. Commercial establishments which sell, rent and/or lease durable goods
including, but not limited to, furniture, home furnishings and equipment stores, motorized and
non-motorized vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles, and mobile home establishments. These
goods are generally more expensive and purchased, rented or leased infrequently.
Heritage Preservation Property. Any area, place, building, structure, land, site or other objects
located within a historic district.
High Rise Building. Any structure designed for a specific use that exceeds four (4) floors of
elevation.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 24 Definitions
Highway, Interstate, Federal Aid Primary, National Highway System (NHS). Interstate, federal aid
primary or the National Highway System (NHS) highways are defined as roads that receive
federal aid or are considered part of the NHS.
Historic District. A single parcel or combination of parcels and right-of-way within a defined area
designated as an historic district by the City Council because of the historical, cultural,
architectural, or archaeological significance of the area.
Historic Preservation. The study, identification, protection, restoration and rehabilitation of
buildings, structures, objects, districts, areas and sites significant in the history, architecture,
archaeology or culture of the City.
Home Occupation. Any occupation or profession carried on by a member of a family, residing
on the premises, conducted entirely within the dwelling.
Impact Zones. Zones assigned around the perimeter of Environmentally Sensitive Areas.
Impervious. A surface consisting of material, such as asphalt, concrete, roofing material, plastic
and similar materials, which does not absorb water.
Improvement Design Criteria. Standards that set forth specific improvement requirements.
Industrial Use. The use of land or buildings for the production, manufacture, warehousing,
storage or transfer of goods, products, commodities or other wholesale items.
Intensification. An increase in measure of or degree in the extent, quantity or volume of use.
Intensity of Use. The number of square feet of development devoted to a land use.
Intensive Vegetation Clearing. The complete removal of trees or shrubs in a contiguous patch,
strip, row or block.
Kennel – Accessory Use. The boarding of one (1) or more dogs within a pen or other enclosure
on the property for the personal enjoyment of the occupants of the property, and for which
commercial gain is not the primary objective.
Landscaping. A groundcover that contains one (1) or more of the following materials: grass,
decorative rock, wood chips, shrubs, flower and vegetable gardens and trees, and to exclude
patio(s), sidewalk(s), and open deck(s) materials as qualifying as a landscaping material.
Light Commercial. Commercial establishments which sell, rent and/or lease convenience goods
such as, but not limited to, apparel, grocery, food and meats, books, shoes and liquor. These
goods are generally inexpensive and purchased, rented or leased frequently.
Loading Space. That portion of a lot or plot designed to serve the purpose of loading and/or
unloading all types of vehicles.
Lot. A parcel of land designated by plat, metes and bounds, registered land survey, auditors plot
or other accepted means, and separated from other parcels or portions by said description for
the purpose of sale, lease or separation.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 25 Definitions
Lot of Record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the
Office of the Register of Deeds, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the deed to which has
been recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds at the time this Code is passed.
Lot, Corner. A lot located at the intersection of two (2) streets or a lot bounded on two (2) sides
by a curving street two (2) chords of which form an angle of one-hundred twenty degrees (120?)
or less measured on the lot side. See Figure 21-11: Corner and Interior Lots.
FIGURE 21-11: CORNER AND INTERIOR LOTS
Lot Coverage. The area of a zoning lot occupied by principal and accessory structures. See
Figure 21-12: Lot Coverage.
FIGURE 21-12: LOT COVERAGE
Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. See Figure 21-13:
Lot Depth and Width.
FIGURE 21-13: LOT DEPTH AND WIDTH
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 26 Definitions
Lot, Double Frontage. See “through lot.”
Lot, Interior. A lot other than a corner or through lot. See Figure 21-11.
Lot Line, Front. The boundary of a lot abutting a street. On a corner lot, the shortest street lot line
is the front lot line, except in the R-3 zone or for a lot adjacent to an R-3 zone, when the lot is
adjacent to an alley, the front property line is the property line opposite the alley.
Lot Line, Rear. The rear lot line is the lot line or lot lines most nearly parallel to and most remote
from the front lot line. Lot lines other than front or rear lot lines are side lot lines.
Lot, Through. A lot having frontage on two (2) non-intersecting streets as distinguished from a
corner lot. Also called a “double-frontage lot.” See Figure 21-14: Through Lot.
FIGURE 21-14: THROUGH LOT
Lot Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot line measured at right angles to the lot
depth at the established front building line. See Figure 21-13.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 27 Definitions
Lot, Zoning. A plot of ground, made up of one (1) or more parcels of land, which is or may be
occupied by a use, structure or structures, including the open spaces required by this Code.
Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an
area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor.
Major Alteration. Work on the exterior of a Heritage Preservation Property that modifies its design,
massing, materials, or quality of workmanship.
Manufactured Home. A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which in the
traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length
or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on
a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning and electrical systems contained therein.
Manufactured Home (floodplain). A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a permanent foundation
when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include the
term “recreational vehicle.”
Marquee. A permanent, roofed structure attached to and supported by the building, typically
projecting over public property.
Membrane. A non-rigid exterior building covering made of fabric or synthetic materials, typically
supported by poles or air.
Minor Alteration. Work on the exterior of a Heritage Preservation Property that does not modify its
design, massing, materials or quality of workmanship. Minor work includes: repair or re-roofing in
kind; repairs or replacement in kind for existing windows, doors, siding or trim; repairs or
replacement in kind for porches; and other work of a similar nature or which is specifically
provided for in the applicable design review guidelines.
Motor Home. A unit designed to provide temporary living quarters, built into as an integral part
of, or permanently attached to, a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis or van. A motor home
must contain permanently installed independent life support systems which meet the American
National Standards Institute standard number A119.2 for recreational vehicles and provide at
least four (4) of the following facilities, two (2) of which must be from the following systems: 1)
cooking facility with liquid propane gas supply; 2) refrigerator; 3) self-contained toilet or a toilet
connected to a plumbing system with connection for external water disposal; 4) heating or air
conditioning separate from the vehicle engine; 5) a potable water supply system including a sink
with faucet either self-contained or with connection for an external source; and 6) separate 110-
125 volt electrical power supply. For purposes of this Code, permanently installed means built
into or attached as an integral part of a chassis or van, and designed not to be removed except
for repair or replacement. A system that is readily removable or held in place by clamps or tie
downs if not permanently installed.
Motor Vehicle. Any motor operated conveyance allowed to operate on the streets including,
but not limited to, automobiles, pickups, vans, trucks, semi-tractors, motorcycles and
recreational campers.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 28 Definitions
Municipal Water and Sewer Systems. Utility systems serving a group of buildings, lots or an area of
the City, with the design and construction of such utility systems as approved by the City
Engineering Department and Public Utilities Commission.
Native Species. A species that existed in an area prior to European settlement.
Natural Community. A group of native plants and animals that interact with each other and their
abiotic environment in ways not greatly altered by modern human activity or by introduced
organisms. A natural community is classified and described by considering vegetation,
hydrology, landforms, soils and natural disturbance regimes, such as wildfires, windstorms, normal
flood cycles and normal infestation by native insects and microorganisms.
Natural Heritage Area. Natural Heritage Areas, as designated in this Code, are those
Environmentally Sensitive Areas that have been identified by the Department of Natural
Resources’ Natural Heritage and Nongame Research Program and Minnesota County Biological
Survey as having not only local, but state-wide significance. These areas are largely unaltered by
modern human activity and have native vegetation distributed in naturally-occurring patterns.
Natural Heritage Areas are the few remaining examples of native vegetative communities
present prior to European settlement. As such, they are of unusually high quality, may contain
rare or endangered species, and represent remnants of St. Cloud's history and heritage.
Noncommercial Message. A message that does not direct attention to a business or to a service
or commodity for sale, and is typically of a political, religious, or ideological nature.
Nonconformity. Any legal use, structure or parcel of land already in existence, recorded or
authorized before the adoption of official regulations that do not permit such use, structure or
parcel of land.
Obstruction (Floodplain). Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill,
structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory
floodplain which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself
or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water.
Open Space Recreation Uses. Recreational uses particularly oriented to, and utilizing, the
outdoor character of an area including hiking and riding trails, primitive campsites,
campgrounds, waysides, parks, and recreational areas.
Ordinary High Water Level. The boundary of public waters and wetlands, and an elevation
delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to
leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation
changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the ordinary
high water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel. For reservoirs and
flowages, the ordinary high water level is the operating elevation of the normal summer pool.
Ordinary High Water Mark. A mark delineating the highest water level, which has been
maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape. The ordinary
high water mark is commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from
predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. In areas where the ordinary high water mark
is not evident, setbacks are measured from the stream bank of the following water bodies that
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 29 Definitions
have permanent flow or open water: the main channel, adjoining side channels, backwaters
and sloughs.
Overburden. The loose soil, silt, sand, gravel or other unconsolidated material overlying bedrock,
either transported or formed in place.
Owner. For purposes of this Code, the word “owner” is deemed to include any person having a
freehold interest or a contractual interest that may become a freehold interest.
Parapet Line. Refers to the line established by intersection between the roof and outer wall of a
building.
Parapet Wall. That portion of a wall which extends above the roof line. See Figure 21-15: Parapet
Wall.
FIGURE 21-15: PARAPET WALL
Parking Area. Land area used for parking motor vehicles and the areas of access to parking
spaces and public streets or alleys.
Parking Space. A land area of such shape and dimensions, and used for the parking of a motor
vehicle, and located as to be readily accessible to a public street or alley.
Passenger Automobile. A motor vehicle designed and used for the carrying of no more than
fifteen (15) persons including the driver. Passenger automobile does not include motorcycles,
motor scooters, buses, commercial vehicles, recreational vehicles, racing cars or stock cars.
Patio. An at-grade ground covering consisting of interlocking brick, tile, cement, asphalt or
similar material.
Pedestrian Way. A public or private right-of-way across a block or within a block to provide
access to be used by pedestrians, which may be used for the installation of utility lines.
Person. Any individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation or
company.
Plat. The drawing or map of a subdivision prepared for filing of record pursuant to MN Chapter
505 and containing all elements and requirements set forth in regulations adopted pursuant to
MN Statute Section 462.358 and Chapter 505.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 30 Definitions
Plat, Common Interest Community Plat (CIC). A Common Interest Community Plat described in
Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 515B (Minnesota Common Interest Ownership Act), which often
shares common areas.
Plat, Final. A drawing or map of a subdivision meeting all the requirements of the City, and in
such form as required by the County for purposes of recording.
Plat, Preliminary. The preliminary map, drawing or chart indicating the proposed layout of the
subdivision.
Plat, Sketch. A sketch preparatory to the preliminary plat, drawn to scale and indicating all
existing buildings and site improvements.
Planned Unit Development. An area with specified minimum contiguous acreage to be
developed as a single entity according to a plan and is distinguished from the traditional
subdivision process of development in that the zoning standards such as density, setback, and
minimum lot sizes may be altered by negotiation.
Pool, Temporary. A temporary pool is an above ground pool that is constructed with nonmetallic,
molded polymeric walls or inflatable fabric walls, which is not intended as a permanent
installation and installed/removed seasonally.
Porch, Enclosed. A structure, or portion thereof, consisting of a platform structure with a roof that
is enclosed, in whole or part, by a screening or a permeable material, such as mesh, lattice or
other similar open material, and containing no windows. If the porch is attached to the principal
structure and has a common door from the principal structure to the porch, the porch is
considered part of the principal structure. If the porch is detached from the principal structure or
does not have a common door from the principal structure to the porch, the porch is
considered an accessory building.
Porch, Unenclosed. A structure, or portion thereof, consisting of a platform structure with a roof,
with or without rails or walls, that extends a maximum of four (4) feet high, excluding roof
columns, from the platform, that contains no windows or screening materials. If the porch is
attached to the principal structure and has a common door to the porch, the porch is
considered part of the principal structure. If the porch is detached from the principal structure or
does not have a common door from the principal structure to the porch, the porch is
considered an accessory building.
Practical Difficulties. As used in connection with the granting of a variance, means that:
1. The property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner not permitted
by the zoning ordinance;
2. The plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the property not created
by the landowner; and,
3. The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality.
Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical difficulties if any reasonable use for
the property exists under the terms of this Code.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 31 Definitions
Predominant. In the context of building materials, a material is considered to be predominant
when it either comprises the majority of the façade or exerts the most marked influence over the
façade. This is distinguished from use of materials as an accent, which is an emphasized detail or
area; in particular, a small detail in contrast to its surroundings.
Primitive Campsites. An area that consists of individual remote campsites accessible only by foot
or water.
Principal Building. A non-accessory building in which is conducted a principal use of the zoning
lot on which it is located.
Principal Use. All uses that are not accessory uses.
Protective Covenants. Contracts made between private parties as to the manner in which land
may be used, with the view to protect and preserve the physical, social and economic integrity
of any given area.
Public Open Space. Any publicly-owned open area including, but not limited to, parks,
playgrounds, school sites, parkways and streets.
Public Waters. Any waters as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 105.37, Subdivisions 14 and
15.
Railroad Right-of-Way. A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for track operation, but
not including depots, loading platforms, station, train sheds, warehouses, car shops, car yards,
locomotive shops or water towers.
Rare Species Site. A documented historic location of a species that is listed on federal or state
lists for rare, threatened and endangered species.
Reach. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a stream or river
influence by a natural or man-made obstruction. In an urban area, the segment of a stream or
river between two (2) consecutive bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
Recreational Camping Area. Any area, whether privately- or publicly-owned, used on a daily,
nightly, weekly or longer basis for the accommodation of five (5) or more tents or recreational
camping vehicles free of charge or for compensation. Recreational camping area excludes
children’s camps, industrial camps, migrant labor camps, as defined in Minnesota Statutes and
State Commissioner of Health rules, United States Forest Service camps, state forest service
camps, state wildlife management areas or state-owned public access areas which are
restricted in use to picnicking and boat landing.
Recreational Camping Vehicle. Recreational camping vehicles include the following:
1. Any vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary
dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation uses.
2. Any structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling
for travel, recreation and vacation.
3. Any portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation and vacation,
constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 32 Definitions
4. Any folding structure, mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation and
vacation use.
Recreational Equipment. Items that are used off-road including, but not limited to, boats, canoes
and snowmobiles.
Recreational Vehicle. A recreational vehicle is any of the following:
1. Any self-propelled vehicle and any vehicle propelled, drawn, towed or carried by a selfpropelled
vehicle, which is designed to be used for temporary living quarters while
engaged in recreational or vacation activities.
2. A non-motorized trailer intended and generally used for transporting recreational
vehicles such as boats and snowmobiles.
3. A van or truck with a slide-in camper which is not used primarily for day to day
transportation needs.
4. Snowmobiles, all terrain vehicles, any type of water craft and similar vehicles. Such
vehicles which are placed on a trailer shall, together with the trailer, be considered a
recreational vehicle.
5. Hobby vehicles, defined as passenger automobiles with antique or collector license
plates, and specialized off-road vehicles which are not primarily used for day to day
transportation needs. Such vehicles which are placed on a utility trailer shall, together
with the trailer, be considered a single recreational vehicle.
6. A trailer designed for carrying property or material.
7. (floodplain) The vehicle or trailer is 400 sq. ft. or less in area when measured at the largest
horizontal projection.
8. (floodplain) Recreational vehicle is synonymous with the term travel trailer, travel vehicle,
and recreational camping vehicle.
Regional Flood. A flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred
generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur in an
average frequency in the magnitude of the one-hundred (100) year recurrence interval.
Regional flood is synonymous with the term “base flood” used in the Flood Insurance Study.
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. The regulatory flood protection elevation is an elevation
no lower than one (1) foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood
elevation caused by encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a
floodway.
Riparian Corridors. The complex assemblages of organisms and their environment existing
adjacent to and near flowing water. Such corridors have two (2) essential characteristics: 1)
laterally flowing water that rises and falls at least once within a growing season; and 2) a high
degree of connectedness with other ecosystems. As such, riparian corridors act as natural
buffers between the flowing water and adjacent land uses, i.e. agriculture, urban areas, etc.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 33 Definitions
Rock Outcrop. Bare exposure of bedrock without soil cover and regardless of plant association.
These outcrops may indicate presence of sensitive soils, sensitive hydrological features, sensitive
geological features, and/or unique biotic communities.
Roof. Refers to the building covering which has a direct connection to outer walls or supports of
a building.
Safety Fence (Pool). A pool safety fence is a barrier with non-climbable vertical supports and no
gaps in the fencing that exceed four (4) inches.
Scientist. A person with a professional degree or training in one or more of the following areas:
natural history, ecology, geology, hydrology, wildlife biology or botany.
Screened (Scenic Rivers Ordinance). When a structure is built or placed on a lot or vegetation is
planted such that when the structure is built it is visibly inconspicuous as viewed from the river
during the summer months. Visibly inconspicuous means difficult to see or not readily noticeable
in summer months as viewed from the river.
Selective Cutting. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure and the ordinary highwater
mark, bluffline or road.
Semi-Public Use. The use of land by a private, non-profit organization to provide a public service
that is ordinarily open to some persons outside the regular constituency of the organization.
Semi-Trailer. A vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in conjunction with a trucktractor
that a considerable part of its own weight, or that of its load, rests upon and is carried by
the truck-tractor, and includes a trailer drawn by a truck-tractor semi-trailer combination. Trailers
coupled with a truck-tractor, semi-trailer combination are semi-trailers.
Sensitive Geological Areas. Any geologic feature easily modified or destroyed by human
activity. Examples include glacially-polished bedrock, open fractures and residual clays.
Sensitive geological features are areas included within designated Natural Heritage and Natural
Resource Areas.
Sensitive Hydrological Areas. A surface or groundwater feature where minor human
disturbances will change water movement, water level or water quality. Sensitive hydrological
features are areas included within designated Natural Heritage and Natural Resource Areas.
Sensitive Resource Management. The preservation and management of areas unsuitable for
development in their natural state due to constraints such as shallow soils over groundwater or
bedrock, highly erosive or expansive soils, steep slopes, susceptibility to flooding, or occurrence
of flora or fauna in need of special protection.
Sensitive Soils. Soil where soil structure or function is easily lost with minor disturbance, such as thin
soils underlain by shallow bedrock or a high water table.
Setback. The minimum distance by which any building or structure must be separated from a
property line. See Figure 21-16: Setback.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 34 Definitions
FIGURE 21-16: SETBACK
Sewer System. Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations and force main, and all other
construction, devices, appliances or appurtenances used for conducting sewage or industrial
waste or other wastes to a point of ultimate disposal.
Sewage Treatment System. Any system for the collection, treatment and dispersion of sewage
including, but not limited to, septic tanks, soil absorption systems and drainfields.
Shore Impact Zone. Land located between the ordinary high water level of a public water and
a line parallel to it at a setback of fifty percent (50%) of the structure setback.
Shoreland. Land located within the following distances from public waters: one-thousand (1,000)
feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond or flowage, and three-hundred (300) feet
from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a floodplain designated by ordinance on a river
or stream, whichever is greater. The limits of shorelands may be reduced whenever the waters
involved are bounded by topographic divides which extend landward from the waters for lesser
distances and when approved by the commissioner.
Sign. A name identification, description, display, illustration, or device which is affixed to or
represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or land in view of the general public
and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution, or business.
Sign, A-Frame. A temporary advertising device ordinarily in the shape of an “A,” or some
variation thereof, located on the ground, not permanently attached and easily movable, and
usually two-sided. Also called a “sandwich board.” See Figure 21-17: A-Frame Sign.
FIGURE 21-17: A-FRAME SIGN
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 35 Definitions
Sign, Balloon. Any sign that is any lighter-than-air or gas-filled balloon attached by means of a
rope or tether to a definite or fixed location. Displays designed to inflate or move by use of a fan
or blower is also considered a balloon sign. Balloons used as temporary attention-getting
devices in conjunction with another sign which are no more than eighteen (18) inches in
diameter, are not considered balloon signs.
Sign, Banner. Any sign printed or displayed upon cloth or other flexible material with or without
frames.
Sign, Cabinet (Contoured). An illuminated sign that contains all text and/or logo symbols within
an enclosed cabinet that is contoured to the shape of the sign’s letters and/or logo, as
distinguished from a cabinet box sign. See Figure 21-18: Cabinet Sign.
FIGURE 21-18: CABINET SIGN
Sign, Cabinet Box. An illuminated sign that contains all text and/or logo symbols within a single
enclosed box cabinet, as distinguished from a cabinet sign. See Figure 21-19: Cabinet Box Sign.
FIGURE 21-19: CABINET BOX SIGN
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 36 Definitions
Sign, Directional. A sign that identifies parking lot entrances and exits, restrooms, public
telephone, walkways and features of a similar nature.
Sign, Electronic. Signs whose alphabetic, pictographic or symbolic informational content can be
changed or altered on a fixed display screen composed of electrically illuminated segments. For
the purposes of this Code, electronic signs within ground or wall signs are regulated as one (1) of
the two (2) following types:
1. Electronic Display Screen. A sign, or portion of a sign, that displays an electronic image
or video, which may or may not include text. This definition includes television screens,
plasma screens, digital screens, flat screens, LED screens, video boards and holographic
displays. See Figure 21-20: Electronic Display Screen.
FIGURE 21-20: ELECTRONIC DISPLAY SCREEN
2. Electronic Message Sign. Any sign, or portion of a sign, that uses changing lights to form a
sign message or messages in text form wherein the sequence of messages and the rate
of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes.
Time and temperature signs are considered electronic message signs. See Figure 21-21:
Electronic Message Sign.
FIGURE 21-21: ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 37 Definitions
Sign, Flashing. A sign with blinking or flashing lights, or other illuminating devices that change
light intensity, brightness or color, traveling/chasing or blinking lights, or rotating beacons are
prohibited. Electronic signs, as permitted by Article 18, are not considered flashing signs;
however, the messages or images on an electronic sign may not imitate flashing signs.
Sign, Ground. A sign that is attached to a completely self-supporting structure. A ground sign
may be a pole or monument sign. See “Sign, Ground – Monument” and “Sign, Ground – Pole.”
1. Sign, Ground – Monument. Any sign, other than a pole sign, placed upon or supported
by the ground independently of any other structure. Ground monument signs are
typically mounted on a masonry base. As distinguished from a ground pole sign, the sign
base of any monument sign must be a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) or more of
the width of the sign face that is to be situated upon the base. A sign base less than
seventy-five percent (75%) of the width of the sign face is considered a ground pole sign.
See Figure 21-22: Ground Monument Sign.
2. Sign, Ground – Pole. A sign erected and maintained on one (1) or more freestanding
mast(s) or pole(s) and not attached to any building, but not including a ground
monument sign. See Figure 21-23: Ground Pole Sign.
FIGURE 21-22: GROUND MONUMENT SIGN
FIGURE 21-23: GROUND POLE SIGN
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 38 Definitions
Sign, Nonconforming. A sign lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption of this Code
that does not conform to the requirements of this Code.
Sign, Obscene. A sign which is found to meet the three (3) established criteria of obscenity: 1)
prurient in nature; 2) completely devoid of scientific, political, educational or social value; and 3)
a violation of local community standards.
Sign, Obsolete or Abandoned. A sign that advertises a business, product, service or activity that
is no longer located on the premises where the sign is displayed.
Sign, Off-Premise. A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or
entertainment conducted, sold or offered at any location other than upon the premises where
such sign is located or to which it is affixed. Also called a billboard.
Sign, Pennant. Any geometric shaped cloth, fabric or other lightweight material normally
fastened to a stringer, which is secured or tethered so as to allow movement of the sign.
Sign, Permanent. A sign attached to a structure or the ground which is made of materials
intended for long-term use.
Sign Permit. A permit for erection, alteration or relocation of a sign.
Sign, Portable. A sign whose principal supporting structure is intended, by design and
construction, to be used by resting upon the ground for support and may be easily moved or
relocated for reuse. Portable signs include, but are not limited to, signs mounted upon a trailer,
wheeled carrier, or other non-motorized mobile structure with or without wheels.
Sign, Projecting. Any sign that is attached to a building or other structure, and extends beyond
the surface of the building or structure to which it is attached by more than twelve (12) inches. A
projecting sign does not include a wall sign. See Figure 21-24: Projecting Sign.
FIGURE 21-24: PROJECTING SIGN
Sign, Roof. Any sign wholly erected, constructed or maintained upon or above the roof or
parapet parapet of any building, with the principal support attached to the roof structure.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 39 Definitions
Sign Support Structure. Any structure that supports, or is capable of supporting, a sign, including
decorative cover.
Sign, Temporary. A sign not intended or designed for permanent display.
Sign, Unsafe. A sign or other advertising structure that constitutes a hazard to public safety or
health by reason of inadequate design, construction, repair or maintenance.
Sign, Wall. A sign mounted on the wall of a building or structure, with the exposed face of the
sign in a plane parallel to the face of the wall. Wall signs do not include projecting signs. See
Figure 21-25: Wall Sign.
FIGURE 21-25: WALL SIGN
Sign, Window (Permanent). A sign printed on the interior of a window or door of a building
intended for viewing from the exterior of such a building. See Figure 21-26: Permanent Window
Sign.
FIGURE 21-26: PERMANENT WINDOW SIGN
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 40 Definitions
Sign, Window (Temporary). A sign attached to or placed upon the interior of a window or door
of a building intended for viewing from the exterior of such a building. See Figure 21-27:
Temporary Window Sign.
FIGURE 21-27: TEMPORARY WINDOW SIGN
Sign with Moving Parts. A sign or other advertising structure with moving, revolving or rotating
parts or visible mechanical movement of any kind, including wind-activated signs. Clocks and
signs which change messages by way of louvers are not considered signs with moving parts.
Significant Historic Site. Any archaeological site, standing structure or other property that meets
the criteria for eligibility to the National Register of Historic Places, is listed in the State Register of
Historic Sites, or is listed in the City of St. Cloud Register of Historic sites, or is determined to be an
unplatted cemetery that falls under the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Section 307.08. A
historic site meets these criteria if it is presently listed on the above registers or if it is determined
to meet the qualifications for listing after review by the Minnesota state archaeologist or the
director of the Minnesota Historical Society. All unplatted cemeteries are automatically
considered to be significant historic sites.
Sleeping Room. A room in a structure rented for sleeping with access to a bathroom, with or
without access to a kitchen in contradistinction to dwelling units and motels, hotels open to
transients.
Spa. An artificial container designed with a mechanical air injection system and/or re-circulating
device where jets of forced air produce currents and bubbles within hot water. Also known as a
“hot tub.”
Steep Slope. Land where agricultural activity or development is either not recommended or
described as poorly suited due to slope steepness and the site's soil characteristics, as mapped
and described in available county soil surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate
design and construction techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the
provisions of this Code. Where specific information is not available, steep slopes are lands having
average slopes over twelve percent (12%), as measured over horizontal distances of fifty (50)
feet or more, that are not bluffs.
Stoop. A landing pad providing ingress and egress from an above grade door in the principal
building. A stoop may be roofed, but cannot be enclosed. See Figure 21-28: Stoop.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 41 Definitions
FIGURE 21-28: STOOP
Stormwater Runoff. Surplus surface water generated by rainfall that does not seep into the earth
but flows overland to flowing or stagnant bodies of water.
Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of
the floor next above it, or, if no such floor above, the space between such floor and the ceiling
next above it.
Story, Half. A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection roof decking and wall
face not more than three (3) feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than
two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area is finished off for use. A half-story containing an independent
apartment or living quarters is counted as a full story.
Streaming Video (Signs). Streaming video is a digital version of video, which may include audio,
that is sent (streamed) to a sign in compressed form in real time for viewing on an electronic
display screen. The media is sent in a continuous stream and is played as it arrives. In relation to
sign standards, streaming video is distinct from animation in that streaming video requires
constant movement of images.
Street. A public right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians and vehicles to abutting
properties, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road,
avenue, boulevard, land, place or however otherwise designated.
Street, Cul-De-Sac. A minor street with only one (1) outlet and having an appropriate terminal for
the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
Street, Frontage Roads. Minor streets which are parallel and adjacent to arterial streets and
highways, and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
Street, Grade. On street centerline means the distance vertically (up or down) from the
horizontal in feet, and tenths (0.10) of a foot for each one-hundred (100) feet of horizontal
distance.
Street, Local. This street serves to provide direct access to abutting properties from the higher
order systems.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 42 Definitions
Strip Commercial Development. A pattern of commercial development comprised of two (2) or
more separate businesses, generally one (1) lot in depth with commercial activity arranged in a
line, usually along an arterial street.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground or on-site
utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins,
manufactured homes and other similar items.
Structural Alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing
walls, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial changes in the roof and exterior walls. The
application of any exterior siding to an existing building for the purpose of beautifying and
modernizing is not considered a structural alteration.
Subdivision. Any land, vacant or improved, which is divided or proposed to be divided into two
(2) or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots, tracts, or interests for the purpose of offer, sale, lease, or
development whether immediate or future, either on the installment plan or upon any and all
other plans, terms, and conditions. Subdivision includes the division or development of residential
and non-residential zoned land, whether by deed, metes and bounds description, devise,
intestacy, lease, map, plat, or other recorded instruments. Subdivision includes resubdivision.
Substandard Use. Any use within the zoning district existing prior to the date of enactment of this
Code which is permitted within the applicable land use district but does not meet the minimum
lot area, length of water frontage, structure setbacks or other dimensional standards of the
Code.
Substantial Damage (floodplain). Means damage of any origin sustained by a structure where
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50
percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement (floodplain). Within any consecutive 365-day period, any
reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), repair after damage,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of
the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This
term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local,
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local
code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions.
2. Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.” For the purpose of this Code,
“historic structure shall be as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 59.1.
Surface Water-Oriented Commercial Use. The use of land for commercial purposes, where
access to and use of a surface water feature is an integral part of the normal conductance of
business. Marinas, resorts and restaurants with transient docking facilities are examples of such
use.
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 43 Definitions
Toe of the Bluff. The lower point of a fifty (50) foot segment with an average slope exceeding
eighteen percent (18%).
Tower. Any ground- or roof-mounted pole, spire or structure, or combination thereof, taller than
fifteen (15) feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces and masts, intended primarily
for the purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device or similar apparatus above
grade.
Tower, Camouflage. A tower or structure which is concealed or disguised to be compatible with
existing or proposed uses on site (i.e., antenna incorporated into site lighting at a park or
incorporated into an electrical distribution center).
Tower, Commercial Communication. A tower designed or used for commercial wireless
telecommunications services, public radio transmission, or commercial television transmission.
Tower, Guyed. A lattice or monopole tower constructed with a system of wires that hold the
tower in place.
Tower, Hierarchy. For the purpose of determining impact the following hierarchy has been
established in Figure 21-29: Tower Hierarchy.
FIGURE 21-29: TOWER HIERARCHY
Tower, Lattice. A framework or structure of crossed wood or metal strips assembled in a pattern
to create a tower.
Tower, Monopole. A tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guyed wires and
anchors.
Tower, Self-Supporting. A lattice or monopole tower constructed without any additional exterior
reinforcement or support.
Tower, Stealth Facility. A structure together with the communications equipment or devices
located thereon, which is not readily identifiable as a tower or antenna and is architecturally
compatible with existing buildings/structures on site, and is compatible with existing or proposed
uses on site. The structure may or may not have a secondary function (i.e., bell tower, spire, etc.)
Trailer. A vehicle designed for carrying property or passengers on its own structure and for being
drawn by a motor vehicle, but does not include a trailer drawn by a truck-tractor semi-trailer
combination, or an auxiliary axle on a motor vehicle which carries a portion of the weight of the
motor vehicle to which it is attached.
Tuck-Under Parking. Any parking that is located in any portion of a building that has any portion
of the floor area of the principal structure above the parking area.
Uses, Conservancy. The City may designate an area unsuitable for development due to wet
soils, steep slopes, inadequate drainage, severe erosion potential, or any other feature likely to
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 44 Definitions
be harmful to the health, safety or welfare of the future residents of the community as
conservancy districts. Only open space uses and accessory structures, which provide negligible
encroachment on the shoreland environment, are permitted in conservancy districts. No land
may be subdivided for development in this district.
Variance. A modification or variation of the provisions of this Code, as applied to a specific
piece of property, except that modification in the allowable uses within a district is not
considered a variance.
Water Feature. Any ornamental tub, pool or other natural or artificial water container, which may
contain aquatic flora or fauna. Detention and retention ponds, and man-made lakes are not
considered “water features.”
Water-Oriented Accessory Structure or Facility. A small, aboveground building or other
improvement, except stairways, fences, docks and retaining walls, which, because of the
relationship of its use to a surface water feature, reasonably needs to be located closer to public
waters than the normal structure setback. Examples of such structures and facilities include
boathouses, gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses and detached decks.
Watershed Management or Flood Control Structure. A dam, floodwall, wingdam, dike, diversion
channel, or an artificially deepened or widened stream channel following the same or
approximately the same course as the natural channel or any other structure for altering or
regulating the natural flow condition of a river or stream. The term watershed management or
flood control structure does not include pilings, retaining walls, gabion baskets, rock riprap or
other facilities intended primarily to prevent erosion and which must be authorized by permit
from the Commissioner of Natural Resources.
Wetland. Land which is annually subject to periodic or continual inundation by water and
commonly referred to as a bog, swamp or marsh or a surface water feature classified as a
wetland in the United States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39 (1971 edition).
Wildlife Corridor. Swath of habitat (land, water, air) through which undomesticated organisms
may move. Such corridors can be discrete linear vegetated areas along rivers (riparian
corridors) and fence lines (hedge rows) or broad connected patches of vegetated land.
Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS). An electrical generating facility comprised of one or
more wind turbines and accessory facilities, including but not limited to: power lines,
transformers, substations and meteorological towers that operate by converting the kinetic
energy of wind into electrical energy.
Wind Energy Conversion System, Building Mounted. A wind energy conversion system attached
to a building.
Wind Energy Conversion System, Freestanding. A wind energy conversion system located on a
pole or tower, which is anchored to the ground.
Wind Energy Conversion System Height. The height of a freestanding wind energy conversion
system shall be measured as the distance from ground level to the highest point on the tower,
including the vertical length of any extensions such as the rotor blade. The height of a building
mounted wind energy conversion system shall be measured as the distance from the point
where the base of the system is attached to the building or to the lowest point on the wind
energy conversion system, whichever is closer to the ground, to the highest point on the wind
Article Last Amended: December 3, 2018
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Article 21:
Land Development Code Article 21 - Page 45 Definitions
energy conversion system, including the vertical length of any extensions such as the rotor
blade.
Yard. An open space on the same zoning lot with a building or structure, which yard is
unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise permitted by
this Code. See Figure 21-30: Yards.
FIGURE 21-30: YARDS
Yard, Front. An open, unobstructed yard across the front of a lot between the building or
allowed building line, and the front property line and between side yard property lines. See
Figure 21-30.
Yard, Interior Side. A side yard that does not abut a street right-of-way. See Figure 21-30.
Yard, Rear. An open, unobstructed yard, except as permitted herein, on the same lot with a
building between the nearest line of the building or allowed building line and the rear property
line extending between the interior property lines or between the interior property line and the
street side yard. See Figure 21-30.
Yard, Side. A yard extending along a side lot line between the front and rear yard, for the required
minimum depth, as specified for the district in which such lot is located, measured perpendicular
to the side lot line. See Figure 21-30.
Yard, Street Side. A side yard on a corner lot that abuts a public street. See Figure 21-30.
Zoning Map. The map or maps incorporated into this Code as a part hereof, designating the use
district.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-1:
Land Development Code Appendix A-1 - Page 1 ESA Information
APPENDIX A-1 – ESA INFORMATION
Section 1: Description of Environmentally Sensitive Resources and Rationale for Protection
Section 2: Best Management Practices
Section 3: Tools for Protection
Section 4: Qualifications of Scientific Members
Section 5: References
Section 6: Resources
Section 7: Development Process - Flowchart
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-1:
Land Development Code Appendix A-1 - Page 2 ESA Information
Section 1:
Description of Environmentally Sensitive Resources and
Rationale for Protection
All vegetative community types are defined in Minnesota's Native Vegetation - A Key to Natural
Communities, MN-DNR, Natural Heritage Program. Transition vegetative communities may appear in more
than one category.
1. Native Prairies
For the purpose of this Code, Central Minnesota remnant native prairie communities include mesic (moist)
oak savannah, xeric (dry) oak savannah, mesic prairie, dry prairie, wet brush prairie, wet meadows, wet
prairies, and rock outcrops.
The protection of remnant prairie tracts is of vital importance to the City of St. Cloud. In Minnesota, less than
1% of the original prairie remains. Undisturbed prairie is one of the rarest ecological community types.
Hundreds of grass and wildflower species comprise a native prairie. The least disturbed prairies contain the
most diverse plant and animal species.
Small unique remnant native prairies occur in and near the City of St. Cloud. Many of these are rare and
fragile.
Prairies of all types are so rare that attempts to preserve them are recommended for all sites. Areas of
concern may be small prairie remnants on already partially developed sites. All of the above should be
managed as prairie and preserved and enhanced if possible.
2. Forests and Woodlands
For the purpose of this Code, forest and woodland communities include oak forest, lowland hardwood
forest, floodplain forest, aspen woodland, aspen forest, oak woodland, oak savannah and tamarack
swamp.
The protection of forests and woodlands is important to the City of St. Cloud. These vegetative communities
often occur on steep slopes, unstable soils and poor soils where they stabilize the soil and prevent erosion,
control runoff and promote the percolation of rainwater. In uplands and in lowlands, forests and
woodlands aid in the control of flooding, prevent sedimentation in and cool streams for fish reproduction,
decrease temperature and provide shade from solar radiation, provide wind protection, improve air
quality and provide habitat and food sources for numerous forest, woodland and savannah plant and
animal species. Large unfragmented tracts of forests and woodland are especially important for interior
forest species and for wildlife corridors.
3. Sensitive Geological and Hydrogeological Features
Included in this category are rock outcrops, steep slopes, unstable and sensitive soils, high groundwater
table, etc.
Sensitive Geological Areas - Sensitive geological areas consist of materials or structures that are easily
modified by human activity, where such modification may result in 1) a loss of scientific or historic
significance or value, or 2) an increase in environmental or geologic hazards. Examples would include
removal of covering material from granite bedrock permitting easier contamination of ground water or use
of private sewage systems in areas where thin sediment lies above granite bedrock.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-1:
Land Development Code Appendix A-1 - Page 3 ESA Information
Sensitive Hydrological Areas - Sensitive hydrological areas include areas where changes in land use which
result in changes in the ratio of infiltration to runoff can easily increase the amount or frequency of flooding.
Such flood intensification may occur near or at the site of the landscape alteration or may affect the larger
streams in the region, including the Sauk and Mississippi Rivers. Also included are areas where ground water
is easily contaminated or where changes in the water table (the level of the top of the ground water) can
cause side effects like surface subsidence and damage to foundations or utilities.
Rock Outcrops - Rock outcrops in the inventory were rated solely on the plant species invading their
surfaces. As crucial for development and planning purposes is their hydrogeological significance. Rock
outcrops in central Minnesota are visible "flags" that signal an underlying bedrock system. In the 1990's,
there was a growing awareness that fractures and faults in the crystalline basement rocks have influenced
erosion deposition and fluid migration patterns in overlaying sediments and sedimentary rocks. There are
linkages between bedrock and overburden patterns. These links are borne out by patterns in vegetation,
human economic development and human environmental impact. In addition, the geology and
topography influence current movement of surface and groundwater. All these affect biotic communities.
To help guide development and stewardship, any property with outcrops should be carefully evaluated
hydrogeologically.
4. Rare Species Sites
Rare species sites include state and federally listed endangered, threatened and rare species and species
of special concern. Each species contains its own unique genetic pool which can prove beneficial to us in
a number of ways. Over the past two centuries, loss of habitat has become the single most important
factor threatening the survival of species. Because oak savannahs, prairies and prairie wetlands have
suffered the greatest alteration of all Minnesota habitats, their indigenous species are under the greatest
threat. The future of Minnesota's endangered species depends upon adequate habitat preservation.
5. Riparian Corridors (River and Stream Corridors)
Riparian corridors are vegetated zones (often forested) along the edge of a river, river segment or stream.
They include floodplains, shorelands, and may include floodplain forest, lowland hardwood forest,
tamarack swamp, willow swamp, cattail marsh, mixed emergent marsh, oak woodland and wet prairie.
These zones act as buffers that provide and help sustain resource values for the river or stream. These values
can be fit into one of four functional categories:
1. Water quality
2. Wildlife
3. Aesthetics and recreation
4. Flood control
How wide a riparian corridor should be will depend on the functional value one is interested in conserving.
As a general rule, the wider the buffer, the better. However, this is often not practical due to social,
economic and political factors.
6. Wetlands
For the purpose of this Code, included in this category are: cattail marsh, willow swamp, wet meadow, wet
prairie, mixed emergent marsh, tamarack swamp, floodplain forest and lowland hardwood forest.
Wetlands are essential habitat for many fish and wildlife species. They serve as storage areas for excess
water during flooding. Wetlands act as a filter for sediments and nutrients as water travels through them
before reaching lakes, rivers and streams. Wetlands also function as ground water recharge areas. They are
often used for public recreation, and some types have commercial value.
Wetland means land transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at
or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow water (as defined by the Wetland Conservation Act
Rules Chapter 8420; 8420.0110 subpart 52).
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-1:
Land Development Code Appendix A-1 - Page 4 ESA Information
Wetland Type means a wetland type classified according to Wetlands of the United States, United States
Fish and Wildlife Service Circular 39 as summarized in 8420.0110 subpart 54.
Since wetlands within Minnesota are protected by the Wetland Conservation Act (WCA), and Section 404
of the Clean Water Act, development within those areas would have to follow WCA Rules 8420 as well as
working within the confines of this Ordinance.
7. Wildlife Corridors
This category includes riparian corridors, flightways, migration routes, nursery and nesting habitats, roosting
sites, and other wildlife habitat. Functions of such corridors include: 1) places where plants and animals can
live and reproduce; 2) places where animals can move from one place to another in relative safety to find
food, water, or mates, either on a daily or seasonal basis.
Corridors for animals and plants are important for the following reasons:
1. To avoid excessive inbreeding, small populations of a species in one habitat island need to have
some contact with a population of the same species in another habitat island.
2. Species loss from a habitat island is less likely when that island is connected to a similar habitat
island, i.e. maintaining corridors between areas of similar habitat helps sustain species diversity.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-1:
Land Development Code Appendix A-1 - Page 5 ESA Information
Section 2:
Best Management Practices
Native Prairies
- Prescribed burning at appropriate times. Rotational burning should occur at two to ten year intervals,
depending upon prairie type and condition. A healthier, more diverse prairie and the protection of
prairie animals results from burning only a portion of a prairie each year. Fire promotes the growth of
grasses and reduces weeds and tree species. A year of no burn promotes flowers and provides
overwintering for butterfly and insect larvae and pupae. Burning in spring, after cool season exotics
have grown and before warm season native prairie species have emerged, promotes the native
species. Late summer and fall burning, after dormancy of prairie species, is more effective in controlling
brush. Burning regimes should vary over time so that tracts are eventually burned at varying times of
the year and varying intensities.
In conjunction with burning, or if burning is not suitable, the following measures may be options:
- Controlled (managed rotational) grazing at appropriate times. Overgrazing can result in the loss of
prairie species and diminish the quality of the prairie. Grazing should begin mid to late June. Plants
should not be grazed below six inches. Rotational grazing allows for prairie flowers and seed production
in non-grazed areas.
- Mowing and removal of plant material at appropriate times (once a year). Mowing for haying (once in
a year, every two to several years) should follow the end of nesting time for ground nesting birds (about
July 15) and allow flower and seed production of prairie species in late summer and fall. To discourage
cool season exotic species and encourage warm season native species, mowing can occur two times
a year: spring, after cool season species have emerged, but before warm season native species; and
fall after dormancy of native species.
- Removal of exotics (through cutting, spot treatments of herbicide, and stump cut treatment with
herbicide) to remove nuisance species such as Siberian Elm, Buckthorn and Honeysuckle.
- Removal of trees. Non-natives, such as Siberian Elm, have been mentioned. Sometimes native trees,
such as box elder, green ash, and aspen need to be removed also. This can be done by cutting,
girdling and cut stump treatment as appropriate to species.
- Physical disturbance of the soil should be avoided, including compaction due to use by vehicles,
heavy foot traffic, as well as plowing, cultivating, and scraping.
- Maintain solar radiation during the growing season.
- Maintain natural hydrology (zero change in runoff), especially for wet prairies and meadows.
- Enhancement by seeding or planting native species from local seed sources, if appropriate.
- Recommended buffers. High priority sites should have no development. Recommended buffers for all
prairie is 100 feet. Very little is known about the requirements of prairies and prairie remnants to
maintain viability and diversity of species.
The above was based on U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service Program Aids Numbers
1452, 1405, 1453 and 1410 (1988 and 1990), as well as recommendations from Ellen Fuge, Natural Area
Management Specialist from the MN-DNR and Fred Bengtson, Assistant Area Wildlife Manager from the
MN-DNR.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-1:
Land Development Code Appendix A-1 - Page 6 ESA Information
Forests and Woodlands
- Forest or woodland tracts of 40 acres or more should be considered for forest preserves (or reserves),
particularly examples of high quality forest ecosystems or rare forest communities. If different forest
communities exist within the city, such as oak forest, maple basswood forest, tamarack swamp,
floodplain forest, a good example (the best?) of each community type should be preserved.
- Oak savannah tracts of 10 acres or more should be considered for oak savannah preserves. Oak
savannah is a very rare natural community.
- Wooded floodplains, wooded streams corridors, wooded slopes, and wooded environmentally fragile
areas should be considered for preservation.
- Trees that provide buffers, such as those separating housing from busy roads or commercial areas, and
trees aesthetically important to the community should be considered for preservation.
- Particularly large or historic trees should be considered for preservation.
- Within smaller tracts of wooded areas being developed, measures to minimize tree loss and woodland
degradation should be considered. Guidelines might include:
? Placing roads and structures so that the development does not fragment the forest or woodland or
sever connections to adjacent wooded or environmentally sensitive areas. Development along the
periphery is preferred.
? Clustering development near the edge of a woodland or in existing clearings is another possibility
to maximize the amount of woodland, including native understory, that is preserved as
development takes place. Innovative site designs which accomplish this same goal should be
encouraged.
? Placing roads, driveways, the "footprint" of structures and construction activity, etc., to minimize
removal and death of the largest and most valuable trees. Both size and species of trees need to
be considered. Some native tree species are more uncommon and/or more difficult to replace.
? Requiring tree protection measures during construction. In general trees need to be protected
from compaction, taking away or piling of dirt, materials, etc., and physical damage to bark or
root systems. (See Appendix E, References, regarding tree protection during construction.)
? In order to prevent the spread of oak wilt, avoiding construction activities involving oak trees during
those months when oak wilt is most likely to spread (April through July).
? Retaining natural "duff" (decaying vegetative matter) under trees and groups of trees. The duff
layer cools soil temperature, provides mulch, nutrients and moisture to keep trees healthy.
? Maintaining natural understory, including native shrub and herb layers. Native vegetation harbors
more plant and animal species diversity and might allow for the natural regeneration of trees and
related species and the sustainability of the forest.
? Control of exotic species, especially buckthorn, should be encouraged.
? Tree replacement with the same or similar species should be considered in cases where
trees of significant size or number must be removed.
The above was based on information from the MN-DNR Forestry Division and Natural Heritage and Non-
Game Research Program, the City of Burnsville (MN) Woodland Protection Ordinance and consultations
with Dennis Ludivig, City of St. Cloud Forester, Tim Edgeton, Sherburne County Forester, and Jeff Haws, MNDNR
Forester.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-1:
Land Development Code Appendix A-1 - Page 7 ESA Information
Rare Species
Best Management Practices will vary with species. See appropriate management and protection
guidelines from appropriate state and federal agencies including: MN-DNR County Biological Survey data
sheets and maps. Any development projects proposed in the vicinity of a rare feature identified on the
map should trigger an inquiry to MN-DNR Natural Heritage Program.
Riparian Corridors
Plans for avoiding fragmentation of corridors need to be made prior to major alteration of the vegetation
on the property or land to be developed.
The following recommended widths have been identified:
(Source: A Citizen's Guide to Conserving Riparian Forests: by Susan C. Peterson and Kenneth D. Kimball.)
- To protect water quality - 25' to 100'
Within this range is an appropriate buffer footage to prevent erosion and sedimentation run-off,
provide streambank stability, assimilate pollutants, and shade the stream adequately as a mechanism
to control water temperature and light levels.
- To provide an adequate buffer needed by plants and wildlife - 100' to 600'
This width is quite variable as it accommodates numerous wildlife species and plant communities.
Examples:
? Most of the streamside flora occur within 100’ of the water interface zone.
? Reptiles/amphibians - 100' to 200'
? Small mammals - 0' to 200'
? Larger mammals and raptors - 0' to 400'
To adapt to wildlife needs, the following is worth considering: a "string and beads" type of pattern. The
"beads" are wider areas which represent unique habitat or a special location, such as a bald eagle
nesting site. The "string" is an attempt to prevent fragmentation of the travel corridors used by various
species. These must be maintained in order for the corridor to remain viable.
- To meet local aesthetic objectives - 25' to 800'
The corridor width varies with the vegetation type, degree of understory and whether the
management objective is visual or noise control. For rivers with outstanding recreational resource
values, corridor buffer widths of 500 feet to one-quarter mile are recommended.
- Flood control
Riparian forests within floodplains deserve special recognition. Floodplain regulations are useful for
preserving riparian corridors from development. But to protect the riparian forest within the floodplain,
one must also develop the rationale for water quality and wildlife protection.
- Waters designated as DNR Protected Waters and designated as Trout Streams and their tributaries.
(Source: DNR Division of Waters)
For all waters falling in this category, a minimum impact zone of 200 feet from the ordinary high water
level, as established by the DNR Division of Waters, is recommended. Clearcutting is discouraged
anywhere in this area. From 200 feet to 100 feet, selective cutting is the preferred harvest method.
Rock Outcrops
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-1:
Land Development Code Appendix A-1 - Page 8 ESA Information
In order to steward the hydrological and geological functions provided here, an impact zone of at least
100 feet (or a greater distance) from the outcrop is recommended. The distance from the outcrop needs
to provide a minimum of 10-12-15 feet of unconsolidated material. On-site evaluation by the Environment
and Development Team can help identify the specifics for the outcrop in question.
The plant communities found on rock outcrop areas are often unique as they are species specially
adapted to survive under any of the following conditions: a) little soil that may contain chemicals
produced by the bedrock substrate; b) great fluctuations in temperature; c) extreme droughts. In the St.
Cloud Natural Areas Inventory conducted by SEH, the three rock outcrop communities identified in Stearns
County (sites 104, 116, 118) and the one in Sherburne County (site 119) appear to be unique compared to
rock outcrop communities in other areas of the state. To steward these special plant communities, fire is a
recommended management tool. Planned periodic burns help prevent invasion by various tree species
from the adjacent landscape. Two species to watch out for are eastern red cedar and red oak. Selective
cutting of any invading tree species is also an appropriate management tool.
The above was prepared in consultation with the Earth Sciences Department, St. Cloud State University.
Wetland Protection Strategies
The following standards recommended for protecting wetlands were developed in consultation with
Stearns County Environmental Services Wetlands Specialists:
- Delineation by a qualified wetland delineator be completed for the site and should include proper
documentation as described in Army Corps of Engineers Public Notice 96-01078-SDE. This delineation
should be completed and its accuracy verified by the county and Army Corps of Engineers prior to the
final plat approval.
- The wetland boundary should be surveyed and shown on the final plat. The delineation report should
be filed together with a Notice of Restriction so that future buyers, through the abstract, are put on
notice that their lot contains jurisdictional wetlands.
- Wetland boundaries and the implications of owning wetland areas should be made clear to all
individual homeowners. This could be accomplished through subdivision agreements between the City
of St. Cloud and the owner/developer.
- Within the wetland boundary, the following activities should be restricted: Chemical applications
(herbicides, pesticides, fertilizers).
- Within the wetland boundary, the following activities should be prohibited: vegetative removal and
cutting (except for exotic and invasive species), filling, grading, drainage, deposition of soil, location of
actual structures.
- The Wetland Conservation Act deminimus exemption should not be allowed for individual lot owners
upon approval of the development.
In order for the above standards to be met, the following methods may be used:
- Cluster development pattern; mix of housing types
- Dedication of easements to protect wetlands
- Modifications of project design to ensure continued water supply to the wetland and free flow of water
- Minimize soil compaction (compaction decreases infiltration and promotes run-off)
- Using buffers in conjunction with other structural and non-structural best management practices as
pretreatment when handling storm water discharge with high flow rates or high concentrations
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-1:
Land Development Code Appendix A-1 - Page 9 ESA Information
- The MPCA's best management practices should be followed to avoid erosion and sedimentation
during the construction phase. Buffer zones should be protected by silt fencing during construction,
and the fence should remain in place until the vegetation is established. During the first two years, the
owner/developer should replant any buffer vegetation that does not survive.
- Creation or restoration of an area wetland
- Development of a plan to guide actions involving the creation of a new wetland or the restoration of
damaged or degraded wetlands
Factors to consider when determining the width of the vegetative buffer zone adjacent to the protected
wetland boundary:
- Slope: as slope increases, width of the buffer increases.
- The use of a meandering buffer strip to maintain a natural appearance is encouraged but not required
in areas of flat topography.
- Depth to groundwater: as depth increases, buffer width can be reduced.
- Soil type: as percolation rate increases, width of buffer can be reduced.
- Type of vegetative cover, i.e. its ability to hold soil and slow run-off
- Buffer width should not fall below 20 feet.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-1:
Land Development Code Appendix A-1 - Page 10 ESA Information
Section 3:
Tools for Protection
Source: Natural Areas: Protecting a Vital Community Asset, A Sourcebook for Minnesota Local
Governments and Citizens, Laurie Allmann, Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, 1997.
TOOL APPLICABILITY FOR LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS RESOURCES AND REFERENCES
Perpetual Conservation
Easement
A legally binding agreement
between a landowner and a
qualifying government agency
or nonprofit organization, in
which the landowner voluntarily
agrees to specified terms that
permanently limit the use and
development of a given
property for the purpose of
protecting agricultural, open
space, cultural, or environmental
values. The easement may be
sold by the landowner, or
donated (in which case there
may be significant income tax
benefits). An easement runs with
the land’s title and is binding on
all future owners.
? To provide a greater degree
of protection for high quality
natural features found within
existing parks and on other
public lands.
? To establish development
buffers on and around the
perimeter of environmentally
sensitive sites.
? To promote volunteer
landowner conservation
measures while keeping land
in private ownership and on
the tax rolls.
? To ensure permanent
protection of required open
space in subdivisions and
other developments.
? The Minnesota Land Trust (MLT)
is a private, nonprofit
organization that specializes in
establishing conservation
easements with willing public
and private landowners.
Contact MLT at (612) 522-3743.
? Easements were used in
conjunction with protection of
a city-owned natural area
known at “Coon Hill” in Red
Wing, MN. Contact Brian
Peterson, Community
Development Director at (612)
385-3617.
? The DNR Local Grants Program
(described under Outright
Purchase) also funds
perpetual easements.
Locally-Enacted Preservation
Overlay Zone
Often referred to by different
names, a Preservation Overlay
Zone is a geographic area
demarcated within a city,
township, or county, the
boundaries of which are based
on concentrations of highly
valued natural features as
identified through a planning
process involving extensive
background studies. A
combination of conservation
tools may be utilized to protect
natural features within the zone,
including (but not limited to)
acquisition of land by a public
agency, restrictions on utilities
and transportation
development, encouragement
of “best management practices”
in use of chemicals/pesticides,
reduce housing densities, and
other land use controls.
Compliance may be voluntary or
mandatory.
? Preservation Overlay Zones are
appropriate for communities
that retain quality natural
features such as undeveloped
watersheds, forest or other
native plant communities, or
geographic features, such as
bluffs, that occur over areas of
divided ownership.
? The process of identifying and
ranking natural features to
determine reasonable
boundaries for the zone will
require the services of
professional ecologists as part
of the planning process.
Ecologists should also be
consulted as to the
determination of appropriate
controls to effectively minimize
threats to the integrity of
natural features within the
zone.
? Lake Elmo, MN has established
an open space/agricultural
preservation and
development overlay district
that includes environmental
analysis among its parameters.
For more information, contact
Ann Terwedo, City Planner at
(612) 777-5510.
? “Conservation Corridors” have
been incorporated into
numerous county and city
planning efforts in Wisconsin.
For more information, contact
Jay Tappen, Senior Planner,
West Central WI Regional
Planning Commission at (715)
836-2918.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-1:
Land Development Code Appendix A-1 - Page 11 ESA Information
TOOL APPLICABILITY FOR LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS RESOURCES AND REFERENCES
Transfer of Development
Rights (TDR)
In the TDR program, two zones
are established in a given
geographic area, a “sending”
(preservation) zone and a
“receiving” zone. Landowners
with property in the sending
zone may sell their (unused)
development rights on the
open market to land
developers and brokers, who
then use the purchased rights
to increase their allowable
building density in the receiving
zone.
? To work effectively, TDR
programs require: (1) a high
demand for housing or other
development in the
receiving zone, (2) capability
of the administering
government unit to set up
and oversee the program on
an ongoing basis, (3)
residents in receiving zone
amenable to higher density.
?Appropriate for large-scale
efforts where keeping land in
private ownership is
considered desirable.
? Although now used in
Maryland and a number of
other states, Minnesota state
statutes, as generally
interpreted, do not allow for
TDR programs - a situation
that may be shortly
remedied. For an update on
the status and availability of
TDR programs in Minnesota,
contact The Land
Stewardship Project at (612)
653-0618.
Purchase of Development
Rights (PDR)
A PDR program typically
involves the purchase of
development rights by a local
government unit or nonprofit
organization in order to
accomplish protection of
natural features, open space,
or agricultural values. PDR
programs are generally
applied as part of a formal
program with specific criteria
used to select acquisitions. A
PDR program may be viewed
as a systematic use of
conservation easements.
? PDR programs require: (1)
the capability of the
administering government
unit to set up and oversee
the program on an ongoing
basis, (2) a funding
mechanism to finance the
acquisition of development
rights. A PDR program may or
may not be set up to require
willing participation of the
seller. Willing participation of
the seller is considered
preferable, in that it makes
the program more effective.
?Appropriate for large-scale
efforts where keeping land in
private ownership is
considered
? The Land Stewardship
Project (LSP) is spearheading
a conservation project in the
east Metro area and is
involved in the use and
development of tools
including PDR. For more
information, contact LSP at
(612) 653-0618.
Registry Programs
Registry programs are a way to
acknowledge and encourage
the voluntary protection of
natural features by private
citizens. Landowners make a
non-binding agreement to
protect their land by enrolling
in a registry. In turn, they are
provided with information and
technical assistance regarding
appropriate conservation
practices for their particular
site.
?Local governments may
either start their own registry
program (if they have
qualified natural resource
staff) or may instead
educate citizens about the
availability of registry
programs offered by other
government agencies or
private, nonprofit
conservation organizations.
? The MN Chapter of The
Nature Conservancy
administers a registry
program. Contact Lisa
Mueller, Land Protection
Specialist at (612) 331-0733.
? “Friends of the Minnesota
Valley” administers a
Heritage Registry for
landowners in the Lower
Minnesota River Valley.
Special Designation
High quality natural areas may
qualify for special designation
under a state or federal
? Special designation may
increase legal protection
and potential for financial
support for acquisition and
? If a natural area has historic
or cultural significance, call
the State Historic
Preservation Office at (612)
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-1:
Land Development Code Appendix A-1 - Page 12 ESA Information
TOOL APPLICABILITY FOR LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS RESOURCES AND REFERENCES
program, such as the National
Register of Historic Places or the
state Scientific Natural Areas
Program, administered by the
Department of Natural
Resources. Special designation
generally requires public
access to land.
management of selected
sites.
? With sites appropriate for
special designation, an
outside agency may be
interested in acquiring the
property and managing it for
protection of its natural
features. This allows the local
community to benefit from
protection of a site without
being obligated for the cost
of acquisition or
management.
? Appropriate options only for
natural areas with features of
state/national significance.
296-5434.
? To find out whether a natural
area might qualify for
designation as a state
Scientific and Natural Area,
call (612) 297-2357.
Outright Purchase
Also known as “fee simple
acquisition,” the outright
purchase of land gives a local
government unit full control
over all rights to a property.
Local governments may
choose to exercise the power
of eminent domain or to
operate under a “willing seller”
policy for acquisition of natural
areas.
? Outright purchase by a unit
of government requires: (1)
the determination that the
land serves a public purpose.
Natural areas can be said to
serve public purposes (e.g.
flood control, enhancement
of air and water quality)
even when public access to
a site is not feasible,
desirable, or practical, (2)
provision of necessary
funding to finance the
purchase. Acquisition may
be financed through general
revenue funds, bond
referenda, lend-lease
programs, special taxation,
government grants, trust
funds, and matching
programs. Cost of acquisition
may be reduced by use of
“bargain sale,” in which the
seller agrees to sell at below
market value (the difference
is recognized by the IRS as a
charitable contribution for
the seller’s income tax
purposes), (3) financial and
staffing resources to provide
for site management and
maintenance.
?Washington County, MN
used a lease-purchase
arrangement to finance an
acquisition of park land in
the St. Croix Valley. For more
information, contact Dave
Engstrom, County
Commissioner at (612) 430-
6215.
? The Minnesota Department
of Natural Resources
administers a matching
grant program to assist local
governments with acquisition
of natural and scenic areas.
For more information about
the Natural and Scenic Area
Grant Program, contact Tom
Kranz, Local Grants Program
at (612) 297-3168.
? The Trust for Public Land (TPL)
is a nonprofit land
conservation organization
that applies its expertise in
negotiation, public finance,
and law to help local
governments acquire public
open space. For more
information, contact TPL at
(612) 338-8494.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-1:
Land Development Code Appendix A-1 - Page 13 ESA Information
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-1:
Land Development Code Appendix A-1 - Page 14 ESA Information
Section 4:
Qualifications of Scientific Members
To serve as a scientific member for the Environment and Development Team, one or more of the following
qualifications must be satisfied:
1. Professional degree in one of these areas: Hydrology, geology, botany, wildlife biology, ecology, or
natural history
2. Documented training in the area of natural resources with demonstrated field experience
3. Knowledgeable and trained in applying methodologies associated with stewarding natural
communities
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-1:
Land Development Code Appendix A-1 - Page 15 ESA Information
Section 5:
References
Allmann, Laurie. Land Protection Options: A Handbook for Minnesota Landowners. The Nature
Conservancy, Minneapolis, MN, 1996.
Allmann, Laurie. Natural Areas: Protecting a Vital Community Asset: A Sourcebook for Minnesota Local
Governments and Citizens. Natural Heritage and Nongame Research Program, Minnesota Department
of Natural Resources, St. Paul, 1997.
Bates, Robert and J. Jackson. Glossary of Geology, 3rd Edition. American Geological
Institute, 1987.
Bolin, Eric G. and William L. Robinson. Wildlife Ecology and Management. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
New Jersey 07632, pp. 461-462, 1995.
Coffin, Barbara and Lee Pfannmuller (eds.). Minnesota's Endangered Flora and Fauna.
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, University of Minnesota Press,
Minneapolis, 1988.
Fargo, J.R., ed. "How to Save Trees During Construction." Tree City USA Bulletin #7, The National Arbor Day
Foundation, Nebraska City, Nebraska, 1989.
Green, Janet C. Birds and Forests: A Management and Conservation Guide. Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources, 1995.
Miller, Nancy L., David M. Rathke and Gary R. Johnson. "Protecting Trees from
Construction Damage: A Homeowner's Guide." Minnesota Extension Service,
University of Minnesota, St. Paul, Minnesota, 1993.
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, Natural Heritage Program, Minnesota's Native Vegetation: A
Key to Natural Communities, 1991, 1993.
Peterson, Susan C. and Kenneth D. Kimball. A Citizen's Guide to Conserving Riparian Forests: Identifying and
Protecting the Value of Riverside Forests in the Northeastern United States. River Network, Box 8787,
Portland, Oregon 97207-8787, 1995.
Short Elliott Hendrickson, Inc. St. Cloud Natural Areas Inventory and Planning Framework, 1996.
Weicherding, Patrick J. "Protecting Shade Trees from Construction Damage." Minnesota Tree Line No. 21-
1978. Agricultural Extension Service, University of Minnesota, 1978.
Wovcha, Daniel, Barbara C. Delaney and Gerda E. Nordquist. Minnesota's St. Croix River Valley and Anoka
Sandplain: A Guide to Native Habitats. Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, University of
Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 1995.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-1:
Land Development Code Appendix A-1 - Page 16 ESA Information
Section 6:
Resources
The St. Cloud Natural Areas Inventory, completed by Short, Elliott and Hendrickson, Inc. (SEH) in March 1996.
Map developed from the St. Cloud Natural Areas Inventory Report, showing the location of high, medium
and low priority natural areas and rare species sites (1996).
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service’s National Wetlands Inventory (1982).
Minnesota County Biological Survey (Department of Natural Resources) information for Sherburne County
(1989-1990), and Benton and Stearns Counties (1995-1997). Data available through the Natural Heritage
Information System, Natural Heritage and Nongame Research Program, Minnesota DNR, St. Paul.
The Minnesota Geological Survey Geologic Atlas (1995).
The Report on the Geology of the Neighborhood around Quarry Park (1994).
The USDA Soil Survey.
A Citizen's Guide to Conserving Riparian Forests.
Floodplains, Shoreland, and Scenic River Ordinances.
Aerial photos of the St. Cloud area.
SCSU Earth Science Dept. work on Sensitive Geological and Hydrological Areas.
USGS topographic maps.
Field notes of scientists who conducted the St. Cloud Natural Areas Inventory and Planning Framework.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-1:
Land Development Code Appendix A-1 - Page 17 ESA Information
Section 7:
Development Process - Flowchart
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-1:
Land Development Code Appendix A-1 - Page 18 ESA Information
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-
2:
Land Development Code Appendix A-2 - Page 1 ESA
Information
APPENDIX A-2 – Environmentally Sensitive Areas Map
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-3:
Land Development Code Appendix A-3 - Page 1 ESA Information
APPENDIX A-3 – Environmentally Sensitive Areas Inventory Table
ST. CLOUD NATURAL AREAS INVENTORY DATABASE - sorted by site
MAP LOCATION NATURAL RESOURCE EVALUATION PLANNING FRAMEWORK NOTES
NUMBER
SITE COUNTY TOWN RANGE SECTION QTR QTR ELEMENT GRADE COMPLEX RANK PRIORITY TOOLS STEWARDSHIP
1 STEARNS N124 W28 32 SE NE WILLOW SWAMP B Y T H PT1 B
2 STEARNS N124 W28 32 NE SW WILLOW SWAMP B Y T H PT1 B
3 STEARNS N124 W28 32 SW SW WILLOW SWAMP C N T L PT3
4 STEARNS N124 W28 33 SW SE FLOODPLAIN FOREST B Y R H PT1
5 STEARNS N124 W28 33 NE SE CATTAIL MARSH D N C L PT3 E,D,B
6 STEARNS N124 W28 33 NE NE CATTAIL MARSH C N C L PT3
7 STEARNS N124 W28 29 SE SE CATTAIL MARSH - STP D N C L PT3 D
8 STEARNS N124 W28 28 SE SW WILLOW SWAMP B Y T H PT1
9 STEARNS N124 W28 28 SW NW WILLOW SWAMP B Y T H PT1
10 STEARNS N124 W28 21 SE SW QUARRY POND D N L PT3
11 STEARNS N124 W28 27 SW NW CATTAIL MARSH C N C L PT3
12 STEARNS N124 W28 27 NW NW WET MEADOW C Y U H PT1 E
13 STEARNS N124 W28 27 NE NW CATTAIL MARSH C Y C M PT3
14 STEARNS N124 W28 27 NW SW CATTAIL MARSH B Y C H PT1 E
15 STEARNS N124 W28 27 NE SW WILLOW SWAMP B Y T H PT1
16 STEARNS N124 W28 27 SW NE WILLOW SWAMP C Y T M PT3 E,D
17 STEARNS N124 W28 23 SW WILLOW SWAMP B Y T H PT1 E
18 STEARNS N124 W28 26 NE NW CATTAIL MARSH C Y C M PT2
19 STEARNS N124 W28 26 NE SW WILLOW SWAMP D N T L PT3 E
20 STEARNS N124 W28 26 SW SE WET MEADOW D N U L PT3 E
21 STEARNS N124 W28 26 SE SW CATTAIL MARSH C Y C M PT2
22 STEARNS N124 W28 21 NE SE QUARRY POND D N L PT3 D,B
23 STEARNS N124 W28 27 SW SE CATTAIL MARSH C Y C M PT2
24 STEARNS N124 W28 34 NW NE CATTAIL MARSH C Y C M PT2
25 STEARNS N124 W28 34 NE NE CATTAIL MARSH C Y C M PT2 E
26 STEARNS N124 W28 34 NE NE MIXED EMERGENT MARSH C Y T M PT2 E,D,B
27 STEARNS N124 W28 34 NE SE CATTAIL MARSH C Y C M PT2 B
28 STEARNS N124 W28 35 SW NW CATTAIL MARSH B Y C H PT1
29 STEARNS N123 W28 2 NW NW WET MEADOW C Y U H PT1 E
30 STEARNS N123 W28 3 NE NE WILLOW SWAMP C Y T M PT2
31 STEARNS N123 W28 3 NE NE TAMARACK SWAMP B Y L H PT1
32 STEARNS N124 W28 34 SW SE WILLOW SWAMP C Y T M PT2 D,B
33 STEARNS N123 W28 4 NE NE WILLOW SWAMP B Y T H PT1
34 STEARNS N124 W28 35 NE NW WET MEADOW D N U L PT3 E
35 STEARNS N124 W28 35 NW SE WILLOW SWAMP B Y T H PT1 B
36 STEARNS N123 W28 2 NW NE WET MEADOW D Y U M PT2 E
37 STEARNS N124 W28 35 SW SE WILLOW SWAMP B Y T H PT1
38 STEARNS N124 W28 16 SE SE CATTAIL MARSH C N C L PT3
39 STEARNS N124 W28 21 NE NW WET MEADOW D N T L PT3 E
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-3:
Land Development Code Appendix A-3 - Page 2 ESA Information
MAP LOCATION NATURAL RESOURCE EVALUATION PLANNING
FRAMEWORK NOTES
NUMBER
SITE COUNTY TOWN RANGE SECTION QTR QTR ELEMENT GRADE COMPLEX RANK PRIORITY TOOLS STEWARDSHIP
40 STEARNS N124 W29 21 NE NW WET MEADOW D N T L PT3 E
41 STEARNS N124 W29 1 NW NE WILLOW SWAMP C N T L PT3
42 STEARNS N124 W29 1 NW NE CATTAIL MARSH D N C L PT3
43 STEARNS N124 W29 1 NW SE CATTAIL MARSH D N C L PT3 B
44 STEARNS N124 W28 7 NE NE CATTAIL MARSH D N C L PT3 B
45 STEARNS N124 W29 12 NE SE CATTAIL MARSH C Y C M PT2
46 STEARNS N124 W29 12 SE SW WILLOW SWAMP C Y T M PT2 B
47 STEARNS N124 W29 12 SW SW WILLOW SWAMP C Y T M PT2 B
48 STEARNS N124 W29 12 SW SE WILLOW SWAMP C Y T M PT2
49 STEARNS N124 W28 7 SW SW WET MEADOW D N T L PT3 E
50 STEARNS N124 W28 7 SW SW WET MEADOW D Y T L PT3 E
51 STEARNS N124 W28 18 NE NE FLOODPLAIN FOREST B Y R H PT1 E
52 STEARNS N124 W28 8 SW SW WET MEADOW C Y T M PT2 E
53 STEARNS N124 W28 17 NW NW MIXED EMERGENT MARSH B Y T H PT1 E
54 STEARNS N124 W28 6 NW NW CATTAIL MARSH C Y C M PT2 E,D
55 STEARNS N124 W28 5 NW NE WET MEADOW D N T L PT3 B,D
56 STEARNS N124 W28 5 NW NE CATTAIL MARSH D N C L PT3 B,D
57 STEARNS N124 W28 5 NE NE CATTAIL MARSH C N C L PT3 E
58 STEARNS N124 W28 3 NW NE FLOODPLAIN FOREST B N R H PT1
59 STEARNS N124 W28 4 SW NE FLOODPLAIN FOREST C Y R H PT1 B
60 STEARNS N124 W28 7 SW NW CATTAIL MARSH C Y C M PT2
61 STEARNS N124 W28 7 NE SW WILLOW SWAMP C N T L PT3
62 STEARNS N124 W29 12 NE SE WILLOW SWAMP C Y T M PT2 E
63 STEARNS N124 W28 36 NW NE MIXED EMERGENT MARSH D Y T L PT3 D
64 STEARNS N123 W28 36 SE SW MIXED EMERGENT MARSH C Y T M PT2 E,D
65 STEARNS N123 W28 1 NE NW MIXED EMERGENT MARSH C N T L PT3 E,D
66 STEARNS N123 W28 1 SE NE FLOODPLAIN FOREST B Y U H PT1
67 STEARNS N123 W28 1 NE NE FLOODPLAIN FOREST B Y U H PT1
68 STEARNS N123 W28 1 SE NW FLOODPLAIN FOREST B Y U H PT1
69 STEARNS N123 W27 7 SE NW FLOODPLAIN FOREST B Y U H PT1
70 SHERBURNE N35 W31 13 SW NE CATTAIL MARSH B Y C H PT1
71 SHERBURNE N35 W30 30 SE SE CATTAIL MARSH C N C L PT3 B,D
72 STEARNS N124 W29 1 SE SW WILLOW SWAMP C N T L PT3 E,D
73 STEARNS N124 W28 28 NE NW CATTAIL MARSH C Y C M PT2 E
74 SHERBURNE N35 W30 4 SW NW WILLOW SWAMP C Y T M PT2
75 SHERBURNE N35 W30 5 SW NE WET MEADOW C Y U H PT1
76 SHERBURNE N35 W30 17 SW SW QUARRY POND D N L PT3
77 STEARNS N124 W28 33 NW NW EMERGENT MARSH B N T M PT2 D,E
78 STEARNS N124 W28 32 NW NE WOODED BUFFER Y L PT3
79 STEARNS N124 W28 32 NW NE CATTAIL MARSH D Y C L PT3 D
80 STEARNS N124 W28 21 SE OAK WOODLAND D Y T L PT3 E,S
81 STEARNS N124 W28 28 NE ASPEN WOODLAND C Y C M PT2 B
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-3:
Land Development Code Appendix A-3 - Page 3 ESA Information
MAP LOCATION NATURAL RESOURCE EVALUATION PLANNING
FRAMEWORK NOTES
NUMBER
SITE COUNTY TOWN RANGE SECTION QTR QTR ELEMENT GRADE COMPLEX RANK PRIORITY TOOLS STEWARDSHIP
82 STEARNS N124 W28 22 SE NW OAK FOREST B N U H PT1 E
83 STEARNS N123 W28 2 NW OAK WOODLAND C Y T M PT2 B
84 STEARNS N124 W28 34 SW OAK FOREST N U NO ACCESS
85 STEARNS N124 W28 SW7,NW18 ASPEN WOODLAND B Y C H PT1 B,D
86 STEARNS N124 W28 27 SE NW OAK WOODLAND Y T NO ACCESS
101 STEARNS N124 W28 7 SE NE OAK WOODLAND / SAVANNA C N E H PT1 E
102 STEARNS N124 W28 7 SE SE OAK WOODLAND / BRUSHLAND D N T L PT3 E
103 STEARNS N124 W28 29 SE SE OAK WOODLAND / BRUSHLAND B N T M PT2 S
104 STEARNS N124 W28 32 NE NE ROCK OUTCROP A Y L H PT1 S
105 STEARNS N124 W29 1 POTHOLE PASTURES N L PT3 E,S
106 STEARNS N124 W28 36 NE NW BRUSH REGROWTH Y L PT3 E,D
107 STEARNS N124 W28 36 NE NW OAK WOODLAND C Y T M PT2 E,D,S
108 STEARNS N124 W28 36 NW NW MESIC PRAIRIE B Y R H PT1 E,S
109 STEARNS N124 W28 36 SE NW OAK WOODLAND B Y T H PT1 S,D
110 STEARNS N124 W28 36 SE NW OLD FIELD Y L PT3 E,S
111 STEARNS N123 W28 1 NW NE OAK FOREST B Y U H PT1
112 STEARNS N123 W28 1 NW NE OAK WOODLAND C Y T M PT2 D
113 STEARNS N123 W27 7 SE NW OLD FIELD Y L PT3 E,D
114 STEARNS N123 W27 N&S 7 OAK WOODLAND B Y T H PT1 E,D
115 STEARNS N124 W28 33 NE NW OAK WOODLAND B Y T H PT1 E
116 STEARNS N124 W28 33 NW NW ROCK OUTCROP C Y L H PT1 E
117 STEARNS N124 W28 33 NE NE OAK FOREST A N U H PT1 B
118 STEARNS N124 W28 33 NE NE ROCK OUTCROP B N L H PT1
119 SHERBURNE N35 W30 17 SW SW ROCK OUTCROP B N L H PT1 S
120 SHERBURNE N35 W31 12 NE NW OAK WOODLAND C Y T M PT2 B,E,S
121 SHERBURNE N35 W31 12 NE NE OAK WOODLAND B N T M PT2 E,S
122 SHERBURNE N35 W30 6 SW NW MESIC PRAIRIE C Y R H PT1 B,E,D
123 BENTON N36 W31 36 SW SE OAK WOODLAND C N T L PT3 B,E,S
124 STEARNS N124 W28 16 NE SE LOW HARDWOOD, MARSH D N T L PT3 D,E,S
125 SHERBURNE N35 W30 6 SE SW OAK WOODLAND / EMERGENT
MARSH C Y T M PT2 D,E,S DNR
126 SHERBURNE N35 W30 6 SW SW OAK WOODLAND C Y T M PT2 E,S
127 SHERBURNE N35 W30 7 NW OLD FIELD Y L PT3
128 SHERBURNE N35 W31 24 OAK FOREST C Y U H PT1 E,B DNR
129 SHERBURNE N35 W31 24 OLD PASTURE ISLE Y L PT3 DNR
130 SHERBURNE N35 W31 13 W FLOODPLAIN FOREST D Y U M PT2 DNR
131 SHERBURNE N35 W31 12 W BLUFF GRASSLANDS Y L PT3 DNR
132 SHERBURNE N35 W31 12 W FLOODPLAIN FOREST D Y R M PT2 E,D,S DNR
133 SHERBURNE N35 W31 12 NE SE OAK SAVANNA D N E M PT2 E,B DNR
135 SHERBURNE N35 W30 4 SW WET MEADOW / PRAIRIE B Y R H PT1 B,E,D,S DNR
136 SHERBURNE N35 W30 SE5,NENE8,W9 WET MEADOW / MARSH C Y U H PT1 B,E,D DNR
137 SHERBURNE N35 W30 NW6,NE5 EMERGENT MARSH D Y T L PT3 B,D,E,S DNR
138 SHERBURNE N35 W30 4 SE OAK SAVANNA B Y R H PT1 S DNR
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-3:
Land Development Code Appendix A-3 - Page 4 ESA Information
139 SHERBURNE N35 W30 W11,W14 OAK WOODLAND / FLOODPLAIN
FOREST C N T L PT3 B,E,S DNR
MAP LOCATION NATURAL RESOURCE EVALUATION PLANNING
FRAMEWORK NOTES
NUMBER
SITE COUNTY TOWN RANGE SECTION QTR QTR ELEMENT GRADE COMPLEX RANK PRIORITY TOOLS STEWARDSHIP
140 SHERBURNE N35 W30 NE17,SW16 MESIC PRAIRIE C N R M PT2 B,D,E
141 BENTON N36 W30 32 SW NE MIXED EMERGENT MARSH C Y T M PT2 B,E,D
142 BENTON N36 W30 32 NW NW EMERGENT MARSH / WOODED
SWAMP C Y T M PT2 B,D,E
143 BENTON N36 W30 31 NE NE EMERGENT MARSH / SHRUB
WETLAND D Y T L PT3 B,D,E
144 BENTON N36 W30 31 CATTAIL MARSH / ALDER WETLAND B Y C H PT1 D
145 BENTON N36 W30 31 SE MIXED OAK FOREST D Y U M PT2 E,B
146 BENTON N36 W30 32 SE SW MIXED EMERGENT MARSH C T L PT3 D,E
147 BENTON N36 W30 32 S WOODLAND NO ACCESS
148 BENTON N36 W30 30 N MIXED EMERGENT MARSH Y T B,D,E NO ACCESS
149 BENTON N36 W30 30 NE LOWLAND HARDWOOD C Y T M PT2 B
150 SHERBURNE N35 W30 SE9,NE17,N16 MIXED EMERGENT MARSH C Y T M PT2 D,E
151 STEARNS N124 W28 35 SE NW OAK WOODLAND C N T L PT3 B,E
152 SHERBURNE N35 W30 3 N LOWLAND HARDWOOD B Y T H PT1 B,D
153 SHERBURNE N35 W30 4 N OAK WOODLAND B Y T H PT1
154 SHERBURNE N35 30W 9 SW NE OAK WOODLAND A Y T H PT1 B
155 SHERBURNE N35 30W SWNW9,NESW9,NWSE9 SW NW RESTORATION / DISTURBED BUFFER L PT3 E
156 SHERBURNE N35 30W SEWN15,SW15 OAK WOODLAND / SHALLOW
MARSH B Y T H PT1 B
157 SHERBURNE N35 30W 15 N1/2 NW OAK WOODLAND / SAVANNA B Y U H PT1 B,E,S
158 SHERBURNE N35 30W N 1/2 15,SWNW15 SHRUB WETLAND A Y T H PT1 B
159 SHERBURNE N35 30W NENE22,NWNE15,SWNE15 WET MEADOW C Y T M PT2 B,E
160 SHERBURNE N35 30W 15 SW SE OLD FIELD / PRAIRIE REMNANT D Y C L PT3 B,E
161 SHERBURNE N35 30W NENE22,SENE22 OAK WOODLAND A Y T H PT1 B,S
162 SHERBURNE N35 30W E 1/2 22,SWSE15 OPEN WATER MARSH / WETLAND
COMPLEX B Y C H PT1 B
163 SHERBURNE N35 30W 15 SE SE OLD FIELD L PT3 B BUFFER ZONE ELK RIVER
COMPLEX
164 SHERBURNE N35 30W NESW23,NWNW23 NE SW OAK WOODLAND B Y T H PT1 B,E
165 SHERBURNE N35 30W 23 NW NE OAK WOODLOT D N C L PT3 B
166 SHERBURNE N35 30W NWSW11,SWSW10,NESE10 NW SW OAK WOODLAND / SHALLOW
MARSH COMPLEX C Y T M PT2 B,E
167 SHERBURNE N35 30W 11 SE SE OAK WOODLAND C Y T M PT2 B
168 SHERBURNE N35 30W 11 NW SE OAK WOODLAND C N T L PT3 B,E WILDLIFE CORRIDOR
169 SHERBURNE N35 30W 11 NE SE WILDLIFE CORRIDOR L PT3 B
170 BENTON /
SHERBURNE N35;N36 30W 2,11,14,22,23; 14,23,26,35 FLOODPLAIN FOREST COMPLEX B Y T H PT1 ELK RIVER
171 BENTON N36 30W 35;NWNE,SWNE,NWSE,SWSE OAK WOODLAND BUFFER L PT3 B
172 SHERBURNE N35 30W 11 NE NE OAK WOODLAND / MARSH
COMPLEX D Y T L PT3 B,E
173 BENTON N36 30W 26 SW NE DISTURBED BUFFER AREA L PT3 B,E
174 BENTON N36 30W 26 SE NE OAK WOODLOT - BUFFER L PT3 BUFFER
175 BENTON N36 30W 26 NW NE PALUSTRINE WETLAND COMPLEX D Y C L PT3 BUFFER TO ELK RIVER
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix A-3:
Land Development Code Appendix A-3 - Page 5 ESA Information
176 BENTON N36 30W 26 N
1/2 NW RIPARIAN CORRIDOR D N C L PT3 B MAYHEW CREEK
177 BENTON N36 30W NENE23,NESE23 MARSH / WET MEADOW D Y C L PT3 B
178 BENTON N36 30W W 1/2 SE33,E 1/2 SW33 SHALLOW MARSH D Y C L PT3 B
179 STEARNS N123 28W 5 S
1/2 NW SHRUB SWAMP C Y T M PT2 B
180 STEARNS N123 28W 5 NE SE WET MEADOW D N C L PT3 B WILDLIFE CORRIDOR
181 STEARNS N123 28W 5 SW SW RESTORATION L PT3 B,E,D WET MEADOW
MAP LOCATION NATURAL RESOURCE EVALUATION PLANNING
FRAMEWORK NOTES
NUMBER
SITE COUNTY TOWN RANGE SECTION QTR QTR ELEMENT GRADE COMPLEX RANK PRIORITY TOOLS STEWARDSHIP
182 STEARNS N123 28W 4 MIXED HARDWOOD SWAMP A Y U H PT1 B NEENAH CREEK
183 STEARNS N123 29W 1, 2 LAKE COMMUNITY B Y T H PT1 PLEASANT LAKE
184 STEARNS N123 28W W 1/2 6, S 1/2 1 HEADWATER WETLAND
RESTORATION L PT3
185 STEARNS N123 28W NW3,NE3 SHRUB SWAMP D Y C L PT3 B
186 STEARNS N123 28W NW3,NE3 NW HEADWATER WETLAND
RESTORATION L PT3 WILDLIFE CORRIDOR
187 STEARNS N123 28W 2 SE HEADWATER WETLAND
RESTORATION L PT3
188 STEARNS N123 28W 2, 3 HEADWATER WETLAND
RESTORATION L PT3 WILDLIFE CORRIDOR
189 STEARNS N123 28W SWSW2,S1/2SE3,S1/2SW3 OAK WOODLAND C Y T M PT2 B
190 STEARNS N123 28W 2 SE SW WET MEADOW D Y C L PT3 B
191 STEARNS N123 29W 1 SE NE MIXED HARDWOOD SWAMP /
FOREST D Y T L PT3 B,E
192 BENTON N36 30W NW34,SW27,SESE28 DONOVAN LAKE COMPLEX A Y T H PT1 B,E
193 STEARNS N123 28W 18 NW NW EMERGENT MARSH C Y C M PT2 B,E,S ST. AUGUSTA CREEK
FLOODPLAIN
194 BENTON /
SHERBURNE N36 30W SWNE26,SE26,E 1/2 35 WETLAND - UPLAND COMPLEX A Y T H PT1 LARGE BUFFER TO EAST
ELK RIVER
195 SHERBURNE N35 30W 2 NE NE BUFFER/RESTORATION L PT3 EAST SIDE ELK RIVER
196 SHERBURNE N35 30W NENE2,SENE2 SHRUB SWAMP B Y T H PT1
197 SHERBURNE N35 30W 2 SW SE WET MEADOW D Y C L PT3 BUFFER TO ELK RIVER
198 SHERBURNE N35 30W 2 NW SE BUFFER/RESTORATION L PT3 BUFFER TO ELK RIVER
199 SHERBURNE N35 30W NWES15, NESE15,SENE15 BUFFER L PT3 B BUFFER ELK RIVER &
TRIBUTARY
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix B:
Land Development Code Appendix B - Page 1 Submission Requirements
Appendix B - Submission Requirements
Rezoning Application
The following shall be submitted as part of a rezoning application:
1. Give the name(s) of the petitioner(s), and the petition shall be signed by each of them.
The address of each petitioner shall be given.
2. Specific description of the area to be rezoned.
3. Statement of the present zone classification of the area and the proposed zone
classification.
4. Statement of how the rezoning will fit in the general zoning pattern of the neighborhood
and the zoning plan of the entire city.
5. A map showing the property to be rezoned.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix B:
Land Development Code Appendix B - Page 2 Submission Requirements
PUD General Development Plan Amendment Application
The following shall be submitted as part of a PUD General Development Plan Amendment
application:
A map (e.g. plat map) showing the property to be rezoned and all abutting or nearby public
streets.
A site plan drawn to scale, showing the following, must accompany the application form
(complete with applicant(s) and owner(s) signatures):
1. Existing and any proposed uses
2. All buildings and structures
3. Parking stall and drive areas
4. Sign structures
5. Landscaping/vegetative features, wetlands, and other significant land forms/features
6. Paved and gravel surfaces
One full-size site plan and one 11” x 17” site plan are required. Planning & Zoning Department
staff may waive submission of the full-size site plan, when appropriate.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix B:
Land Development Code Appendix B - Page 3 Submission Requirements
Create or Amend a Medical Service District Zoning District Application
The following shall be submitted as part of an application to create or amend a Medical
Service District Zoning District:
A site plan, drawn to scale, must accompany the application form (complete with applicant(s)
and owner(s) signatures). The site plan showing the general layout of the entire area must
include:
1. Traffic pattern plan
2. Parking plan
3. Access points
4. Proposed district boundary and ownership
5. Location and square footage of all existing and proposed future structures and uses
6. Applicable building density information
7. Landscaping plan
8. Exterior signage
9. Estimates of traffic and land impacts on surrounding public streets
One full-size site plan and one 11” x 17” site plan are required. Planning & Zoning Department
staff may waive submission of the full-size site plan, when appropriate.
A map (e.g. plat map) showing the subject property and all abutting or nearby public streets is
required. The map must not be larger than 11” x 17”.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix B:
Land Development Code Appendix B - Page 4 Submission Requirements
Temporary Excavation Permit Application
The following shall be submitted as part of a temporary excavation permit application:
A site plan drawn to scale, showing the following, must accompany the application form
(complete with applicant(s) and owner(s) signatures:
1. Property lines and dimensions
2. Size, location, and use of all existing and future buildings, excavation areas, processing
areas, and stockpiles
3. Parking stalls and drive areas
4. Points and widths of ingress and egress
5. Proposed elevations, drainage and access routes to be used in hauling to and/or from
the site and its frequency
6. Proposed elevations, drainage, and access routes to be used in hauling to and/or from
the site and its frequency
One full-size site plan and one 11” x 17” site plan are required. Planning & Zoning Department
staff may waive submission of the full-size site plan, when appropriate.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix B:
Land Development Code Appendix B - Page 5 Submission Requirements
Variance Application
The following shall be submitted as part of a variance application:
A site plan drawn to scale, showing the following, must accompany the application form
(complete with applicant(s) and owner(s) signatures):
1. Property lines
2. Size, location, and use of all existing and proposed buildings
3. Parking stalls and drive areas
4. Sign structures
5. Landscaping/vegetative features, wetlands, and other significant land forms/features
6. Paved and gravel surfaces
One full-size site plan and one 11” x 17” site plan are required. Planning & Zoning Department
staff may waive submission of the full-size site plan, when appropriate.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix B:
Land Development Code Appendix B - Page 6 Submission Requirements
Conditional Use Permit Application
The following plans, drawn to scale, shall be submitted as part of a conditional use permit
application:
1. Location of the lot and all existing and proposed structures and/or uses on the lot.
2. Dimensions of the lot and all existing and proposed structures and/or uses on the lot.
3. Elevations (topography) of the lot, streets, sanitary and water facilities.
4. Points of access to and from the lot.
If the conditional use permit is for land within the Scenic Rivers District, the following shall also be
submitted as part of a conditional use permit:
1. All applications for a conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a map showing all
lands within one-quarter mile of the affected property together with the names and
addresses of the owners of the land in such areas or the nearest ten property owners,
whichever will provide notice to the greatest number of landowners.
2. In order to secure information upon which to base its determination, the Zoning Board of
Appeals may require the applicant to furnish, in addition to the information required for a
permit, the following information:
a. A plan of the area showing contours, soil types, high water mark, ground water
conditions, bedrock, slope and vegetative cover.
b. Location of buildings, parking areas, traffic access, driveways, walkways, piers, open
spaces and landscaping.
c. Plans of buildings, sewage disposal facilities, water supply system and arrangement of
operations.
d. Specification for areas of proposed filling, grading, lagooning or dredging.
e. Other pertinent information necessary to determine if the proposed use meets the
requirements of this Ordinance. The Zoning Board of Appeals, in evaluating each
application, may request that other state or federal agency make available expert
assistance when possible.
If the conditional use permit is for land within the Floodplain Overlay District, the following shall
also be submitted as part of a conditional use permit:
1. Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation
of the lot, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, flood-proofing
measures, and the relationship of the above to the location of the stream channel.
2. Specifications for building construction and materials, flood-proofing, filling, dredging,
grading, channel improvement, storage of materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix B:
Land Development Code Appendix B - Page 7 Submission Requirements
3. Transmit one copy of the information described in subsection 4.3-1 above to a
designated engineer or other expert persons or agency for technical assistance, where
necessary, in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities,
the seriousness of flood damage to the use, the adequacy of the plans for protection,
and other technical matters.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix B:
Land Development Code Appendix B - Page 8 Submission Requirements
Special Exceptions Permit Application
The following shall be submitted as part of a special exceptions permit application:
A site plan drawn to scale, showing the following, must accompany the application form
(complete with applicant(s) and owner(s) signatures):
1. Property lines and dimensions
2. Size, location, and use of all buildings
3. Parking stalls and drive areas
4. Points and widths of ingress and egress
5. Recreation and other open space areas
6. Facilities and uses of recreation areas
7. Landscaping features on the property, such as sod, seeded grass, trees, including species
and size at time of planting, ornamental shrubs and bushes, including species and size at
time of planting; flower gardens, landscape rock, patios, sidewalks, and other paved
surfaces
8. Other property or use related information as deemed necessary to evaluate the request
for a special exceptions permit.
One full-size site plan and one 11” x 17” site plan are required. Planning & Zoning Department
staff may waive submission of the full-size site plan, when appropriate.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix B:
Land Development Code Appendix B - Page 9 Submission Requirements
Land Use Change Permit Application
The following shall be submitted as part of a rezoning application:
A site plan drawn to scale, showing the following, must accompany the application form
(complete with applicant(s) and owner(s) signatures):
1. Property lines and dimensions
2. Size, location, and use of all buildings
3. Parking stalls and drive areas
4. Points and widths of ingress and egress
5. Recreation and other open space areas
6. Facilities and uses of recreation areas
7. Landscaping features on the property (sod, seeded grass, trees, including species and
size at time of planting, ornamental shrubs and bushes, including species and size at time
of planting; flower gardens, landscape rock, patios, sidewalks, and other paved surfaces)
8. Property or use-related information as deemed necessary to evaluate the request for a
land use change permit
One full-size site plan and one 11” x 17” site plan are required. Planning & Zoning Department
staff may waive submission of the full-size site plan, when appropriate.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix B:
Land Development Code Appendix B - Page 10 Submission Requirements
Sign Permit Application
The following shall be submitted as part of a Sign Permit application:
1. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
2. Location of building, structure or lot to which, or upon which, the sign is to be attached
or erected.
3. Drawing of the sign showing dimensions and describing the face of the sign.
4. Upon Request: Give a copy of stress sheets and calculations showing the structure is
designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount required by this
and all other laws and ordinances.
5. Name of person, firm, corporation or association erecting sign.
6. Written consent of the owner of any vacant land on which the sign is to be located.
7. Such other information as the Building Inspector requires to show full compliance with this
and all other laws and ordinances of the City.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix B:
Land Development Code Appendix B - Page 11 Submission Requirements
Floodway and Flood Fringe District Determinations within the General Floodplain District
Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other approval within the General Floodplain
District, the applicant shall be required to furnish such of the following information as is deemed
necessary by the Zoning Administrator for the determination of the regulatory flood protection
elevation and whether the proposed use is within the Floodway or Flood Fringe District:
1. A typical valley cross-section(s) showing the channel of the stream, elevation of land
areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-sectional areas to be occupied by the
proposed development, and high water information.
2. Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground, pertinent structure, fill,
or storage elevations, the size, location, and spatial arrangement of all proposed and
existing structures on the site, and the location and elevations of streets.
3. Photographs showing existing land uses, vegetation upstream and downstream, and soil
types.
4. Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the stream for at
least 500 feet in either direction from the proposed development.
The applicant shall be responsible to submit one copy of the above information to a designated
engineer or other expert person or agency for technical assistance in determining whether the
proposed use is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District and to determine the regulatory flood
protection elevation. Procedures consistent with Minnesota Regulations, Parts 6120.5000 -
6120.6200 and 44 Code of Federal Regulations Part 65 shall be followed in this expert evaluation.
The designated engineer or expert is strongly encouraged to discuss the proposed technical
evaluation methodology with the respective Department of Natural Resources' Area Hydrologist
prior to commencing the analysis. The designated engineer or expert shall:
1. Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood.
2. Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based upon a hydraulic analysis
of the stream channel and overbank areas.
3. Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional flood without
increasing flood stages more than 0.5 foot. A lesser stage increase than 0.5 foot shall be
required if, as a result of the additional stage increase, increased flood damages would
result. An equal degree of encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach
shall be assumed in computing floodway boundaries.
4. The Zoning Administrator shall present the technical evaluation and findings of the
designated engineer or expert to the City. The City must formally accept the technical
evaluation and the recommended Floodway and/or Flood Fringe District boundary or
deny the permit application. The City, prior to official action, may submit the application
and all supporting data and analyses to the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
the Department of Natural Resources or the Planning Commission for review and
comment. Once the Floodway and Flood Fringe District Boundaries have been
determined, the City shall refer the matter back to the Zoning Administrator who shall
process the permit application consistent with the applicable provisions of this Code.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix C:
Land Development Code Appendix C - Page 1 Applicability of Design Guidelines
APPENDIX C – HISTORIC DISTRICTS
St. Cloud Residential Historic Districts
? Barden Park Historic District
? Pantown Neighborhood Historic District
? Southside Neighborhood Historic District
St. Cloud Commercial Historic District
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix D:
Land Development Code Appendix D - Page 1 Sign Area Calculations
APPENDIX D – SIGN AREA CALCULATIONS
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix D:
Land Development Code Appendix D - Page 2 Sign Area Calculations
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix D:
Land Development Code Appendix D - Page 3 Sign Area Calculations
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix D:
Land Development Code Appendix D - Page 4 Sign Area Calculations
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix D:
Land Development Code Appendix D - Page 5 Sign Area Calculations
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix D:
Land Development Code Appendix D - Page 6 Sign Area Calculations
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix E:
Land Development Code Appendix E – Page 1 Plant List
APPENDIX E – PLANT LIST
Prohibited Invasive Aquatic Plants
Certain invasive species that can threaten natural resources and their use have been designated as
prohibited invasive species in Minnesota. It is unlawful (a misdemeanor) to possess, import, purchase,
transport, or introduce these species except under a permit for disposal, control, research, or education.
The prohibited invasive species in Minnesota include the following and any hybrids, cultivars, or varieties of
the species:
Botanical Name Common Name Source
alvinia molesta
Aquarium Watermoss or Giant
Salvinia MN-DNR & MDA
Butomus umbellatus* Flowering Rush MN-DNR & MDA
Crassula helmsii Australian stone crop MN-DNR & MDA
Hydrilla verticillata Hydrilla MN-DNR & MDA
Hydrocharis morsus-ranae European Frog-bit MN-DNR & MDA
Hygrophila polysperma Indian swampweed MN-DNR & MDA
Lagarosiphon major African oxygen weed MN-DNR & MDA
Lythrum salicaria, Lythrum virgatum,
or any variety, hybrid, or cultivar
thereof Purple loosestrife MN-DNR & MDA
Myriophyllum spicatum* Eurasian Watermilfoil MN-DNR & MDA
Potamogeton crispus* Curly-leaf pondweed MN-DNR & MDA
Stratiotes aloides Water Aloe or Water Soldiers MN-DNR & MDA
Trapa natans Water Chestnut MN-DNR & MDA
* These species are known to be in Minnesota waters.
Prohibited Invasive and unlisted Non-Native Plants
Regulated and unlisted non-native species are legal to possess, sell, buy, and transport, but they may not
be introduced into a free-living state, such as being released or planted in public waters:
Botanical Name Common Name Source
Cabomba caroliniana Carolina Fanwort or Fanwort MN-DNR & MDA
Nymphaea spp.* Non-Native Waterlilies MN-DNR & MDA
Myriophyllum aquaticum Parrot's Feather MN-DNR & MDA
Iris pseudacoris* Yellow Iris or Yellow Flag MN-DNR & MDA
* These species are known to be in Minnesota waters.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix E:
Land Development Code Appendix E – Page 2 Plant List
Prohibited Invasive and Non-Native Plants
Invasive and non-native plants cause or may cause economic or environmental harm or harm to human
health; or threatens or may threaten natural resources or the use of natural resources in Minnesota. Invasive
and non-native plants have an advantage because the insects, diseases, and animals that would normally
keep their populations in control are not found in Minnesota and are able to spread at varying rates
because they have developed specialized mechanisms to survive. These plants crowd out native
vegetation, add to problems with erosion, diminish forage production on land that is used by domestic and
wild animals and impact the public in many negative ways:
Botanical Name Common Name Source
Alliaria petiolata Garlic mustard MN-DNR & MDA
Berberis thunbergii Japanese barberry MN-DNR & MDA
Berteroa incana Hoary alyssum MN-DNR & MDA
Bromus inermis Smooth brome grass MN-DNR & MDA
Butomus umbellatus Flowering rush MN-DNR & MDA
Caragana arborescens Siberian peashrub MN-DNR & MDA
Carduus nutans Musk or nodding thistle MN-DNR & MDA
Centaurea maculosa Spotted knapweed MN-DNR & MDA
Chrysanthemum leucanthemum Oxeye daisy MN-DNR & MDA
Circisum vulgare Bull thistle MN-DNR & MDA
Cirsium arvense Canada thistle MN-DNR & MDA
Coronilla varia Crown vetch or axseed MN-DNR & MDA
Cynanchum nigrum Black Swallow-wort MN-DNR & MDA
Daucus carota Queen Ann's lace MN-DNR & MDA
Digitalis lanata Grecian foxglove MN-DNR & MDA
Elaeagnus angustifolia Russian olive MN-DNR & MDA
Euphorbia esula Leafy spurge MN-DNR & MDA
Frangula alnus Glossy buckthorn MN-DNR & MDA
Glechoma bederacea
Creeping Charlie, ground ivy or
gill-over-the-ground MN-DNR & MDA
Hieracium aurantiacum Orange hawkweed MN-DNR & MDA
Iris pseudacorus Yellow iris MN-DNR & MDA
Linaria vulgaris
Butter and eggs or common
toadflax MN-DNR & MDA
Lonicera tartarica, L. morrowii, L. x
bella Exotic honeysuckles MN-DNR & MDA
Lotus corniculatus Birdsfoot trefoil MN-DNR & MDA
Lythrum salicaria Purple loosestrife MN-DNR & MDA
Melitotus alba, M. officinalis White and yellow sweet clover MN-DNR & MDA
Miscanthus sacchariflorus Amur silver grass MN-DNR & MDA
Pastinaca sativa Wild parsnip MN-DNR & MDA
Phalaris arundinacea Reed canary grass MN-DNR & MDA
Polygonum cuspidatum Japanese knotweed MN-DNR & MDA
Rhamnus cathartica Common buckthorn MN-DNR & MDA
Robinia pseudoacacia Black locust MN-DNR & MDA
Sonchus arvensis Perennial sow thistle MN-DNR & MDA
Tanacetum vulgare Common tansy MN-DNR & MDA
Ulmus pumila Siberian elm MN-DNR & MDA
Vicia cracca, Vicia villosa Cow vetch and hairy vetch MN-DNR & MDA
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix E:
Land Development Code Appendix E – Page 3 Plant List
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix F:
Land Development Code Appendix F – Page 1 Permanent Stormwater Design Checklist
APPENDIX F – PERMANENT STORMWATER DESIGN CHECKLIST
Last Updated: May 20, 2019
Site Address/Project Name: ________________________________________
Prepared By: Date:____________
Reviewed By: Date:____________
? Proposed drainage plan and calculations shall be prepared in accordance with the
current City Standards for volume, rate, and water quality control as outlined in the
City’s Land Development Code, Article 19.12 DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS found at:
http://ci.stcloud.mn.us/index.aspx?nid=1011
? Checklist items are reviewed during the building permit review, land disturbance
permit and/or subdivision review process.
? This checklist is not an all-inclusive list of design requirements. The owner and the
licensed professional responsible for design shall be responsible to meet all
applicable local, state and federal requirements.
1.0 GENERAL
1.1 Proposed drainage plan and hydraulic calculations are dated and signed by a
licensed professional.
1.2 Owner, engineer and architect name, address, phone and email listed.
1.3 Plan is to scale with a legend. North arrow shown.
1.4 Size of the project shown:
a) Existing impervious and pervious surface areas of the site.
b) Ultimate (fully developed) impervious and pervious surface of the site.
c) Development schedule: show phasing and calendar year each phase is
planned for construction.
1.5 Plan is drawn in 2-foot maximum contours. Existing and proposed contours shown
differently. All contours are labeled and legible. Where applicable, extend existing
contour lines a minimum beyond the site boundary to accurately depict the
drainage patterns. Elevation tied to NGVD 88 (City benchmark).
1.6 Describe and identify the location of existing vegetation.
1.7 Areas not to be disturbed clearly defined.
1.8 On-site soil characteristics: Boundaries of different soil types are described.
Groundwater elevations are shown.
1.9 Existing drainage: Show pre-developed drainage areas, land use and the direction
of flow for each area and travel path used to determine the Time of Concentration.
1.10 Final drainage: Show post-developed drainage areas, land use and the direction of
flow for each area and travel path used to determine the Time of Concentration.
1.11 Identify off-site catchment areas draining to the site. Provide 2-foot contours. Show
land use and direction of flow for each area and travel path used to determine the
Time of Concentration.
1.12 Existing public and private utilities shown.
PERMANENT STORMWATER DESIGN CHECKLIST
? For New Subdivisions and Commercial Building Sites
? Each site will be reviewed for site specific items
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix F:
Land Development Code Appendix F – Page 2 Permanent Stormwater Design Checklist
1.13 All receiving surface waters, including wetlands and ponds, within one mile from the
project boundaries that will receive stormwater from the construction site. Identify if
the surface water is a special or impaired water.
1.14 Property limits shown. Streets labeled. Lot and block information shown if platted.
Street address shown if un-platted.
1.15 A long-term inspection and maintenance plan for all permanent stormwater
treatment practices is required to be submitted with the SWPPP.
2.0 EASEMENTS
2.1 Existing and proposed drainage easements shown and labeled on the plan.
2.2 Private structural stormwater BMPs (e.g. ponds, infiltration/filtration systems) shall meet
permanent public easement and maintenance agreement requirements per Land
Development Code Section 19.12.E. Easement access shall be designed for:
a) The easement is required to be a minimum of 10 feet in width and shall extend
from the structural stormwater BMP to the boundary of the parcel and
terminate at said boundary at a location providing reasonable access (e.g.
abut to existing approaches) from the adjoining public right-of-way onto the
easement.
b) The easement shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width from the edge of the
structural stormwater BMP and include all pre-treatment BMPs (e.g. sumps). In
the case of surface ponding BMP’s, the easement shall be a minimum of 10
feet in width from the Normal High-Water Level.
2.3 The easement access shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width from the Normal High-
Water Level for City owned (public) ponds and infiltration systems.
3.0 BUILDING LOTS & DRAINAGE SWALES
3.1 All existing and proposed lot corner elevations shown to the nearest tenth of a foot.
3.2 Control/spot elevations for drainage ways provided.
3.3 100-year flow contained in easement.
3.4 Minimum slope of side lot drainage swales is 2%, direction arrow shown.
3.5 Minimum back lot drainage swale slope is 1%, direction arrow shown.
3.6 Building pads, type of house to be built, garage floor elevation, lowest floor elevation
and lowest opening elevation are shown.
3.7 Driveway slope from garage to the gutter is shown.
3.8 Lowest opening elevation: min. 2 feet above 100-year HWL, and min. 1 foot above
emergency overflow elevation.
4.0 STORMDRAIN SYSTEM, INLETS, AND OVERFLOWS
4.1 Stormdrain system design: Rainfall frequency shall be determined by City Engineer.
4.2 Pipe size, length, grade and material shown.
4.3 Top of castings and all inverts of catch basins and manholes shown. Label storm
drain structures.
4.4 All apron elevations (inlets and outlets) shown.
4.5 450-foot max. manhole spacing (City owned systems only).
4.6 Apron inlets to stormdrain system include trash guards.
4.7 Discharge direction of flow generally 45 degrees or less to the flow direction of
receiving ditch or stream.
4.8 Discharges to rear property lines shall be piped to at least the rear property line.
4.9 Overflow design to be considered for events greater than stormdrain system design
event.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix F:
Land Development Code Appendix F – Page 3 Permanent Stormwater Design Checklist
4.10 Private stormdrain pipes and structures servicing a building site (e.g. commercial lot)
not designed for water quality treatment shall meet requirements of the plumbing
code.
5.0 PRETREATMENT
5.1 A pretreatment device such as a vegetated filter strip, small sedimentation basin, or
water quality inlet (e.g. grit chamber, sump, hydrodynamic separator) is required to
remove solids, floating materials, and oil and grease from the runoff, to the maximum
extent practicable before stormwater discharges into an infiltration or filtration
system. Pretreatment devices shall be sized and designed based on Minnesota
Stormwater Manual guidance and to prevent clogging of the system.
5.2 It is recommended that pretreatment practices be designed for easy maintenance
and capture a minimum of 25 percent of the sediment from runoff.
5.3 Pre-treatment sumps shall have a minimum 3-foot sump depth and be a manhole
structure if possible.
5.4 Pre-treatment sumps are required on the last storm manhole prior to discharging to a
pond (City owned ponds only).
5.5 Standard details of proprietary pre-treatment devices shall be provided.
5.6 City owned pre-treatment devices shall be sized by the City’s Stormwater
Compliance Specialist.
6.0 WET SEDIMENTATION BASIN (PONDS)
6.1 Pond drainage/service area shown (in the report).
6.2 Grading plan with pond cross section. All apron elevations (inlet and outlet) shown.
6.3 Hydraulic calculations for ponding provided. 100-year high water level and normal
water level shown.
6.4 Where possible, provide a forebay at the inlet; locate inlet and outlet at opposite
ends of pond; and provide length to width ratio 3:1.
6.5 Permanent pool volume minimum of 1,800 cubic feet of storage below the outlet
pipe per acre drained to the basin.
6.6 Pond design shall provide live storage for a water quality volume (calculated as an
instantaneous volume) based on the new and/or redevelopment volume
requirement not treated by another on-site system.
6.7 Outlet sized to discharge water quality volume at no more than 5.66 cfs/acre of
pond surface area
6.8 Outlet designed to prevent discharge of floating debris and short circuiting.
6.9 Energy dissipation on outlet piping.
6.10 Emergency overflow spillway is located to protect adjacent property and large fill
sections.
6.11 Stabilized emergency overflow spillway provided to accommodate storms greater
than the 100-year event. High point elevation and direction of overflow marked on
plans. Top of berm is 1 foot above emergency overflow spillway.
6.12 Ponds shall not be in a wetland unless mitigated for.
6.13 Minimum horizontal distance between a water supply well and the ordinary high
water level of a pond is 35 feet.
6.14 Pre-treatment sumps are required on the last storm manhole prior to discharging to
the pond. (City owned ponds only)
6.15 Pond liners shall be considered, following Minnesota Stormwater Manual design
specifications, in circumstances where a permanent pool is needed but difficult to
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix F:
Land Development Code Appendix F – Page 4 Permanent Stormwater Design Checklist
maintain due to site conditions, or where seepage from the pond into the
groundwater would otherwise occur but must be avoided. This includes:
a) Areas with Hydrologic Group A soils, gravel, or fractured bedrock
b) Potential stormwater hotspots (PSHs) or contaminated soils or groundwater
6.16 As part of the drawing set submittal, provide in table form the following information:
a) Elevation of normal water level (NWL).
b) Elevation of 100-year high water level (HWL), with respective discharge rate.
6.17 The permanent volume must reach a minimum depth of at least 3 feet with no depth
greater than 10 feet, and be configured to minimize scour or resuspension of solids.
6.18 A 10:1 bench is provided for first 1 foot of depth below normal water elevation.
6.19 Buffer zones, pond slopes, pond depth as per City of St. Cloud Engineering
Department Standard Plate “Vegetated Buffer Area for Wet Ponds”.
6.20 Vegetation and slope stabilization methods are subject to City’s approval.
6.21 Minimum 10-foot width at top of berm.
7.0 INFILTRATION/FILTRATION
7.1 Refer to the Minnesota Stormwater Manual for specific design criteria and guidance.
City owned systems shall be designed in partnership with City staff.
7.2 Infiltration systems must not be excavated to final grade, or within three (3) feet of
final grade, and filter media cannot be installed until the contributing drainage area
has been constructed and fully stabilized unless rigorous erosion prevention and
sediment controls (e.g. diversion berms) are provided to keep sediment and runoff
completely away from the infiltration/filtration area. Notes, temporary BMPs, and
details provided on plans.
7.3 Area to be infiltrated or filtrated shall be shown in the stormwater report.
7.4 Calculations and/or computer model results that demonstrate the design adequacy
of the infiltration or filtration system must be included as part of the SWPPP.
7.5 The water quality volume shall discharge through the soil surface or filter media in 48
hours or less. Additional flows that cannot be infiltrated or filtered in 48 hours should
be routed to bypass the system through a stabilized discharge point. A way to
visually verify that the system is functioning as designed must be provided.
7.6 At least one soil boring is required in the location of each infiltration treatment system
to verify soil types, ensure a minimum of 3 feet of separation from the seasonally
saturated soils (or from bedrock) and the bottom of the proposed infiltration system,
and to help determine and confirm infiltration rates.
7.7 In addition to the soil boring required above, At least one double-ring infiltrometer
test is required to be completed in all infiltration treatment systems per the chart and
below. Field measured infiltration rates must be divided by a safety factor of 2. Onsite
testing must be consistent with the recommendations in the Minnesota
Stormwater Manual
a) For new development projects of raw land, the infiltration rate test is required
prior to plan submittal.
b) For redevelopment projects with existing infrastructure over the proposed
infiltration area, the infiltration rate test must be completed prior to installation
of the infiltration system. Results must be approved by the City’s Engineering
Department prior to installation.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix F:
Land Development Code Appendix F – Page 5 Permanent Stormwater Design Checklist
Surface area (ft2) of
infiltration BMP Soil Borings Double-Ring
Infiltrometer Tests
<1,000 1 1
1,000 - 5,000 2 2
5,000 - 10,000 3 3
>10,000 4 4
7.8 The number of soil borings and
double-ring infiltration tests required
per each infiltration system is shown
in the chart.
7.9 Infiltration systems shall not be constructed in areas where soil infiltration rates are
field measured at more than 8.3 inches per hour unless soils are amended per MN
Stormwater Manual guidance.
7.10 Provide scaled drawing with typical detail and cross section and associated pretreatment
BMPs. Show runoff area directed to the BMP. Show design details such as
planting/engineered soils, landscape/final stabilization plan, soil & subgrade
preparation details.
7.11 Infiltration is prohibited when the infiltration systems will be constructed in:
a) Areas that receive discharges from industrial facilities which are not authorized
to infiltrate industrial stormwater under an NPDES/SDS Industrial Stormwater
Permit issued by the MPCA.
b) Areas that receive discharge from vehicle fueling and maintenance areas.
c) Areas with less than three (3) feet of separation distance from the bottom of
the infiltration system to the elevation of the seasonally saturated soils or the
top of bedrock.
d) Areas where high levels of contaminants in soil or groundwater will be
mobilized by the infiltrating stormwater.
e) Areas of predominately Hydrologic Soil Group D (clay) soils.
f) Areas within 1,000 feet up-gradient, or 100 feet down-gradient of active karst
features
g) Areas within a Drinking Water Supply Management Area (DWSMA) as defined
in Minn. R. 4720.5100, subp. 13 and per NPDES CSW Permit requirements.
h) Areas where soil infiltration rates are more than 8.3 inches per hour unless soils
are amended to slow the infiltration rate below 8.3 inches per hour.
i) Areas where infiltrating stormwater may mobilize high levels of contaminants in
soil or groundwater. It is required to complete the MPCA's contamination
screening checklist or conduct your own assessment to determine the
suitability for infiltration. Permittees must retain the checklist or assessment with
the SWPPP.
7.12 Filtration systems shall be designed to remove at least 80% TSS.
7.13 Filtration systems shall meet City standard plate/detail requirements for filtration basin
and draintile connection and cleanout.
7.14 Filtration systems must be constructed with an impermeable liner with less than three
(3) feet of separation between seasonally saturated soils or from bedrock, and in
areas where infiltrating water may mobilize contaminants in soil or groundwater.
7.15 Underground treatment systems shall also meet the following minimum requirements:
a) Minimize manifold pipe lengths and maximize manifold pipe sizes.
b) 6” minimum inspection port centered on each row/section.
c) At least one maintenance access per each 100-foot maintenance section.
d) Pipe transitions shall be designed without a vertical lip.
e) Proprietary device standard details shall be provided.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix F:
Land Development Code Appendix F – Page 6 Permanent Stormwater Design Checklist
7.16 As part of the drawing set submittal, provide in table form the following information
from the below example. Include in the table additional site and BMP specific
summary information to determine volume reduction, water quality or rate control
compliance.
EXAMPLE BMP SUMMARY TABLE
Provide additional information as appropriate to site conditions and BMPs used
EXISTING IMPERVIOUS AREA = 25,000 SF IMPERVIOUS DRAINAGE AREA TO BMPS
EXISTING PERVIOUS AREA = 27,000 SF RAIN GARDEN = 12,000 SF
STORMTECH = 23,000 SF
PROPOSED IMPERVOIUS AREA = 50,000 SF
PROPOSED PERVIOUS AREA = 2,000 SF PERVIOUS DRAINAGE TO BMPS = 1,500 SF
NEW IMPERVIOUS AREA = 25,000 SF SITE INFILTRATION RATE = 3.1 IN/HR (TESTED, SEE TEST RESULTS)
REDEVELOPED IMPERVIOUS AREA = 10,000 SF
SAFETY FACTOR = 2 (MN STORMWATER MANUAL
RECCOMENDED SAFETY FACTOR)
FINAL PERVIOUS AREA = 2,000 SF DESIGN INFILTRATIOIN RATE = 3.1/2 = 1.55 IN/HR
REQUIRED VOLUME REDUCTION: TIME OF INFILTRATION
25,000 SF X 1" = 2,084 CF
RAIN GARDEN: 24" (SOIL MIX DEPTH + SURFACE) / 1.55 IN/HR
= 15.5 HRS (OK)
10,000 SF X 1/4" = 209 CF
STORMTECH CHAMBER + ROCK DEPTH = 36" / 1.55 IN/HR =
23.2 HRS (OK)
2,084 + 209 = 2,293 TOTAL CF REQUIRED
PROVIDED INFILTRATION VOLUME (2 BMPS): DEPTH TO GROUNDWATER & SOILS:
RAIN GARDEN = 350 CF (SHOW
CALCULATION)
SOIL BORINGS SHOW GREATER THAN 10 FEET FROM BOTTOM
OF EACH BMP TO GW
STORMTECH SC 740 = 2,000 CF (SEE CALCS IN
REPORT OR SHOW)
SEE SOIL BORING X IN REPORT (SHOW WATER TABLE & BMP
BOTTOM ELEVATIONS)
8.0 REFERENCES
8.1 City Standard Construction Specifications and Plates
8.2 Minnesota Stormwater Manual
8.3 City of St. Cloud’s Land Development Code
a) Article 19.12, Drainage Improvements
b) Appendix G, Alternative Stormwater Treatment Options
c) Appendix H, Stormwater Easement & Maintenance Agreement Documents
8.4 Permanent Stormwater Treatment Practice Inspection and Maintenance Plan
Examples
8.5 Stormwater Easement & Maintenance Agreement Documentation Requirements
and Checklist
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix G:
Land Development Code Appendix G – Page 1 Alternative Stormwater Treatment Options
APPENDIX G – Alternative Stormwater Treatment Options
The following is based off the flexible treatment options process developed by the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s Minimal Impact Design Standards (MIDS)
Community Assistance Package. The City of St. Cloud encourages the use of the MIDS
calculator to show volume reduction from alternative practices and pollutant removal
documentation. The MIDS calculator is located:
http://stormwater.pca.state.mn.us/index.php/Calculator
Projects must fully attempt to comply with the appropriate volume reduction
requirement as described in the City’s Land Development Code Article 19.12. Options
considered and presented shall examine the merits of relocating project elements to
address varying soil conditions and other constraints across the site. If full compliance is
not possible due to any factors listed below, the applicant must document the reason
and submit to the City Engineer for review and approval. If site constraints or restrictions
limit the full volume reduction requirement, the following flexible treatment options shall
be used.
Documentation of the flexible treatment options sequence starting with Alternative #1
shall be provided to the City Engineer; if Alternative #1 cannot be met, then Alternative
#2 shall be analyzed. Applicants must document the specific reasons why Alternative
#1 cannot be met based on the factors listed below.
If Alternative #2 cannot be met then Alternative #3 can be considered. Applicants
must document the specific reasons why Alternative #2 cannot be met based on the
factors listed below.
If alternative #3 is not feasible or approved, then alternative #4 shall be met. When all
of the conditions are fulfilled within an alternative, this sequence is completed.
Volume reduction techniques that will be considered shall include infiltration; reuse &
rainwater harvesting; canopy interception & evapotranspiration; and/or additional
techniques included in the Minimal Impact Design Standards (MIDS) calculator and the
Minnesota Stormwater Manual.
Higher priority shall be given to BMPs that include volume reduction. Secondary
preference is to employ filtration techniques, followed by rate control BMPs.
Factors to be considered for each alternative include:
a) Karst geology
b) Shallow bedrock
c) High groundwater
d) Hotspots or contaminated soils
e) Drinking Water Source Management Areas or within 200 feet of drinking water
well
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix G:
Land Development Code Appendix G – Page 2 Alternative Stormwater Treatment Options
f) Zoning, setbacks or other land use requirements
g) Excessive cost
h) Poor soils (infiltration rates that are too low or too high, problematic urban soils)
Alternative #1: Applicant attempts to comply with the following conditions:
a) Achieve at least half of the volume reduction required.
b) Remove 75% of the annual TP load from the increase in impervious surfaces if the
site is new development or from the new and/or fully reconstructed impervious
surfaces for a redevelopment site.
c) Options considered and presented shall examine the merits of relocating project
elements to address varying soil conditions and other constraints across the site.
Alternative #2: Applicant attempts to comply with the following conditions:
a) Achieve volume reduction to the maximum extent practicable.
b) Remove 60% of the annual TP load from the increase in impervious surfaces if
the site is new development or from the new and/or fully reconstructed
impervious surfaces for a redevelopment site.
c) Options considered and presented shall examine the merits of relocating project
elements to address varying soil conditions and other constraints across the site.
Alternative #3: Off-site mitigation, as approved by the City Engineer, equivalent to the
volume reduction requirement for the construction activity, can be used in areas
selected in the below order of preference. Off-site mitigation projects shall be
completed within 24 months after the start of the original construction activity.
1. Locations that yield benefits to the same receiving water that receives runoff
from the original construction activity.
2. Locations within the same Department of Natural Resources (DNR) catchment
area as the original construction activity.
3. Locations in the next adjacent DNR catchment area up-stream.
4. Locations anywhere within the City.
Alternative #4: Pay into the City’s Stormwater Impact Fund:
a) The remaining volume reduction not met onsite will be subject to the stormwater
impact fee. The fee is determined by multiplying the remaining stormwater
volume by the fixed cost multiplied by an administrative multiplier.
Stormwater Impact Fund Fee = (Volume) x (Fixed Cost x Multiplier)
= (V) x (FC x M)
Where:
V = Remaining required volume reduction not met on-site.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix G:
Land Development Code Appendix G – Page 3 Alternative Stormwater Treatment Options
FC = The fixed cost, as set in ordinance section 575, Public Utilities
Department Fees, is determined by the average expected cost per
cubic foot of volume reduction needed to construct off-site BMPs.
M = The multiplier, as set in ordinance section 575, Public Utilities Department
Fees, is determined by the expected cost to administer, design and
provide long-term maintenance on installed BMPs.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix H:
Land Development Code Appendix H – Page 1 Stormwater Easement & Maintenance Agreement Standard Documents
APPENDIX H – STORMWATER EASEMENT & MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT
STANDARD DOCUMENTS
The following are standard documents to be used to meet easement and maintenance
agreement requirements related to Article 19 of the Land Development Code. The City’s
Legal Department will prepare the documents for owner signatures.
? 3” top margin required on first page of each recorded document.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix H:
Land Development Code Appendix H – Page 2 Stormwater Easement & Maintenance Agreement Standard Documents
PERMANENT DRAINAGE EASEMENT
This agreement, is made this _____ day of _______________, 20___, by and between
________________________, hereinafter called “Grantor,” and the City of St. Cloud, Minnesota, a
municipal corporation organized under the laws of the State of Minnesota, hereinafter called “Grantee.”
That whereas said Grantor is the owner of that tract of land in the County of insert County Name,
State of Minnesota legally described as:
Insert legal description of entire parcel
That for good and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which is hereby
acknowledged, the Grantor does hereby grant and convey to the Grantee and its assigns, a perpetual access
easement to, around and from the structural stormwater BMP located within the following described
easement area to-wit:
Insert Legal Description for the easement
1. The easement is required to be a minimum of 10 feet in width and shall extend from the structural
stormwater BMP to the boundary of the parcel and terminate at said boundary at a location
providing for reasonable access (e.g. abut to existing approaches) from the adjoining public
right-of-way onto the easement.
2. The easement shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width from the edge of the structural stormwater
BMP and include all pre-treatment BMPs (e.g. sumps). In the case of surface ponding BMP’s, the
easement shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width from the Normal High Water Level.
3. Provide a map (exhibit) showing the location of the easement area along with the written legal
description. Must be 11 x 17 for recording purposes.
for the right to, but not the obligation, to, inspect, maintain and repair such Structural Stormwater BMP(s)
located in the above described easement area. Grantor grants to Grantee the right over and across
Grantor’s adjacent lands to access the above described easement area.
No one other than Grantor and Insert who (e.g. mortgage company) or delete if none possess any
right, title or interest in the property above described.
The intent of this easement is not to shift responsibility from Grantor, its successors or assigns,
the responsibility for, inspections, maintenance and repair of the Structural Stormwater BMP(s). Grantor,
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix H:
Land Development Code Appendix H – Page 3 Stormwater Easement & Maintenance Agreement Standard Documents
its successors or assigns, shall remain primarily responsible for all such inspections, maintenance and
repair of the Structural Stormwater BMP(s) located in the above easement area.
EXHIBIT A IS/ARE ATTACHED (IF THIS APPLIES ….A COPY OF THE CONSENT
SUBORDINATION AGREEMENT)
[Signatures begin on next page]
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix H:
Land Development Code Appendix H – Page 4 Stormwater Easement & Maintenance Agreement Standard Documents
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have hereunto executed this document the day and year first above
written.
CITY OF ST. CLOUD, MINNESOTA
By_______________________________
Dave Kleis
Its Mayor
By _______________________________
Seth Kauffman
Its City Clerk
STATE OF MINNESOTA )
) ss
COUNTY OF __________ )
On this _____ day of __________________, 20__, before me, a Notary Public within and for the
County of ________________, State of Minnesota, personally appeared Dave Kleis, and Seth Kauffman,
the mayor and City Clerk of the City of St. Cloud, Minnesota, to me known to be the persons described
herein and who executed the foregoing instrument and acknowledged that they executed same as their
free act and deed.
___________________________________________
Notary Public
My Commission Expires: _________________________
[Signatures continued on next page]
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix H:
Land Development Code Appendix H – Page 5 Stormwater Easement & Maintenance Agreement Standard Documents
INSERT OWNER NAME
By____________________________________
Type name of signatory
Insert title of owner Authorized Signatory
STATE OF MINNESOTA )
) ss
COUNTY OF __________ )
On this _____ day of __________________, 20___, before me, a Notary Public within and for the
County of ________________, State of Minnesota, personally appeared insert name of owner authorized
signatory, the insert title of owner authorized signatory of insert property owner name, to me known to be
the person described herein and who executed the foregoing instrument and acknowledged that he executed
same as his free act and deed.
___________________________________________
Notary Public
My Commission Expires: _________________________
THIS DOCUMENT DRAFTED BY:
St. Cloud City Attorney’s Office
400 2nd Street South
St. Cloud, MN 56301
(320) 255-7204
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix H:
Land Development Code Appendix H – Page 6 Stormwater Easement & Maintenance Agreement Standard Documents
PRIVATE STORMWATER BMP MAINTENANCE
AGREEMENT
I. THIS AGREEMENT, made this day of ____________________, 20 , by and
between the City of St. Cloud (hereinafter referred at as the “City”), a Minnesota Municipal
Corporation, and, [corporation, individual] (hereinafter referred to as “Owner”), its
successors and assigns, with reference to the following facts and circumstances:
A. Owner, owns certain real property situated in the City of St. Cloud, legally described as
follows:
Insert Legal Description of entire parcel(s) structural stormwater BMP is located on
(hereinafter referred to as the “Subject Property”).
B. As a condition of its approval of the development or re-development of the Subject
Property, the City has required that the parties hereto enter into an agreement, which
makes provision for the maintenance of the Structural Stormwater Best Management
Practice(s) (BMPs) located within the boundaries of the Subject Property as the same is
described and depicted in those certain construction plans prepared by Owner.
C. The parties hereto desire to set forth their agreement with respect to the maintenance of
the Structural Stormwater BMPs and the costs of such maintenance.
II. NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing facts and circumstances, and for
other good and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which is hereby
acknowledged, the parties hereto, hereby agree as follows:
A. For the purpose of this Agreement, maintenance of the Structural Stormwater BMPs shall
mean the regular inspection, routine maintenance, and major maintenance described
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix H:
Land Development Code Appendix H – Page 7 Stormwater Easement & Maintenance Agreement Standard Documents
within the maintenance plan and as required to maintain the performance standard and
function of the Structural Stormwater BMPs identified within the projects Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) and construction documents.
B. Owner shall be solely responsible for the maintenance of the Structural Stormwater
BMPs, and shall bear all costs of such maintenance.
C. Owner shall complete an annual report, certified by a qualified individual. The report
shall include written documentation of the inspection schedule, dates of inspection,
remedial actions taken to repair, modify, or reconstruct the BMPs, certification that the
BMP(s) are functioning in accordance with the approved plans, and notification of any
planned change in responsibility for the BMPs. Owner shall retain completed annual
reports for a minimum of 5 years and shall provide the City with the written
documentation upon request.
D. Owner grants the City or its agents or contractor the right of entry at reasonable times and
in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspecting, operating, installing, constructing,
reconstructing, maintaining, or repairing the Structural Stormwater BMPs.
E. Owner grants to the City the necessary easements and right-of-way and maintain
perpetual access from public right-of-ways to the Structural Stormwater BMPs for the
City or its agent or contractor. Owner agrees to grant and execute such other easements
defining Structural Stormwater BMPs’ area as may be required by the City.
F. If, upon inspection, the City finds that the Owner has failed to properly maintain the
Structural Stormwater BMPs, the City may order the work to be performed within a
specified time. In the event the work is not performed, or a schedule for undertaking the
work to be performed has not been provided within the specified time and agreed to by
the City, Owner agrees to allow the City to enter the property and take whatever steps it
deems necessary to properly maintain the Structural Stormwater BMPs. The cost
reasonably incurred by the City for performing such maintenance shall be reimbursed to
the City within 30 days by the party responsible for such maintenance and, if the
responsible party does not timely reimburse the City, then the City may recover its costs
by levying a special assessment against the Subject Property.
G. The Owner, for itself and respective successors and assigns, hereby waives any statutory
right which it may have to contest any such assessment by the City of its maintenance
costs on the basis of the benefit to portions of the Subject property.
H. Nothing in this Agreement will obligate the City to undertake maintenance or repair of
the Structural Stormwater BMPs and in no event shall this Agreement be construed to
impose any such obligation on the City.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix H:
Land Development Code Appendix H – Page 8 Stormwater Easement & Maintenance Agreement Standard Documents
I. Owner, its heirs, administrators, executors, assigns and any other successor interest shall
indemnify and hold harmless the City and its officers, agents and employees for any and
all damages, accidents, casualties, occurrences, claims or attorney’s fees which might
arise or be asserted, in whole or in part, against the City from the construction, presence,
existence, or maintenance of the Structural Stormwater BMPs subject to this Agreement.
In the event a claim is asserted against the City, its officers, agents or employees, the City
shall notify Owner and Owner shall defend at Owner’s expense any suit based on such
claim. If any judgment or claim against the City, its officers, agents or employees, shall
be allowed Owner shall pay all costs and expenses in connection therewith. The City will
not indemnify, defend or hold harmless in any fashion the Owner from any claims arising
from any failure, regardless of any language in any attachment or other document that the
Owner may provide.
J. Responsibility for maintaining and repairing Structural Stormwater BMPs under this
Agreement shall belong to the Owner and any successor owner of the subject property.
The Owner signing this Agreement shall only be released upon sale with the written
consent of the City. By accepting a deed or other conveyance of the Subject Property,
future owners shall be responsible to meet all obligations of Owner under this
Agreement.
K. Owner, and its respective successors and assigns, shall not transfer, assign or modify its
responsibilities with respect to this Agreement without the City’s written prior consent.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit a transfer of its responsibilities with respect
to this Agreement by Owner.
L. No waiver of any provision of this agreement shall affect the right of any party thereafter
to enforce such provisions or to exercise any right or remedy available.
M. Owner shall provide as attachment to this agreement the required Maintenance Plan as
required by the City of St. Cloud Land Development Code Article 19 and its incorporated
Appendices as referenced.
N. The terms and conditions of the Agreement shall be binding upon, and shall insure to the
benefit of, the parties hereto and their respective successors and assigns.
[Signatures begin on next page]
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix H:
Land Development Code Appendix H – Page 9 Stormwater Easement & Maintenance Agreement Standard Documents
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have hereunto executed this document the day and year first above
written.
CITY OF ST. CLOUD, MINNESOTA
By_______________________________
Dave Kleis
Its Mayor
By _______________________________
Seth Kauffman
Its City Clerk
STATE OF MINNESOTA )
) ss
COUNTY OF __________ )
On this _____ day of __________________, 20__, before me, a Notary Public within and for the
County of ________________, State of Minnesota, personally appeared Dave Kleis, and Seth Kauffman,
the mayor and City Clerk of the City of St. Cloud, Minnesota, to me known to be the persons described
herein and who executed the foregoing instrument and acknowledged that they executed same as their
free act and deed.
___________________________________________
Notary Public
My Commission Expires: _________________________
[Signatures continued on next page]
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix H:
Land Development Code Appendix H – Page 10 Stormwater Easement & Maintenance Agreement Standard Documents
INSERT OWNER NAME
By____________________________________
Type name of signatory
Insert title of owner Authorized Signatory
STATE OF MINNESOTA )
) ss
COUNTY OF __________ )
On this _____ day of __________________, 20___, before me, a Notary Public within and for the
County of ________________, State of Minnesota, personally appeared insert name of owner authorized
signatory, the insert title of owner authorized signatory of insert property owner name, to me known to be
the person described herein and who executed the foregoing instrument and acknowledged that he executed
same as his free act and deed.
___________________________________________
Notary Public
My Commission Expires: _________________________
THIS DOCUMENT DRAFTED BY:
St. Cloud City Attorney’s Office
400 2nd Street South
St. Cloud, MN 56301
(320) 255-7204
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix H:
Land Development Code Appendix H – Page 11 Stormwater Easement & Maintenance Agreement Standard Documents
CONSENT SUBORDINATION
This Consent and Subordination Agreement is made this day of , 20 , by
the undersigned.
RECITALS
A. Owner, holds the fee title to the following described subject property:
Insert legal description of parcel
B. The undersigned, , a corporation organized under the law of the State of
________________, has an interest in this property pursuant to a Mortgage as evidenced
by a document dated , and recorded on in the office of the County Recorder
for County, as Document No. .
C. The Owner to this property intends to, inspect and maintain Structural Stormwater BMPs
on the above described property, pursuant to the requirements of St. Cloud City Land
Development Code Article 19 and has entered into a Private Stormwater BMP
Maintenance Agreement with the City of St. Cloud detailing the Owner’s responsibilities.
The Private Stormwater BMP Maintenance Agreement has been filed on the subject
property.
D. A permanent access easement has been granted by the Owner to the City of St. Cloud to
which a copy of this Consent and Subordination Agreement is attached.
CONSENT AND SUBORDINATION
The undersigned consents to and agrees that its interest in the property on which the
structural stormwater BMP is located will be subordinate and subject to the terms, conditions
and responsibilities of the Owner as enumerated in the Private Stormwater BMP
Maintenance Agreement and the Drainage Easement.
Information provided in Appendices is for informational and reference purposes only. Such information is subject to change.
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota Appendix H:
Land Development Code Appendix H – Page 12 Stormwater Easement & Maintenance Agreement Standard Documents
IN TESTIMONY THEREOF, the undersigned corporation has caused this instrument to be
executed its corporate name by its as of the day and year first above written.
(Insert full name of corporation)
by ,
its ,
STATE OF MINNESOTA )
) SS
COUNTY OF )
This instrument was acknowledged before me on this _____ day of ________________,
20__, by _NAME_______________ as _____TITLE_______________________, on behalf of
that corporation.
_____________________________
Notary Public
My Commission Expires: _________________________
THIS DOCUMENT DRAFTED BY:
St. Cloud City Attorney’s Office
400 2nd Street South
St. Cloud, MN 56301
(320) 255-7204