
Shakopee, MN Code of Ordinances


CITY OF SHAKOPEE, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2018 S-3 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 974, passed November 21, 2017











Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:  http://www.amlegal.com




ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE NO. 919



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CITY CODE FOR THE CITY OF SHAKOPEE, MINNESOTA
AMENDING, RESTATING, REVISING, UPDATING, RE-CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH THE SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN THE CITY CODE,
AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE CITY CODE.



   WHEREAS, Minnesota Statutes Sections 415.02 and 415.021 authorize the
City of Shakopee to cause its ordinances to be codified and printed in a book;



   WHEREAS, The City previously codified its ordinances in 1978; and



   WHEREAS, The City now desires to recodify its current City Code and
ordinances.



NOW THEREFORE the City Council of the City of Shakopee, Minnesota ordains:



Section 1.   The general ordinances of the City as amended, restated,
revised, updated, codified and compiled in book form, including penalties for
the violations of various provisions thereof, are hereby adopted and shall
constitute the "City Code of the City of Shakopee." This City Code adopts by
reference certain statutes and administrative rules of the State of Minnesota
as named in the City Code.



Section 2.   The City Code as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the
following titles:



            TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



            TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



            TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



            TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



            TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



            TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



            TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



            TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



            TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



            PARALLEL REFERENCES



            INDEX



Section 3.   All prior ordinances, pertaining to the subjects treated in
the City Code, shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of
this ordinance, except as they are included and re-ordained in whole or in
part in the City Code; provided, this repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall this repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching
territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain
persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds
or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal
property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to
public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public
places; nor shall this repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or
special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the
City Code. All fees established in prior ordinances codified in this Code
shall remain in effect unless amended in this code or until an ordinance
adopting a fee schedule is adopted or amended.



Section 4.   This ordinance adopting the City Code shall be a sufficient
publication of any ordinance included in it and not previously published in
the City's official newspaper. The Clerk of the City shall cause a
substantial quantity of the City Code to be printed for general distribution
to the public at actual cost and shall furnish a copy of the City Code to the
County Law Library or its designated depository. The official copy of this
City Code shall be marked and be kept in the office of the City Clerk.



Section 5.   The City Code is declared to be prima facie evidence of the
law of the City and shall be received in evidence as provided by Minnesota
Statutes by the Courts of the State of Minnesota.



Section 6.   This ordinance adopting the City Code, and the City Code
itself, shall take effect upon publication of this ordinance in the City's
official newspaper.



Adopted in adjourned regular session of the City Council of the City of
Shakopee, Minnesota held this 20th day of October, 2015.



                                       
                                         



                                    Mayor
of the City of Shakopee



ATTEST:



                                                   
             



City Clerk



Published in the Shakopee Valley News on the 29th day of October, 2015.



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Rules of interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Severability



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Reference to offices



   10.09   Errors and omissions



   10.10   Official time



   10.11   Reasonable time



   10.12   Ordinances repealed



   10.13   Ordinances unaffected



   10.14   Effective date of ordinances



   10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights, and liabilities



   10.18   Copies of code



   10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules and supplements by reference



   10.20   Enforcement



   10.21   Otherwise unlawful



   10.22   Payment into City Treasury of fines and penalties



   10.23   Reference to a public official



   10.24   Incorporation by reference



   10.25   Authority to issue citations



 



   10.99   Penalty



   Appendix A:   Notice of code violation



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city,
as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“Shakopee City Code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”,
“codified ordinances”, or “code” may be substituted. Code title,
chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as
contained in the code.



   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to
the components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may
be referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code”.
Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by
the number, such as “§ 10.01”. Headings and captions used in this code
other than the title, chapter, and section numbers are employed for reference
purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.02  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or
implication required, the same rules of construction, definition, and
application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing
the interpretation of state law.



   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all
ordinances of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that
construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of
the context of the same ordinance:



      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as
if written “and/or”, whenever the context requires.



      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions, or
ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as
well may do as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the
performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.



      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



      (4)   General term. A general term following specific
enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless
expressly so limited.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
or ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to
their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY. The City of Shakopee, Minnesota. The term CITY when used in
this code may also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized
representatives.



      CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The person duly appointed by the Council and
acting in such capacity.



      CITY CLERK. The person duly appointed by the Council and acting
in such capacity.



      CODE, THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.



      CONVICTION. Either of the following accepted and recorded by the
Court:



         (a)   A plea of guilty; or



         (b)   A verdict of guilty by a jury or a finding of
guilty by the Court.



      COUNCIL. The City Council of Shakopee, Minnesota.



      COUNTY.  Scott County, Minnesota.



      CRIME. Conduct which is prohibited by ordinance and for which the
actor may be sentenced to imprisonment or fine.



      EX-OFFICIO MEMBER. A person who is not counted for the purpose of
determining a quorum, and has no right to vote, but shall have the right and
obligation (within that person’s discretion) to speak to any question
coming before the board, commission, or other deliberative body of which the
person is such member.



      INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation or
connection of the lateral curb line or, if no curb, then the lateral boundary
lines of the roadways or streets which join one another at, or approximately
at, right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
streets joining at any other angle may come in conflict.



      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.



      MISDEMEANOR. The crime for which a sentence of not more than 90
days or a fine of not more than $700, or both, may be imposed.



      MONTH. A calendar month.



      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words
SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All
terms shall mean a pledge taken by the person and administered by an
individual authorized by state law.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer,
office, employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.



      ORDINANCE. An ordinance duly adopted by the City Council of
Shakopee, Minnesota.



      PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons,
firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used
in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER
as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



      PETTY MISDEMEANOR. An offense, which does not constitute a crime,
and for which a sentence of a fine of not more than $200 may be imposed.



      POLICE OFFICER.POLICE OFFICER and PEACE OFFICER mean every
officer, including special police, authorized to direct or regulate traffic,
keep the peace, and appointed or employed for the purpose of law enforcement.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.



      PREMISES. Any lot, piece, or parcel of land within a continuous
boundary whether publicly or privately owned, occupied, or possessed.



      PRIVATE PROPERTY. All property not included within the definition
of public property or public place.



      PUBLIC PROPERTY.PUBLIC PROPERTY and PUBLIC PLACE mean any place,
property, or premises dedicated to public use, owned by the city, occupied by
the city as a lessee, or occupied by the city as a street by reason of an
easement, including, but not limited to, streets, parks, or parking lots so
occupied.



      ROADWAY. The portion of a street improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the event a street includes 2 or
more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY as used herein shall refer to any
such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively.



      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



      STATE. The State of Minnesota.



      STREET. The entire area dedicated to public use, or contained in
an easement or other conveyance or grant to the city, and shall include, but
not be limited to, roadways, boulevards, sidewalks, alleys, avenues, and
other public property between lateral property lines in which a roadway lies.



      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading. Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



      VIOLATE. Includes failure to comply with.



      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



(2013 Code, § 1.01)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 50, passed 1-1-1981;
Ord. 120, passed 7-28-1983; Ord. 177, passed 8-22-1985; Ord. 254, passed
10-14-1988; Ord. 317, passed 8-29-1991; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
that reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the
misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to
express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words
to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when
another word or words was clearly intended to express the intent, the
spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted, or
substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions
shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the
text as originally published.



   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question
exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.10  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.



§ 10.11  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME
or NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last. If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   (A)   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain
all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein
enumerated and embraced.



   (B)   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.14  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.15  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.16  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter
or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.17  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS, AND LIABILITIES.



   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws. This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings, and rights are continued; punishments, penalties,
or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been
enacted. In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway
right-of-ways; contracts entered into or franchises granted; the acceptance,
establishment, or vacation of any highway; and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.



§ 10.18  COPIES OF CODE.



   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Clerk for public inspection. The City Clerk shall provide a copy for sale for
a reasonable charge.



§ 10.19  ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES AND SUPPLEMENTS BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting
this code or ordinances, all future amendments to any state or federal rules
and statutes adopted by reference in this code or referenced in this code of
ordinances are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been
in existence at the time this code was adopted, unless there is clear
intention expressed in the code to the contrary.



   (B)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting
this code of ordinances, all future supplements are hereby adopted as if they
had been in existence at the time this Code was enacted, unless there is
clear intention expressed in the Code to the contrary.



§ 10.20  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any licensed peace officer of the City’s Police Department,
or the County Sheriff, or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to
enforce any provision of this code.



   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from
time to time, the City Clerk shall have the authority to administer and
enforce this code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain
individuals designated within the code or by the City Clerk or City Council
shall have the authority to administer and enforce the provisions specified.
All and any person or persons designated may issue a citation in lieu of
arrest or continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.



   (C)   The City Clerk and any city official or employee designated by
this code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under this code, may
with the permission of a licensee of a business or owner of any property or
resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect
or otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.



   (D)   If the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control
of a premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the
City Clerk, peace officer, or any employee or official charged with the duty
of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable
cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of
competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before
conducting the inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant
shall be only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the people are being complied with
and to enforce these provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made
as a result of the warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be
probable cause to issue the warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is
reasonable. Probable cause does not depend on specific knowledge of the
condition of a particular property.



   (E)   Every licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of
property within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or
entrance to the property by the City Clerk or any other authorized city
officer or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code
enacted to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the people are being
complied with and to enforce these provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit
the inspection of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for
termination of any and all permits, licenses, or city service to the
property. Mailed notice shall be given to the licensee, owner, resident, or
other person in control of the property, stating the grounds for the
termination, and the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of
the property shall be given an opportunity to appear before the City Clerk to
object to the termination before it occurs, subject to appeal of the City
Clerk’s decision to the City Council at a regularly scheduled or special
meeting.



   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
authority of the city to enter private property in urgent emergency
situations where there is an imminent danger in order to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.



§ 10.21  OTHERWISE UNLAWFUL.



   The code of ordinances does not authorize an act or omission otherwise
prohibited by law.



(2013 Code, § 1.04)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)



§ 10.22  PAYMENT INTO CITY TREASURY OF FINES AND PENALTIES.



   All fines, forfeitures, and penalties recovered for the violation of
any ordinance, rule, or regulation of the city shall be paid into the City
Treasury by the court or officer thereof receiving such monies. Payment shall
be made in the manner, at the time, and in the proportion provided by law.



(2013 Code, § 1.06)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)



§ 10.23  REFERENCE TO A PUBLIC OFFICIAL.



   Wherever an appointed public official is referred to in this code of
ordinances, the reference shall include such public official or that
person’s designee.



(2013 Code, § 1.11)  (Ord. 224, passed 8-27-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)



§ 10.24  INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.



   References in this code of ordinances to state statutes are to
Minnesota Statutes 1992, Laws of Minnesota 1993, Laws of Minnesota 1994, and
Laws of Minnesota 1995, unless otherwise provided. References to rules,
regulations, standards, or models are to those documents in effect on January
1, 1996, unless otherwise provided.



(2013 Code, § 1.12)  (Ord. 408, passed 3-7-1995; Ord. 445, passed 2-22-1996)



§ 10.25  AUTHORITY TO ISSUE CITATIONS.



   Licensed peace officers, community service officers, the Fire Marshal,
Fire Chief, animal control official, and Building Official are expressly
authorized to issue citations against a person, firm, or corporation who
violates any provision of this code of ordinances.



(2013 Code, § 1.13)  (Ord. 610, passed 8-30-2001)



§ 10.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of
this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including state statute
specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90
days or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of
this code, including state statutes specifically adopted by reference, which
is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense
which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than
$300.



   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to
time, in either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs
of prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.



   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform
any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.



   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if
any person, firm, or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this
code, the Council or any city official designated by it, may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct, or abate
the violation.



APPENDIX A
NOTICE OF CODE VIOLATION



To:  (Name and address of person who is alleged to have violated the code)



From:  (Name and title of city official giving the notice)



Re:  Alleged violation of section of this code of ordinances, relating to
(give title of section)



Date:  (Date of notice)



   I hereby allege that on (date of violation) you violated §        
        of the City Code relating to
_______________________________________________________________________________
.



   The City Council has by resolution established an administrative
penalty in the amount of $        for this violation.



   Payment of this administrative penalty is voluntary, but if you do not
pay it, the city may initiate criminal proceedings for this alleged violation.



   Payment is due within 14 days of the date of this notice. Before the
due date, you may request an additional 14-day extension of the time to pay
the administrative penalty.



   As an alternative to the payment of this administrative penalty, if the
situation that gave rise to this alleged violation is corrected by      
                (establish date), then the payment of the
administrative penalty will be waived.



   Even if the administrative penalty is paid, the city reserves the right
to institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain,
correct, or abate the violation.



   Before the due date, you may request to appear before the City Council
to contest the request for payment of the penalty. After a hearing before the
Council, the Council may determine to withdraw the request for payment or to
renew the request for payment. Because the payment of the administrative
penalty is voluntary, there shall be no appeal from the decision of the
Council.



   If you pay the administrative penalty, the city will not initiate
criminal proceedings for this alleged violation. However, the Council, or any
city official designated by it, may institute appropriate proceedings at law
or at equity to restrain, correct, or abate the violation.



   Payment of the administrative penalty may be made by check, cash, or
money order to the City Treasurer.



Signed:                                              
               



      (Name and Title of Person Giving Notice)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      31.   CITY COUNCIL AND MAYOR



      32.   CITY ORGANIZATION



      33.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



      34.   FINANCE AND REVENUE



CHAPTER 30:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   30.01   Authority and purpose



   30.02   Execution of contracts and city seal



   30.03   Right to administrative appeal



   30.04   Rules of procedure for appeals and other hearings



   30.05   Facsimile signature



   30.06   Code of Ethics



   30.07   Personnel rules



   30.08   Criminal history background checks



   30.09   Election years




Abandoned Property




   30.20   Disposal of abandoned motor vehicles



   30.21   Disposal of unclaimed property



   30.22   Disposal of excess property



   30.23   Persons who may not purchase; exceptions



 



   30.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 30.01  AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.



   Pursuant to the authority granted by statute, this title of this code
of ordinances is enacted so as to set down for enforcement the government and
good order of the city by and through the Council.



(2013 Code, § 2.01)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)



§ 30.02  EXECUTION OF CONTRACTS AND CITY SEAL.



   All contracts to which the city is a party, in addition to being signed
by the Mayor and City Administrator, shall be sealed with the city seal. Said
seal shall be kept in the custody of the City Clerk and affixed by the City
Clerk, or his or her designee. The official city seal shall be a circular
disc having engraved thereon “CITY OF SHAKOPEE” and such other words,
figures, or emblems as the Council may adopt.



(2013 Code, § 2.06)  (Ord. 51, passed 1-1-1981; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992;
Ord. 853, passed 3-29-2012)



§ 30.03  RIGHT TO ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL.



   If any person shall be aggrieved by any administrative decision of the
City Administrator, or any board or commission not having within its
structure an appellate procedure, such aggrieved person is entitled to a full
hearing before the Council upon serving a written request therefor upon the
Mayor and City Administrator at least 10 days prior to any regular Council
meeting. Such request shall contain a general statement setting forth the
administrative decision to be challenged by the appellant. At such hearing,
the appellant may present any evidence the appellant deems pertinent to the
appeal, but the city shall not be required to keep a verbatim record of the
proceedings. The Mayor, or other officer presiding at the hearing, may, in
the interest of justice or to comply with time requirements and on the
Mayor’s own motion or the motion of the appellant, the City Administrator,
or a member of the Council, adjourn the hearing to a more convenient time or
place, but such time or place shall be fixed and determined before
adjournment so as to avoid the necessity for formal notice of reconvening.



(2013 Code, § 2.07)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 30.04  RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR APPEALS AND OTHER HEARINGS.



   The Council may adopt by resolution certain written rules of procedure
to be followed in all administrative appeals and other hearings to be held
before the Council or other bodies authorized to hold hearings and determine
questions therein presented. Such rules of procedure shall be effective 30
days after adoption and shall be for the purpose of establishing and
maintaining order and decorum in the proceedings.



(2013 Code, § 2.08)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)



§ 30.05  FACSIMILE SIGNATURE.



   The Mayor, City Clerk, and City Treasurer are hereby authorized to
request a depository of city funds to honor an order for payment when such
instrument bears a facsimile of their signatures, and to charge the same to
the account designated thereon or upon which it is drawn, as effectively as
though it were their manually written signature. Such authority is granted
only for the purpose of permitting such officers an economy of time and
effort.



(2013 Code, § 2.10)  (Ord. 51, passed 1-1-1981; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 30.06  CODE OF ETHICS.



   (A)   Purpose. The public judges its government by the way public
officials conduct themselves in the posts to which they are elected or
appointed. City officials, including City Council members and all members of
boards and commissions appointed by the City Council, hold positions of
public trust under the scrutiny of public opinion, and their actions must be
above suspicion. The public has a right to expect that these city officials
will conduct themselves in a manner that will preserve public confidence in
and respect for government. In order to continue the public confidence and
integrity of city officials and to promote trust of the people in the
objectivity of their public servants, this Code of Ethics for city officials
of the city is adopted.



   (B)   Credo. The following credo is hereby adopted.



      (1)   The city believes that government service is a worthy
calling. The city is proud of the privilege of serving the public.



      (2)   The city affirms the dignity and value of the service we
render, and strive for a constructive, creative, and practical approach to
our work and responsibilities.



      (3)   The city dedicates itself to the highest ideals of honor
and integrity and the principles of equality for all regardless of race,
color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, status with
regard to public assistance, disability, sexual orientation, or age.



      (4)   The city believes it is its duty continually to improve
its abilities and skills in order to sustain productive and quality
performance.



      (5)   The city emphasizes a friendly and courteous attitude
and seeks to present a positive image of public service.



      (6)   The city respects and treats as privileged, information
accepted in trust, to the extent permitted by law, and believes that all
matters of personnel should be handled fairly according to established rules.
The city believes that personal gain, either immediate or in the future,
secured by the misuse of one’s position, is totally unethical. Public
service is a public trust.



   (C)   Disclosure of economic interest.



      (1)   In the event any individual City Council member, member
of a board or commission, individual city official, or person acting as a
representative or appointee of the city shall have a conflict of interest,
the individual shall disclose such conflict to the City Attorney prior to any
action by the city on the matter(s) which causes the possible conflict.



      (2)   The City Attorney shall, in turn, advise appropriate
city officials of the possible conflict and make a recommendation as to the
proper procedures to be followed.



(2013 Code, § 2.39)  (Ord. 438, passed 1-18-1996)



§ 30.07  PERSONNEL RULES.



   The Council may establish personnel rules setting forth the rights,
duties, and responsibilities of employees. Such rules may, from time to time,
be amended.



(2013 Code, § 2.40)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)



§ 30.08  CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECKS.



   (A)   Criminal history background checks authorized.



      (1)   The Police Department and/or a Human Resources
authorized vendor is authorized to conduct a criminal history background
investigation on applicants for paid and volunteer positions with the city,
as provided by this section. For paid employment positions, this section
applies only to those applicants who are selected for interviews or receive
conditional offers of employment.



      (2)   The Police Department and/or a Human Resources
authorized vendor may not perform a background investigation unless the
applicant consents in writing to the investigation and to the release of the
investigation information to the City Administrator and other city staff as
is appropriate.



      (3)   An applicant’s failure to provide consent may
disqualify the applicant for the position sought. This section does not apply
to background checks related to applicants for peace officer or firefighter
positions.



   (B)   Required disclosure. If the city rejects the applicant’s
application due, solely or in part, to the applicant’s prior conviction of
a crime, subject to the exception set forth in M.S. § 364.09, as it may be
amended from time to time, the City Administrator must notify the applicant
in writing of the following:



      (1)   The grounds and reasons for the rejection;



      (2)   The applicable complaint and grievance procedure set
forth in M.S. § 364.06, as it may be amended from time to time;



      (3)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for
employment; and



      (4)   All competent evidence of rehabilitation will be
considered upon reapplication.



(2013 Code, § 2.41)  (Ord. 512, passed 5-7-1998; Ord. 871, passed
8-20-2013; Ord. 937, passed 7-5-2016)



§ 30.09  ELECTION YEARS.



   (A)   Purpose. The City Council has determined that it is in the
best interests of the city and its residents that the regular municipal
election be held in even-numbered years rather than in odd-numbered years.
The purpose of this section is to change the timing of the city’s municipal
elections from odd-numbered years to even-numbered years and to modify the
terms of the Mayor and Council members to facilitate an orderly transition in
the change to even-numbered year elections.



   (B)   Election in even-numbered years. Pursuant to M.S. § 205.07,
as it may be amended from time to time, the city municipal general election
shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each
even-numbered year beginning in 2018. No city municipal election shall be
held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November 2017.



   (C)   Transition terms. The terms of Mayor and Council members whose
terms would otherwise expire on the first Monday in January 2018 are extended
until the first Monday in January 2019. The terms of the Council members
whose terms would otherwise expire on the first Monday in January 2020 are
extended until the first Monday in January 2021.



   (D)   The City Clerk is authorized to take all actions necessary to
provide for an orderly transition from the existing election schedule to the
schedule set forth in this section.



(Ord. 910, passed 8-18-2015)




ABANDONED PROPERTY




§ 30.20  DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES. A motor vehicle as defined in M.S. Ch.
169, as it may be amended from time to time, that has remained for a period
of more than 48 hours on public property illegally or lacking vital component
parts, or has remained for a period of more than 48 hours on private property
without the consent of the person in control of such property, or in an
inoperable condition such that it has no substantial potential further use
consistent with its function unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or
storage building. It shall also mean a motor vehicle voluntarily surrendered
by its owner to and accepted by the city or the Police Department and any
motor vehicle coming into possession of the city or its Police Department by
seizure, confiscation, or other means and such vehicle has remained unclaimed
after notice to the last registered owner thereof hereinbefore provided shall
be deemed to have been abandoned. A CLASSIC CAR or PIONEER CAR, as defined in
M.S. Ch. 168, as it may be amended from time to time, shall not be considered
an ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE within the meaning of this section. Vehicles on
the premises of junk yards or automobile graveyards, which are licensed and
maintained in accordance with this code of ordinances, shall not be
considered ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES within the meaning of this section.



      VITAL COMPONENT PARTS. Those parts of a motor vehicle that are
essential to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including, but not
limited to, the motor, drive train, and wheels.



   (B)   Custody. The city shall take into custody and impound any
abandoned motor vehicle.



   (C)   Immediate sale. When an abandoned motor vehicle is more than 7
model years of age, is lacking vital component parts, and does not display a
license plate currently valid in the state or any other state or foreign
country, it shall immediately be eligible for sale at public auction, and
shall not be subject to the notification, reclamation, or title provisions of
this division (C).



   (D)   Notice.



      (1)   When an abandoned motor vehicle does not fall within the
provisions of division (C) above, the city shall give notice of the taking
within 10 days. The notice shall set forth the date and place of the taking;
the year, make, model, and serial number of the abandoned motor vehicle, if
such information can be reasonably obtained; and the place where the vehicle
is being held; shall inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to
reclaim the vehicle under division (F) below; and shall state that failure of
the owner or lienholder to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle and
contents shall be deemed a waiver by them of all rights, title, and interest
in the vehicle and a consent to the sale of the vehicle and contents at a
public auction pursuant to division (F) below.



      (2)   The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered
owner, if any, of the abandoned motor vehicle and to all readily identifiable
lienholders of record. If it is impossible to determine with reasonable
certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and all
lienholders, the notice shall be published once in the official newspaper.
Published notices may be grouped together for convenience and economy.



   (E)   Right to reclaim.



      (1)   The owner or any lienholder holder of an abandoned motor
vehicle shall have a right to reclaim such vehicle from the city upon payment
of all towing and storage charges resulting from taking the vehicle into
custody within 15 days after the date of the notice required by this division
(E).



      (2)   Nothing in this division (E) shall be construed to
impair any lien of a garage keeper under the laws of this state, or the right
of the lienholder to foreclose. For the purposes of this division (E), GARAGE
KEEPER is an operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator of a
motor vehicle storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for the
servicing, repair or maintenance of motor vehicles.



   (F)   Public sale.



      (1)   An abandoned motor vehicle and contents taken into
custody and not reclaimed under division (E) above shall be sold to the
highest bidder at public auction or sale, following 1 published notice
published at least 7 days prior to such auction or sale. The purchaser shall
be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles
which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle. The receipt shall
also entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle and receive a certificate
of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership. Before such a
vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must receive a motor vehicle
safety check.



      (2)   From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor
vehicle, the city shall reimburse itself for the cost of towing, preserving
and storing the vehicle, and all administrative, notice, and publication
costs incurred pursuant to this division (F). Any remainder from the proceeds
of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder
for 90 days and then shall be deposited in the General Fund of the city.



   (G)   Disposal of vehicles not sold. Where no bid has been received
for an abandoned motor vehicle, the city may dispose of it in accordance with
division (H) below.



   (H)   Contracts and disposal.



      (1)   The city may contract with any qualified person for
collection, storage, incineration, volume reduction, transportation, or other
services necessary to prepare abandoned motor vehicles and other scrap metal
for recycling or other methods of disposal.



      (2)   Where the city enters into a contract with a person duly
licensed by the State Pollution Control Agency, the Agency shall review the
contract to determine whether it conforms to the Agency’s plan for solid
waste disposal. A contract that does so conform may be approved by the
Agency. Where the city enters into a contract with a person duly authorized
by the State Pollution Control Agency, the Agency shall review the contract
to determine whether it conforms to the Agency’s plan for solid waste
disposal for the purpose of obtaining reimbursement.



      (3)   If the city utilizes its own equipment and personnel for
disposal of the abandoned motor vehicle, it shall be entitled to
reimbursement for the cost thereof along with its other costs as herein
provided.



(2013 Code, § 2.70)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 65, passed 6-18-1981;
Ord. 121, passed 8-4-1983; Ord. 139, passed 12-15-1983; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992; Ord. 404, passed 3-2-1995)



§ 30.21  DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.



   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ABANDONED PROPERTY.Tangible or intangible property that has
lawfully come into the possession of the city in the course of municipal
operations, remains unclaimed by the owner, and has been in the possession of
the city for at least 60 days and has been declared such by a resolution of
the Council.



   (B)   Preliminary notice. If the City Administrator knows the
identity and whereabouts of the owner, the City Administrator shall serve
written notice upon the owner at least 30 days prior to a declaration of
abandonment by the Council. If the city acquired possession from a prior
holder, the identity and whereabouts of whom are known by the City
Administrator notice shall also be served upon that holder. Such notice shall
describe the property and state that unless it is claimed and proof of
ownership, or entitlement to possession established, the matter of declaring
it abandoned property will be brought to the attention of the Council after
the expiration of 30 days from the date of such notice.



   (C)   Notice and sale.



      (1)   (a)   Upon adoption of a resolution declaring certain
property to be abandoned property, the City Administrator shall publish a
notice thereof describing the same, together with the names (if known) and
addresses (if known) of prior owners and holders thereof, and including a
brief description of such property.



         (b)   The text of such notice shall also state the time,
place, and manner of sale of all such property, except cash and negotiables.
Such notice shall be published once at least 10 days prior to sale.



      (2)   The sale shall be made to the highest bidder at public
auction or sale conducted in the manner directed by the Council in its
resolution declaring property abandoned and stated in the notice.



   (D)   Fund and claims thereon. All proceeds from such sale shall be
paid into the General Fund of the city and expenses thereof paid therefrom.
The former owner, if a claim is made within 8 months from the date of
publication of the notice herein provided, and upon application and
satisfactory proof of ownership, may be paid the amount of cash or
negotiables or, in the case of property sold, the amount received therefor,
less a pro-rata share of the expenses of storage, publication of notice, and
sale expenses, but without interest. Such payment shall be also made from the
General Fund.



   (E)   Found currency. Any person finding currency within the city
shall deliver it to the Police Department to be held for a period of 60 days
in order to determine the rightful owner.



      (1)   Unless otherwise specified in this section, currency
coming into the possession of the city shall be stored and safely maintained
by the city for a period of 60 days.



      (2)   Such currency shall be disposed of by the city in the
following manner.



         (a)   All currency coming into the city as found
property shall be turned over by the Police Department to the Finance
Department for safekeeping, unless directed otherwise or for evidentiary
purposes by the Police Department.



         (b)   After 60 days, if no claim is made by the owner to
the city or if the owner cannot be located, the currency may be returned to
the finder if, at the time of delivery to the city, the finder indicated in
writing that they wished to assert claim to the currency as the finder. Upon
delivery of the currency to the finder as provided in this division (E), the
city shall have no further interest or obligation with respect to the
currency. No claims shall be made by a city employee finding currency on city
property or during the course of his or her duties as a city employee, unless
the employee is the rightful owner of the currency.



         (c)   If, at the end of the 60-day period, no claims
have been made by the owner or finder to the currency, the City Administrator
or the Administrator’s designee may, in their discretion, choose to deposit
the currency into the General Fund of the city.



      (3)   All currency found by city employees on city property or
in the course of their duties as city employees shall be deposited by the
City Administrator or Administrator’s designee into the General Fund if
there are no claims to the currency by the owner within the 60-day period.



      (4)   The City Administrator or Administrator’s designee
shall be responsible for maintaining a list of found currency that is
returned to the finder, including the finder’s name, address, date of
birth, and phone number.



      (5)   If at a later date, after the currency has been turned
over to the finder and a claim is made by the rightful owner, the city shall
provide the name and address of the finder to the rightful owner.



(2013 Code, § 2.70)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 65, passed 6-18-1981;
Ord. 121, passed 8-4-1983; Ord. 139, passed 12-15-1983; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992; Ord. 404, passed 3-2-1995; Ord. 742, passed 1-26-2006)



§ 30.22  DISPOSAL OF EXCESS PROPERTY.



   (A)   Declaration of surplus and authorizing sale of property. The
City Administrator may, from time to time, recommend to the Council that
certain personal property (chattels) owned by the city is no longer needed
for a municipal purpose and should be sold. By action of the Council, said
property shall be declared surplus and the City Administrator authorized to
dispose of said property in the manner stated herein. The City Council may
direct that surplus property be donated to a worthy cause if the donation
complies with state statutes for an eligible recipient.



   (B)   Surplus property worth an estimated value of less than
$15,000. The City Administrator may sell surplus property of the city with an
estimated value of less than $15,000.



   (C)   Surplus property worth an estimated value of $15,000 or more.



      (1)   The City Administrator shall offer for public sale to
the highest bidder surplus property with an estimated value of $15,000 or
more. Such sale shall be to the person submitting the highest bid.



      (2)   Notwithstanding any of the above provision, the City
Administrator is authorized to negotiate a direct sale of surplus property
with another governmental agency.



   (D)   Receipts from sales of surplus property. All receipts from
sales of surplus property under this section shall be placed in the
appropriate fund.



(2013 Code, § 2.70)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 65, passed 6-18-1981;
Ord. 121, passed 8-4-1983; Ord. 139, passed 12-15-1983; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992; Ord. 404, passed 3-2-1995; Ord. 844, passed 3-24-2011)



§ 30.23  PERSONS WHO MAY NOT PURCHASE; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   No employee of the city who is a member of the
administrative staff, department head, a member of the Council, or an advisor
serving the city in a professional capacity, or members of their immediate
families, may be a purchaser of property under this section.



      (2)   Other city employees may be purchasers if they are not
directly involved in the sale, if they are the highest responsible bidder,
and if at least 1 week’s published or posted notice of sale is given.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to be a purchaser of property
under this section if such purchase is prohibited by the terms of this
section.



(2013 Code, § 2.70)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 65, passed 6-18-1981;
Ord. 121, passed 8-4-1983; Ord. 139, passed 12-15-1983; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992; Ord. 404, passed 3-2-1995)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 30.99  PENALTY.



   Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or provision
of this chapter when that person performs an act thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a
misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.



(2013 Code, § 2.99)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY COUNCIL AND MAYOR



Section



   31.01   Council meetings



   31.02   Special and emergency meetings



   31.03   Council procedure at regular meetings



   31.04   Salaries of Mayor and Council members



   31.05   Finance Director



   31.06   Office of Mayor



 



   31.99   Penalty



§ 31.01  COUNCIL MEETINGS.



   Regular meetings of the Council shall be held in the Council Chambers
on the first Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. The Council may, by
resolution adopted not less than 1 week prior thereto, change its regular
time of meeting; provided, however, that if any regular meeting shall fall on
a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held on the next business day.



(2013 Code, § 2.02)  (Ord. 293, passed 10-19-1990)



§ 31.02  SPECIAL AND EMERGENCY MEETINGS.



   (A)   Special meetings. Special meetings of the Council may be
called by the Mayor or by any 2 other members of the Council by writing filed
with the City Clerk stating the time, place, and purpose of the meeting.
Notice of a special meeting shall be given by the City Clerk to each member
of the Council by mailing a copy of such filing to all members who did not
sign or issue the call at least 4 days prior to the time stated therein, or
by personal service at least 72 hours prior to the projected time of meeting.
Special meetings may be held without prior written notice to the Council when
all Council members are present at the meeting or consent thereto in writing.
Any such consent shall be filed with the City Clerk prior to the beginning of
the meeting. Any special meeting attended by all Council members shall be a
valid meeting for the transaction of any business that may come before the
meeting. Meetings of the Council which are adjourned from time-to-time shall
not be subject to the foregoing notice requirements; nor shall special
meetings which, in the judgment of the Council, require immediate
consideration to meet an emergency, require such notice, but may be called by
telephone communication or any other expeditious means. Notice to the public
and to news media shall be given as required by statute.



   (B)   Emergency meetings. In determining what constitutes an
emergency, the Council should be guided by considerations of whether the
situation calls for immediate action involving the protection of the public
peace, health, or safety. Action by the Council finding facts supporting the
emergency shall be noted in the minutes of the emergency meeting before
remedial action is taken thereon.



   (C)   Posted notice. In addition to any other notice required by
this section, the City Clerk shall endeavor to post a notice of all meetings
in City Hall where other notices are posted.



(2013 Code, § 2.03)  (Ord. 255, passed 10-14-1988)



§ 31.03  COUNCIL PROCEDURE AT REGULAR MEETINGS.



   (A)   The City Administrator shall prepare the following items:



      (1)   An agenda for the forthcoming meeting;



      (2)   A compiled list of all claims; and



      (3)   A copy of all minutes to be considered.



   (B)   Roberts’ Rules of Order (Newly Revised) shall govern all
Council meetings as to procedural matters not set forth in the statute or
this code of ordinances. The order of business at regular meetings shall be
as set forth in the agenda. Matters not on the agenda, or not in the order
specified, shall not be considered except:



      (1)   With the consent of 4/5 of a quorum of the Council
members present;



      (2)   Scheduled public hearings or bid lettings at the time
stated in the notice; or



      (3)   Emergency matters.



(2013 Code, § 2.04)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)



§ 31.04  SALARIES OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   Salaries of the Mayor and Council members and which amounts are deemed
reasonable and proper, are hereby fixed, as follows:



   (A)   The annual salary of the Mayor shall be as set by Council from
time to time.



   (B)   The annual salary of each Council member shall be as set by
Council from time to time.



   (C)   In addition to the above, the Mayor and each Councilperson
shall be paid an amount set by Council from time to time for any meeting
attended at which the City Council has designated the Mayor or Councilperson
as the official representative of the City Council.



      (1)   In order to be eligible for the payment, the Mayor or
Councilperson must attend the entire meeting.



      (2)   Neither the Mayor nor any Councilperson shall receive
more than one payment set by Council from time to time per calendar day.



(2013 Code, § 2.13)  (Ord. 274, passed 1-2-1990; Ord. 509, passed 1-1-1998;
Ord. 737, passed 1-1-2006; Ord. 872, passed 8-20-2013; Ord. 908, passed
8-18-2015)



§ 31.05  FINANCE DIRECTOR.



   The Finance Director shall, in addition to all other duties, have the
responsibility for fulfilling the City Clerk’s financial responsibility
under and pursuant to M.S. § 412.151, as it may be amended from time to time.



(2013 Code, § 2.14)  (Ord. 148, passed 6-28-1984; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)



§ 31.06  OFFICE OF MAYOR.



   The term of office for the office of Mayor shall be 4 years. This
section shall not affect the term of office for any person elected to the
office of Mayor before December 31, 2015.



(Ord. 911, passed 8-18-2015)



§ 31.99  PENALTY.



   Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or provision
of this chapter when that person performs an act thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a
misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.



(2013 Code, § 2.99)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



CHAPTER 32:  CITY ORGANIZATION



Section




General Provisions




   32.01   Precinct boundaries



   32.02   Boards and Commissions generally; exceptions



   32.03   Departments generally




Employees, Boards, and Departments




   32.15   City Administrator



   32.16   Police Department



   32.17   Fire Department



   32.18   Public Works Department



   32.19   Additional departments



   32.20   Planning Commission



   32.21   Board of Adjustment and Appeals



   32.22   Public Utilities Commission



   32.23   Parks and Recreation Advisory Board



 



   32.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 32.01  PRECINCT BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   First Precinct. The First Precinct shall be bounded on the
south by Tenth Avenue, on the west and north by the corporate city limits and
on the east by Market Street extending from Tenth Avenue to the northern
corporate city limits.



   (B)   Second Precinct. The Second Precinct shall be bounded on the
south by Vierling Drive; on the east by Marschall Road to the northerly
terminus thereof and thence continuing northeast along the bed of the
meandering creek to the corporate city limits along the centerline of the
Minnesota River; on the north by the corporate city limit; and on the west by
a line running along Market Street to Tenth Avenue, thence west along Tenth
Avenue to Spencer Street, thence south to Vierling Drive.



   (C)   Third Precinct. The Third Precinct shall be bounded on the
north by County Road 101; on the east by Canterbury Road (County Road 83); on
the south by U.S. Highway 169 and Eagle Creek Boulevard (County Road 16); and
on the west by Marschall Road (County Road 17).



   (D)   Fourth Precinct. The Fourth Precinct shall be bounded on the
north by the northerly corporate city limits; on the east by the easterly
corporate city limits, and the south by a line beginning at County Road 101
and the eastern corporate city limit; thence southwesterly along County Road
21 to Eagle Creek Boulevard (County Road 16); thence west along Eagle Creek
Boulevard (County Road 16) to 1/4 mile east of Canterbury Road; thence south
1/4 mile; thence west 1/4 mile to Canterbury Road (County Road 83); thence
north along Canterbury Road (County Road 83) to County Road 101; thence west
along County Road 101 to Marschall Road; thence north along Marschall Road to
the northerly terminus thereof; thence continuing northeast along the bed of
the meandering creek to the corporate city limits along the centerline of the
Minnesota River.



   (E)   Fifth Precinct. The Fifth Precinct shall be bounded on the
east by Adams Street; on the north by 10th Avenue; and on the west and south
by the corporate city limits.



   (F)   Sixth Precinct. The Sixth Precinct shall be bounded by a line
beginning at the intersection of Adams Street and Tenth Avenue West, thence
east along 10th Avenue West to Spencer Street (County Road 79), thence south
along Spencer Street (County Road 79) to Vierling Drive, thence east along
Vierling Drive to Thistle Lane, thence south along Thistle Lane to Mound
Street, thence west along Mound Street to Spencer Street (County Road 79),
thence south along Spencer Street (County Road 79) to the southern corporate
city limit, thence west along the southerly corporate city limit to Marystown
Road (County Road 15), thence north along Marystown Road (County Road 15) to
17th Avenue (County Road 16), thence east along 17th Avenue 310 feet, thence
north 415 feet, thence west 310 feet to Marystown Road (County Road 15),
thence south along Marystown Road (County Road 15) 700’, thence west
440’, thence south 150’, thence east 440’ to Marystown Road (County
Road 15), thence south along Marystown Road (County Road 15) 66’, thence
west 200’, thence south 210’, thence east 200’ to Marystown Road
(County Road 15), thence south along Marystown Road to 128th Street, thence
west along 128th Street 980’, thence south 1/8 mile, thence west 1/8 mile,
thence south 1/8 mile to County Road 78, thence west along County Road 78 to
the western corporate city limit, thence north along the western corporate
city limit 1/4 mile, thence east 1/2 mile, thence north to U.S. Highway 169,
thence east along U.S. Highway 169 to Marystown Road, thence north along
Marystown Road (Adams Street) to Tenth Avenue West.



   (G)   Seventh Precinct. The Seventh Precinct shall be bounded on the
south by a line beginning at the intersection of Spencer Street (County Road
79) and 17th Avenue, thence east along 17th Avenue to Valley View Road,
thence south and east along Valley View Road to Evergreen Lane, thence north
along Evergreen Lane to Olive Road, thence east along Olive Road to Weston
Lane, thence north along Weston Lane to 17th Avenue, thence east along 17th
Avenue to Marschall Road; on the east by Marschall Road; on the north by a
line beginning at the intersection of Marschall Road and Vierling Drive,
thence west to Thistle Lane, thence south along Thistle Lane to Mound Street,
thence west along Mound Street to Spencer Street (County Road 79); on the
west by a line beginning at the intersection of Mound Street and Spencer
Street (County Road 79) extending south along Spencer Street (County Road 79)
to 17th Avenue.



   (H)   Eighth Precinct. The Eighth Precinct shall be bounded on the
east and north by Eagle Creek Boulevard, on west by Marschall Road, and on
the south by U.S. Highway 169.



   (I)   Ninth Precinct. The Ninth Precinct shall be bounded on the
south by County Road 14, on the east by Marschall Road, on the north by a
line beginning at the intersection of Marschall Road and 17th Avenue, thence
west along 17th Avenue to Weston Lane, thence south on Weston Lane to Olive
Road, thence west on Olive Road to Evergreen Lane, thence south on Evergreen
Lane to Valley View Road, thence north and west on Valley View Road to 17th
Avenue, thence west on 17th Avenue to Spencer Street (County Road 79); on the
west by a line beginning at the intersection of 17th Avenue and Spencer
Street (County Road 79) extending south along County Road 79 to Londonderry
Cove, thence south along the westerly corporate city limit to County Road 14.



   (J)   Tenth Precinct. The Tenth Precinct shall be bounded on the
north by U.S. Highway 169; on the west by Marschall Road (County Road 17); on
the south and east by a line beginning at the intersection of Valley View
Road and Marschall Road (County Road 17), thence east along Valley View Road
to Independence Drive, thence north along Independence Drive to 17th Avenue,
thence east along 17th Avenue to Canterbury Road (County Road 83) and thence
north along Canterbury Road (County Road 83) to U.S. Highway 169.



   (K)   Eleventh Precinct. The Eleventh Precinct shall be bounded on
the north by a line beginning at the intersection of 17th Avenue (County Road
16) and Canterbury Road (County Road 83), thence west along 17th Avenue to
Independence Drive, thence south along Independence Drive to Valley View
Road, and thence west along Valley View Road to Marschall Road (County Road
17); thence south along Marschall Road (County Road 17) to County Road 42;
thence east along County Road 42 to the corporate city limits; thence north
1/2 mile along the corporate city limit; thence east 1 mile along the
southerly corporate city limit; thence (following the legislative district
boundary) north 1/4 mile, thence west 1/4 mile; thence north 1/2 mile; thence
west 1/4 mile to Canterbury Road (County Road 83) 1/4 mile north of the
intersection of Valley View Road and Canterbury Road (County Road 83); thence
north along Canterbury Road (County Road 83) to 17th Avenue (County Road 16).



   (L)   Twelfth A Precinct. The Twelfth A Precinct shall be bounded by
a line beginning at the intersection of County Road 21 and Eagle Creek
Boulevard (County Road 16); thence west along Eagle Creek Boulevard to
McKenna Road; thence south along McKenna Road 1000’; thence (following the
legislative district boundary) west 1/4 mile; thence south 1/8 mile; thence
east 1/4 mile to McKenna Road; thence south along McKenna Road 2000’ to
Tinta Lane; thence east on Tinta Lane 1/2 mile to County Road 21; thence
south along County Road 21 1/4 mile to the southerly corporate city limit;
thence continuing along the corporate city limits to the eastern corporate
city limit; thence north to County Road 101; thence west along County Road
101 to County Road 21; thence south to Eagle Creek Boulevard (County Road 16).



   (M)   Twelfth B Precinct. The Twelfth B Precinct shall be bounded by
a line beginning at the southeasterly corporate city limit at County Road 21;
thence northerly along County Road 21 1/2 mile; thence (following the
legislative district boundary) west 1/2 mile to the intersection of Tinta
Lane and McKenna Road; thence north along McKenna Road 2000’; thence west
1/4 mile; thence north 1/8 mile; thence east 1/4 mile to McKenna Road; thence
north along McKenna Road 1000’ to Eagle Creek Boulevard (County Road 16);
thence west along Eagle Creek Boulevard (County Road 16) to 1/4 mile east of
Canterbury Road (County Road 83); thence south 1/4 mile; thence west 1/4 mile
to Canterbury Road (County Road 83); thence south along Canterbury Road
(County Road 83) 1/2 mile; thence east 1/4 mile; thence south 1/2 mile;
thence east 3/4 mile to McKenna Road; thence south along McKenna Road 1/2
mile to the southerly corporate city limit.



   (N)   Thirteenth Precinct. The Thirteenth Precinct shall be bounded
by a line beginning at the intersection of County Road 14 and County Road 79,
thence easterly along County Road 14 to Marschall Road (County Road 17),
thence north along Marschall Road (County Road 17) to County Road 42, thence
east along County Road 42 to the eastern corporate city limit, thence south
to the southern corporate city limit (County Road 72); thence westerly along
the southern corporate city limit to County Road 79, thence northerly on
County Road 79 to County Road 14.



   (O)   Generally. Unless otherwise specified in this section, all
precinct boundaries that reference avenues, drives, roads, streets, and
highways means the centerline of such avenues, drives, roads, streets, and
highways.



(2013 Code, § 2.22)  (Ord. 852, passed 3-29-2012)



§ 32.02  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Appointments.



      (1)   All board and commission appointments authorized by this
code of ordinances or resolution shall be filled by appointment by the
Council at the first regular meeting in February of each year. The term of
each appointee shall be established and stated at the time of appointment,
and terms of present board and commission members may be re-established and
changed so as to give effect to this section.



      (2)   New appointees shall assume office on March 1, the last
day in February being the date of expiration of terms; provided, however,
that all appointees to boards and commissions shall hold office until their
successor is appointed and qualified. All vacancies shall be filled in the
same manner as for an expired term, but the appointment shall be effective
immediately when made and only for the unexpired term.



   (B)   Qualifications.



      (1)   All members shall be residents of the city, except such
as the Council deems more representative. No appointed board or commission
member shall be an employee of the city, but an ex officio member may be so
employed. The City Administrator shall be an ex officio member of all boards
and commissions; provided, that if the City Administrator is unable to attend
a meeting or act in the capacity of such membership, the City Administrator
may be represented by the City Administrator’s Assistant or some person
duly authorized by the City Administrator. Council members may be members of
a board or commission, appointed for a term established by the Council at the
time of the appointment, but not to extend beyond the end of the then current
term being served by such member of the Council.



      (2)   Any board or commission member may be removed by the
Council for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office and the
position filled as any other vacancy.



   (C)   Compensation. All appointed board and commission members, with
the exception of Planning Commission members, shall serve without
remuneration, but may be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenses incurred in
the performance of their duties when such expenses have been authorized by
the Council before they were incurred.



   (D)   Procedures. The Chair and Secretary shall be chosen from and
by the board or commission membership annually to serve for 1 year; provided,
that no Chair shall be elected who has not completed at least 1 year as a
member of the board or commission. Each board and commission shall hold its
regular meetings at a time established and approved by the Council.



   (E)   Application. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
this section shall apply to all boards and commissions, except the City
Public Utilities Commission.



   (F)   Robert’s Rules of Order. All boards and commissions, except
the City Public Utilities Commission, shall adopt Robert’s Rules of Order,
as revised, and shall adopt such other and further rules for their own
proceedings as they shall, from time to time, deem expedient.



(2013 Code, § 2.50)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992;
Ord. 340, passed 10-8-1992; Ord. 372, passed 2-15-1994; Ord. 406, passed
3-2-1995)



§ 32.03  DEPARTMENTS GENERALLY.



   (A)   Control. All departments of the city are under the overall
control of the City Administrator. Heads of all departments are responsible
to the City Administrator and subject to the City Administrator’s
supervision and direction, except as otherwise provided by law.



   (B)   Appointment. All department heads and employees shall be
appointed by the Council, after screening and recommendation by the City
Administrator. All appointments shall be for an indeterminate term and
subject to any applicable civil service regulations, except as otherwise
provided by law.



   (C)   Compensation. All wage and salary scales shall be fixed and
determined by the Council, except as otherwise provided by law.



(2013 Code, § 2.30)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)




EMPLOYEES, BOARDS, AND DEPARTMENTS




§ 32.15  CITY ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   Position established. The position of City Administrator is
hereby established.



   (B)   Position re-defined. The existing position of City
Administrator is hereby affirmed. The City Administrator shall perform the
duties hereinafter prescribed, which shall not include the duties prescribed
by law for city clerks.



   (C)   Qualifications. The City Administrator shall be selected
solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with
special reference both to experience, formal education, as well as knowledge
of accepted practices pertaining to the duties of the office.



   (D)   Duties. The City Administrator shall be the Chief
Administrative Officer of the city and shall be responsible to the Council
for the proper administration of all affairs of the city and to that end
shall be empowered and required to:



      (1)   Supervise the administration of all departments,
offices, and divisions of the city except as otherwise provided by law and
carry out any other responsibilities placed under the City Administrator’s
jurisdiction by this section or by subsequent Council action;



      (2)   Advertise for, interview, and screen all prospective
city employees as permitted by law and shall make recommendations to the
Council before the Council makes any appointment that the City Administrator
is not authorized to make; suspend employees as necessary; make
recommendations for terminating employees and may suspend any employee until
the next Council meeting when the Council shall affirm, modify, or reject the
recommendation for termination;



      (3)   Develop and issue all administrative rules, regulations,
and procedures necessary to ensure the proper functioning of all departments
and offices under the City Administrator’s jurisdiction as permitted by law
and Council approval;



      (4)   Prepare and submit an annual budget to the Council and
keep the Council advised of the financial condition of the city and make such
recommendations as the City Administrator may from time to time determine
desirable and necessary;



      (5)   Attend and participate in discussions at all meetings of
the Council and other official bodies as directed by the Council. The City
Administrator shall also represent the city at all official or semi-official
functions as may be directed by the Council and not in conflict with the
prerogatives of the Mayor. The City Administrator shall be entitled to notice
of all regular and special meetings of the Council;



      (6)   See that all laws and provisions of this code of
ordinances are duly enforced;



      (7)   Purchase or enter into contracts for previously budgeted
items when the amount thereof does not exceed $25,000, and purchase or enter
into contracts for previously budgeted services, when the annual amount of
such contract does not exceed $25,000. For items and services in excess of
$25,000, the City Administrator shall receive estimates, quotations,
proposals, or sealed bids, as appropriate, and present them to the Council
for official action;



      (8)   Recommend from time to time the adoption of such
measures as the City Administrator may deem necessary or expedient for the
health, safety, and welfare of the community or for the improvement of the
administration;



      (9)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the
Council and consistent with state statutes and this code of ordinances; and



      (10)   Accept resignations of employment from all employees,
except department heads, Police Captains, and Police Sergeants; and



      (11)   Hire, promote, and appoint employees for positions
previously budgeted for and authorized by the City Council, with the
exception of department heads, Police Captains, and Police Sergeants and
those employees recommended for hire at or above the mid-point of the
established pay range.



   (E)   Suspensions, terminations, and appeals. Notice of termination
or suspension must be in writing and shall specify the grounds thereof and
must be served forthwith upon the suspended employee and filed with the
Council. Any department head or employee so suspended or terminated may
request a hearing before the Council by serving 10 days’ written demand on
the Council for such hearing and also by serving such notice on the City
Administrator. The Council shall hear such appeal within 14 days after the
service of the notice and shall render its decision within 7 days after the
hearing is closed.



   (F)   Compensation. The City Administrator shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed by the Council.



(2013 Code, § 2.05)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 18, passed 3-15-1979;
Ord. 51, passed 1-1-1981; Ord. 294, passed 10-19-1990; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992; Ord. 355, passed 3-25-1993; Ord. 394, passed 12-20-1994; Ord. 456,
passed 8-29-1996; Ord. 701, passed 4-15-2004; Ord. 801, passed 7-10-2008;
Ord. 880, passed 1-7-2014; Ord. 887, passed 5-20-2014; Ord. 961, passed
5-2-2017)



§ 32.16  POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   A Police Department, heretofore established, is hereby continued. The
head of this Department shall be known as the Chief of Police. The number of
employees of the Police Department shall be determined by the Council. The
Chief of Police shall have, without the approval of the Council, authority to
appoint additional members of the Police Department for temporary duty when
in the Chief’s judgment, an emergency exists for the preservation of life
or property. The Chief of Police shall supervise the operation of the Police
Department and shall make and file such reports as may be required by the
City Administrator. Employment of all permanent full-time police officers,
including the Chief of Police, shall be in accordance with state statutes and
in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the Police Civil
Service Commission.




(2013 Code, § 2.31)   (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)




§ 32.17  FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   A Fire Department, heretofore established, is hereby
continued. The size and composition (including, but not limited to, a
determination as to permanent and volunteer members) shall be established by
the Council by resolution which may be changed from time to time. The Fire
Department, with the approval of the Council, shall establish, and from time
to time revise, written rules and regulations of the Department including,
but not limited to, its internal structural organization, a copy of which
shall be distributed to each of its members whenever established or revised.



   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have general
supervision of the Department, including training of every member, and the
custody of all property used and maintained for the purpose of said
Department. The Chief shall see that the same are kept in proper order and
that all rules and regulations and all provisions of the laws of the state
and this code of ordinances relative to a Fire Department and to the
prevention and extinguishment of fires are duly observed, The Chief shall
supervise the preservation of all property endangered by fire and shall
control and direct all persons engaged in preserving such property. In case
of the absence or disability of the Chief for any cause, the Assistant Chief
shall exercise all powers, perform all the duties, and be subject to all the
responsibilities of the Chief.



   (C)   It is the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to file
with the City Administrator a report as to all fires occurring during the
previous year, stating the probable cause thereof and estimated damages; such
reports shall also state the other activities of the Department during the
preceding year. The Chief of the Fire Department shall also make and file
such other reports as may be required by the City Administrator.



(2013 Code, § 2.32)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 32.18  PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   A Department of Public Works is hereby established. The head
of this Department shall be known as the Director of Public Works. The
Director shall be a registered professional engineer and shall function as
City Engineer when legally requested to do so. The Director shall have the
duty of supervision of all public works operations and engineering
operations. The Director shall have under his or her direct supervision any
assistants as may be necessary as well as all skilled and unskilled labor
required therefor.



   (B)   The Director shall also be responsible for maintenance of all
city parks and grounds and have under his or her supervision all labor
required for maintenance thereof. The Director shall work in cooperation with
the Park and Recreation Director. The Director shall make and file such
reports as may be required by the City Administrator; and shall perform such
duties as are required of the him or her, or referred to the Director by the
Council.



(2013 Code, § 2.36)  (Ord. 284, passed 1-1-1990; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 32.19  ADDITIONAL DEPARTMENTS.



   The following departments, and any other departments as may be
determined by the Council, are hereby authorized and shall have the duties
specified by the Council: Department of Planning and Finance Redevelopment
and Administration Department.



(2013 Code, § 2.37)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)



§ 32.20  PLANNING COMMISSION.



   A Planning Commission composed of 7 members is hereby established. The
Planning Commission members shall serve staggered 4-year terms. The Planning
Commission shall have such authority and perform such duties as prescribed by
state statutes and this code of ordinances. Each member of the Planning
Commission shall receive such compensation per Planning Commission meeting or
hearing, as shall be fixed by the Council.



(2013 Code, § 2.52)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 406, passed 3-2-1995)



§ 32.21  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS.



   The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall be the Planning Commission.



(2013 Code, § 2.53)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979)



§ 32.22  PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION.



   (A)   Generally. The City Public Utilities Commission, heretofore
established, continues. The Commission shall have the full, absolute, and
exclusive control of, and power over, all city water plants and systems, and
all light and power plants and systems. The Commission shall also have
control of, and power over, such public buildings that by agreement between
the Council and the Commission, are placed under the jurisdiction of the
Commission. This control and power shall extend to all parts, buildings,
attachments, and appurtenances thereto; and to all apparatus, machinery, and
material of every kind used in operating these plants and systems. The
Commission is empowered to operate and control any other utilities
subsequently acquired.



   (B)   Membership. In accordance with 2002 Minnesota Session Laws,
Ch. 226, as it may be amended from time to time, the Commission shall consist
of 5 members appointed by the Council, and their compensation shall be set by
the Council. No more than 1 member shall be a member of the Council. Each
member shall serve for a term of 3 years. Commission members must reside
within the corporate limits of the city at the time of their appointment to
the Commission, and if they move outside of the corporate limits during their
term of office, they shall tender their resignation to the Council who may
accept or reject it. If the Council rejects the resignation, said
Commissioner may complete the Commissioner’s term of office.



   (C)   Procedures. The Commission shall adopt rules for its own
proceedings which shall provide for, among other things, at least 1 regular
meeting by the Commission each month. It shall annually choose a President
from among its own members. It shall appoint a Secretary who need not be a
member of the Commission, for an indefinite term. The Secretary shall receive
a salary fixed by the Commission.



   (D)   Powers. The Commission shall have power to extend and to
modify or rebuild any public utility and to do anything it deems necessary to
its proper and efficient operation; and it may enter into necessary contracts
for these purposes.



   (E)   Employees. The Commission shall have power to employ all
necessary help for the management and operation of the public utility,
prescribe duties of officers and employees and fix their compensation.



   (F)   Purchases. The Commission shall have power to buy all fuel and
supplies, and it may purchase wholesale electric energy, steam heat, gas, or
water, as the case may be, for municipal distribution,



   (G)   Rates, rules, and regulations. The Commission shall have
power, after informing the Council, to fix rates and to adopt reasonable
rules and regulations for utility service supplied by the municipally- owned
public utilities within its jurisdiction. A joint meeting shall be held
between the Commission and Council when requested by either body.



   (H)   Agreement with city. The Commission shall have power to enter
into agreements with the Council for payments by the city of utility service;
compensation for the use by either the Commission or the city of buildings,
equipment, and personnel under the control of the other; payments to the city
in lieu of taxes; transfers of surplus utility funds to the General Fund; and
also agreements on other subjects of relationships between the Commission and
the Council. The Commission shall also have any and all power and authority
provided by law. All existing agreements between the Commission and Council
are preserved.



   (I)   Disposition. No utility, or portion thereof, shall be
transferred from under the jurisdiction of the Commission and no utility, or
portion thereof, shall be sold, rented, leased, or otherwise disposed of
except as by law.



(2013 Code, § 2.54)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992;
Ord. 628, passed 4-25-2002)



§ 32.23  PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD.



   (A)   Establishment. A City Park and Recreation Advisory Board is
hereby established. The Park and Recreation Advisory Board shall have
advisory powers and shall be subordinate to the Council. The duties of this
Board shall consist of making recommendations to the Council on establishing
policies and programs relating to park, recreation, and leisure services.



   (B)   Duties. This includes, but is not limited to, the following
duties.



      (1)   The Board shall make recommendations to the Council
regarding park development including the maintenance and upgrade of
facilities and equipment, the naming of parks, and the location of new parks
and what facilities they shall include.



      (2)   The Board shall make recommendations to the Council
concerning park land acquisition procedures and park dedication requirements.



      (3)   The Board shall be responsible for submitting an annual
and 5-year capital improvement program, outlining recommended improvements to
existing and proposed park lands prior to July 1 of each year.



      (4)   The Board shall make recommendations and submit to the
Council an annual operating budget and schedule for recreational program fees.



      (5)   The Board shall review and evaluate park and recreation
programs and how these programs can and do fulfill the existing and future
needs of the city, while preserving the city’s heritage and traditions. The
Board shall be knowledgeable of the City Council’s vision and shall
evaluate the programs based on how they meet the goals and action plans
established by Council.



      (6)   The Board shall endeavor to foster mutually beneficial
relationships between the City School District, City Area Catholic Education
Center, affiliated recreation organizations, and surrounding governmental
agencies.



   (C)   Composition of Commission.



      (1)   The Park and Recreation Advisory Board shall consist of
7 members appointed by the Council having staggered terms of 3 years each.
Appointment shall be made by resolution naming the Board members and setting
the term of office. Vacancies occurring thereafter shall be filled for the
unexpired term of the vacant office and shall be by resolution adopted by a
majority vote of the Council.



      (2)   The composition of the Board may include citizens from
the community representing the following interests in the community:



         (a)   School;



         (b)   Community organization(s);



         (c)   General public;



         (d)   Senior citizens; and



         (e)   Neighboring townships.



(2013 Code, § 2.57)  (Ord. 290, passed 6-5-1990; Ord. 305, passed 2-6-1991;
Ord. 311, passed 6-14-1991; Ord. 323, passed 12-12-1991; Ord. 340, passed
10-8-1992; Ord. 774, passed 12-28-2006)



§ 32.99  PENALTY.



   Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or provision
of this chapter when that person performs an act thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a
misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.



(2013 Code, § 2.99)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



CHAPTER 33:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



Section



   33.01   Policy and purpose



   33.02   Definitions



   33.03   Establishment of Emergency Management Agency



   33.04   Powers and duties of the Director



   33.05   General provisions and emergency management workers



   33.06   Emergency regulations and succession



   33.07   Emergency Management Agency procedure



   33.08   Fallout shelter in public structures



   33.09   Conformity and cooperation with federal, state, and county
authority



   33.10   Emergency management as a governmental function



   33.11   Participation in labor dispute or politics



   33.12   Use of city equipment; personnel; expenditure of city funds



   33.13   Emergency Management Director



§ 33.01  POLICY AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   Because of the existing and increasing possibility of the
occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size and destructiveness resulting
from enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or from fire, flood,
earthquake, or other natural or human-made causes, and in order to ensure
that preparations of this city will be adequate to deal with such disasters,
and generally to provide for the common defense and to protect the public
peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the
people of this city, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary:



      (1)   To establish a city emergency management organization;



      (2)   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during
emergencies at the time of a natural or human-made disaster;



      (3)   To provide for the formulation of necessary plans and
training to meet the requirements of the city missions; and



      (4)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this
city and other political subdivisions of this state or of other states with
respect to the carrying out emergency management functions.



   (B)   It is further declared to be the purpose of this chapter and
the policy of the city, that all emergency management functions of this city
be coordinated to the maximum extent practicable with the comparable
functions of the federal government, of this state, county, and of private
agencies of every type, to the end that the most effective preparations and
use may be made of the nation’s labor force, resources, and facilities for
dealing with any disaster that may occur.



(2013 Code, § 2.11)  (Ord. 769, passed 10-26-2006)



§ 33.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EMERGENCY. An emergency declared by the Governor under the provisions
of M.S. § 12.31, as it may be amended from time to time, or an emergency
declared by the Mayor and/or Council under § 33.06.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The preparation for and carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible; to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage
resulting from disaster, natural or human-made, acute shortages of energy, or
from incidents occurring that pose radiological, bio-terrorism, or other
health hazards. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting
services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering,
warning services, communications, radiological, chemical, and other special
weapons defense, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency human
services, emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions
of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services, and
other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other
activities necessary or incidental to preparation for a carrying out of the
foregoing functions.



   EMERGENCY RESPONSE PERSONNEL. Any personnel employed by the city and
any other volunteer or paid member of the city emergency management
organization engaged in carrying on emergency management functions in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any rule or other
thereunder.



(2013 Code, § 2.11)  (Ord. 769, passed 10-26-2006)



§ 33.03  ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY.



   (A)   Pursuant to the authority in M.S. § 12.25, as it may be
amended from time to time, there is hereby created within the city government
an Emergency Management Agency, which shall be under the supervision and
control of an Emergency Management Director, hereinafter called the Director.
The Director shall be appointed by the Council for an indefinite term and may
be removed at any time. The Director may be compensated at a rate to be
determined by the Council and shall be paid necessary expenses.



   (B)   The Director shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration, and operation of the emergency management
organization, subject to the direction and control of the Council. Emergency
management shall be organized into such divisions and bureaus, consistent
with state, county, and local emergency operation plans, as the Director
deems necessary to provide for the efficient performance of local emergency
management functions during an emergency. The Emergency Management Agency
shall perform emergency management functions outside the city as may be
required pursuant to the provisions of the state statutes, Ch. 150, the
county common organization contract, or this chapter.



(2013 Code, § 2.11)  (Ord. 769, passed 10-26-2006)



§ 33.04  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The Director, with the consent of the Council or City
Administrator, shall represent the city on any county, regional, or state
organization for emergency management.



   (B)   The Director shall make such studies and surveys of the labor
force, industries resources, and facilities of the city as the Director deems
necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency management, and to plan
for their most efficient use in time of an emergency.



   (C)   The Director shall prepare a comprehensive general plan for
the emergency management of the city which will include a community shelter
plan utilizing the established shelters and shall present such plan to the
Council for its approval. When the Council has approved the plan by
resolution, it shall be the duty of all municipal agencies and all emergency
response personnel of the city, to perform the duties and functions assigned
by the plan as approved. The plan may be modified in like manner from time to
time. The Director shall coordinate the emergency management activities of
the city to the end that they shall be consistent and fully integrated with
the emergency operation plans of the county.



   (D)   In accordance with the state, county, and city emergency
operations plan, the Director shall institute such training programs and
public information programs and shall take all other preparatory steps,
including the partial or full mobilization of emergency response personnel in
advance of actual disaster, as may be necessary to the prompt and effective
operation of the city emergency operation plan in time of an emergency. The
Director may, from time to time, conduct such practice alerts or other
emergency management exercises as the Director may deem necessary.



   (E)   The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment,
supplies, and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the city to
the maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all such
departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate
with and extend such services and facilities to the local Emergency
Management Agency and to the Governor or the county authorities upon request.
The head of each department and agency, in cooperation with and under the
direction of the Director, shall be responsible for the planning and
programming of such emergency management activities as will involve the
utilization of the facilities of this department or agency.



   (F)   The Director shall, in cooperation with existing city
departments and agencies affected, organize, recruit, and train shelter
managers, radiological monitors, police reserves, rescue personnel,
firefighters, emergency medical personnel, and any other personnel that may
be required on a volunteer basis to carry out the emergency operation plans
of the city, the county, or the state. To the extent that such emergency
personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or agency for
emergencies, they shall be assigned to such department or agency for purposes
of administration and command. The Director may dismiss any volunteer at any
time and require the surrender of any equipment and identification furnished
by the city.



   (G)   Consistent with the emergency operations plan, the Director
shall provide and equip emergency hospitals, casualty stations, ambulances,
canteens, evacuation centers, and other facilities, or conveyances for the
care of the injured or homeless persons.



   (H)   The Director shall carry out all emergency orders, rules, and
regulations issued by the Mayor, Governor, and county through the common
organization contract, pertaining to emergency management.



   (I)   The Emergency Management Director shall direct and coordinate
the general operations of all local emergency response personnel during an
emergency in conformity with controlling regulations and instructions of
state and county emergency management authorities. The heads of departments
and agencies shall be governed by the Director’s orders in respect thereto.



   (J)   Consistent with the emergency operations plan, the Director or
city EOC shall use the County Emergency Operating Center and, if required by
the local emergency operations plan, auxiliary centers to be used during an
emergency as headquarters for direction and control of emergency response
personnel. The Director shall arrange for representation at the center by
municipal departments and agencies, public utilities and other agencies
authorized by federal or state authority to carry on emergency.



   (K)   During the first 30 days of an emergency, if the Legislature
is in session or the Governor, has coupled the declaration of the emergency
with a call for a special session of the Legislature, the Director may, when
necessary to save life or property, require any person, except members of the
federal or state military forces and officers of the state or any other
political subdivision, to perform services for emergency management purposes
as the Director deems necessary; and the Director may commandeer, for the
time being, any motor vehicle, tools, appliances, or any other property,
subject to the owner’s right to just compensation as provided by law.



(2013 Code, § 2.11)  (Ord. 769, passed 10-26-2006)



§ 33.05  GENERAL PROVISIONS AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT WORKERS.



   (A)   Emergency management volunteers shall be called into service
only in case of an emergency or a natural disaster for which the regular
municipal forces are inadequate or for necessary training and preparation for
such emergencies. All volunteers shall serve without compensation.



   (B)   Each emergency management volunteer shall be provided with
such suitable insignia or other identification as may be required by the
Director. Such identification shall be in a form and style approved by the
federal government. No volunteer shall exercise any authority over any person
except an authorized volunteer shall use the identification of a volunteer or
otherwise represent themselves to be an authorized volunteer.



   (C)   No emergency management volunteer shall carry any firearm
while on duty except on written order of the Chief of the Police Department.



   (D)   Personnel procedures of the city applicable to regular
employees shall not apply to volunteer emergency management workers, but
shall apply to paid employees of the Emergency Management Agency.



(2013 Code, § 2.11)  (Ord. 769, passed 10-26-2006)



§ 33.06  EMERGENCY REGULATIONS AND SUCCESSION.



   (A)   When used in this chapter, the term EMERGENCY includes, in
addition to the meaning given in state law, disasters caused by fire, flood,
windstorm, or other natural and human-made causes.



   (B)   Whenever necessary to meet an emergency or to prepare for such
an emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the
Governor or the Council, the Mayor may by proclamation promulgate
regulations, consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulations,
respecting: protection against nuclear missiles; the sounding of attack
warning; the conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies;
the repair, maintenance, and safeguarding of essential public services;
emergency health, fire, and safety regulation; trial drills; or practice
periods required for preliminary training; and all other matters which are
required to protect public safety, health, and welfare in emergencies.



   (C)   Every proclamation of emergency regulations shall be in
writing and signed by the Mayor, shall be dated, shall refer to the
particular emergency to which it pertains, if so limited, and shall be filed
in the office of the City Administrator, where a copy shall be kept posted
and available for public inspection during business hours. Notice of the
existence of such regulation and its availability for inspection at the
Administrator’s office shall be conspicuously posted at the front of City
Hall or other headquarters of the city and at such other places in the
affected area as the Mayor shall designate in the proclamation. Thereupon the
regulation shall take effect immediately or at such later time as may be
specified in the proclamation. By like proclamation, the Mayor may modify or
rescind any such regulation.



   (D)   The Council may rescind any such regulation by resolution at
any time. If not sooner rescinded, every such regulation shall expire at the
end of 30 days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency to
which it relates, whichever occurs first. Any ordinance, rule, or regulation
inconsistent with an emergency regulation promulgated by the Mayor shall be
suspended during the period of time and to the extent that such conflict
exists. During the emergency, the city is, notwithstanding any statutory or
charter provision to the contrary, empowered, through its governing body
acting within or without the corporate limits of the city, to enter into
contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat such disaster by
protecting the health and safety of persons and property, and providing
emergency assistance to the victims of such disaster. The city may exercise
such powers in the light of exigencies of the disaster without compliance
with time consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law pertaining
to the performance of public work, entering into contracts, incurring of
obligations, employment of temporary workers, rental of equipment, purchase
of supplies and materials, limitations upon tax levies; and the appropriation
and expenditure of public funds including, but not limited to, publication of
ordinances and resolutions, publication of calls for bids, provisions of
civil service laws and rules, provisions relating to low bids, and
requirements for budgets.



   (E)   During an emergency, the Mayor is authorized to contract on
behalf of the city for services for the purchase of merchandise or materials
where the amount of the contract or purchase does not exceed $25,000. The
Mayor may take such action without prior approval of the Council and without
compliance with regular purchasing and bidding procedures, but all claims
resulting therefrom shall be audited and approved by the Council as in the
case of other purchases and contracts.



   (F)   (1)   In the event of a nuclear attack upon the United
States or a natural disaster or any other emergency affecting the vicinity of
the city, the Mayor, the Council, and the City Administrator shall be
forthwith notified by any 1 of the said persons and by any means available to
gather at the emergency operations center.



      (2)   Those gathered shall proceed as follows:



         (a)   By majority vote of those present, regardless of
number, they shall elect a Chair and Secretary to preside and keep the
minutes respectively;



         (b)   They shall review and record the specific facts
relating to nuclear attack or natural disaster or other emergency and
injuries to persons or damage to property already done or the imminence
thereof;



         (c)   By a majority vote of those present, regardless of
number, they shall fill all positions on the Council, including the office of
Mayor, of those persons upon whom notice could not be served or who are
unable to be present; and



         (d)   Such interim succession shall serve until such
time as the duly elected official is again available and returns to the
position or the state of emergency is past and a successor is designated and
qualified as required by law, whichever shall occur first.



(2013 Code, § 2.11)  (Ord. 769, passed 10-26-2006)



§ 33.07  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY PROCEDURE.



   (A)   There is hereby established in the City Treasury an Emergency
Management Account. Into this Account shall be placed the proceeds of taxes
levied for emergency management, money transferred from other funds, gifts,
and other revenues of the Emergency Management Agency. From it shall be made
expenditures for the operation and maintenance of the Emergency Management
Agency and other expenditures for emergency management.



   (B)   Regular accounting, disbursement, purchasing, budgeting, and
other financial procedures of the city shall apply to the Emergency
Management Fund insofar as practicable; but, budgeting requirements and other
financial procedures shall not apply to expenditures from the Fund in any
case when their application will prevent compliance with terms and conditions
of a federal or state grant of money or property for emergency management
purposes.



(2013 Code, § 2.11)  (Ord. 769, passed 10-26-2006)



§ 33.08  FALLOUT SHELTER IN PUBLIC STRUCTURES.



   (A)   It is the policy of the city that fallout shelters be
incorporated in all publicly-owned buildings to the fullest extent
practicable in order to provide protection against radiation in the event of
nuclear attack.



   (B)   The Council shall require that all contracts for the design or
construction of such publicly-owned buildings, including additions to or
alterations of existing structures, incorporate fallout protection for at
least the normal anticipated daily population of the building. The fallout
shelter protection provided for shall meet or exceed the minimum space and
fallout protective criteria recommended by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, unless exempted from such shelter requirement as provided in division
(C) below.



   (C)   The Council may exempt buildings or structures from the
requirements of this section where it finds that such incorporation of
fallout shelter will create an additional cost in the construction of such
structure in excess of 1% of the estimated cost thereof without shelter so
incorporated, or if it finds that other factors make unnecessary or
impracticable the incorporation of fallout shelters in such structures,



(2013 Code, § 2.11)  (Ord. 769, passed 10-26-2006)



§ 33.09  CONFORMITY AND COOPERATION WITH FEDERAL, STATE, AND COUNTY
AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Every officer and agency of the city shall cooperate with
federal, state, and county authorities and with authorized agencies engaged
in emergency management and emergency measures to the fullest possible extent
consistent with the performance of their duties.



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter and of all regulations made
thereunder shall be subject to all applicable and controlling provisions of
federal and state laws and of regulations and orders issued thereunder and
shall be deemed to be suspended and inoperative so far as there is any
conflict therewith.



(2013 Code, § 2.11)  (Ord. 769, passed 10-26-2006)



§ 33.10  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AS A GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION.



   All functions hereunder and all other activities relating to emergency
management are hereby declared to be governmental functions. The provisions
of this chapter shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits
to which that person would not otherwise be entitled under this chapter or
under the worker’s compensation law, or under any pension law, nor the
right of any such person to receive any benefits or compensation under any
act of Congress.



(2013 Code, § 2.11)  (Ord. 769, passed 10-26-2006)



§ 33.11  PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTE OR POLITICS.



   The Emergency Management Agency shall not participate in any form of
political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for
political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute.



(2013 Code, § 2.11)  (Ord. 53, passed 2-26-1981; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992; Ord. 408, passed 3-7-1995; Ord. 769, passed 10-26-2006)



§ 33.12  USE OF CITY EQUIPMENT; PERSONNEL; EXPENDITURE OF CITY FUNDS.



   In the event of a disaster and when it is impossible or impractical to
first seek city Council approval, the Mayor or the Mayor’s designee is
authorized to exercise discretion and to use city equipment, supplies, and
personnel and to expend city funds as necessary to preserve and maintain the
operation of city government and the safety and security of the public.



(2013 Code, § 2.11)  (Ord. 564, passed 12-30-1999)



§ 33.13  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR.



   The Council may appoint an Emergency Management Director either for the
city or in conjunction with another unit of government, and provide for
compensation.



(2013 Code, § 2.12)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992;
Ord. 769, passed 10-26-2006)



CHAPTER 34:  FINANCE AND REVENUE



Section



   34.01   Commercial Building Rehabilitation Loan Program



   34.02   Franchises



   34.03   Partial pre-payment of special assessments permitted



   34.04   Deferment of special assessments



   34.05   Capital Improvement Fund



 



   34.99   Penalty



§ 34.01  COMMERCIAL BUILDING REHABILITATION LOAN PROGRAM.



   (A)   Authority. Pursuant to M.S. § 469.184, as it may be amended
from time to time, the city has been authorized to establish a Commercial
Building Loan Program to rehabilitate and preserve small and medium sized
commercial buildings located within its boundaries, and to provide for the
administration thereof. Pursuant to this statute, the Economic Development
Authority for the city has been authorized to develop and administer an
Interest Reduction Program to pay in periodic payments or in a lump sum
payment, any or all of the interest on loans made pursuant to this statute
for the rehabilitation or preservation of small and medium sized commercial
buildings.



   (B)   Findings. The Council finds that many commercial buildings in
the city are physically deteriorating, underused, economically inefficient,
or functionally obsolete, and in need of rehabilitation to meet applicable
building codes; that there is a need for a comprehensive program for the
rehabilitation of such buildings to prevent economic and physical blight and
deterioration, to increase the municipal tax base, and to assist in the
implementation of the comprehensive plan for the city; that some owners of
small and medium sized commercial buildings are unable to afford
rehabilitation loans on terms available in the private mortgage market or to
obtain rehabilitation loans on any terms because the private mortgage market
is severely restricted; and that the health, safety, and general welfare and
the preservation of the quality of life of the residents of the city are
dependent on the preservation and rehabilitation of small and medium sized
commercial buildings in the city.



   (C)   Economic Development Authority to act on behalf of city. The
Council hereby authorizes the Economic Development Authority for the city to
exercise any and all of the powers conferred on the city and a housing and
redevelopment authority by M.S. § 469.184, as it may be amended from time to
time, to operate and administer a municipal Commercial Rehabilitation Loan
Program within the city.



   (D)   Administration. The Economic Development Authority for the
city is hereby granted the power and authority to adopt from time to time
various program regulations and guidelines for the Commercial Building
Rehabilitation Loan Program authorized by this chapter, which regulations
shall include a definition of “small and medium sized commercial
buildings”, loan eligibility and loan priority criteria, loan amount
limitations and any other provisions and regulations which may from time to
time be necessary or desirable.



   (E)   Commercial Building Rehabilitation Loan Program. There is
hereby established and provided a Program for the making of loans for the
rehabilitation and preservation of small and medium sized commercial
buildings located within the city, which Program shall be administered by the
Economic Development Authority for the city in accordance with the following
regulations, conditions, and provisions, and such other regulations and
guidelines as shall be formulated and adopted by the Economic Development
Authority for the city.



      (1)   Loans may be provided and made for the rehabilitation
and preservation of small and medium sized commercial buildings, and all such
loans shall be secured either by mortgages on the property with respect to
which the loans are made or by other security acceptable to the Council.
Except as hereinafter provided, such loans may be made on such terms and
conditions as may be authorized pursuant to the regulations and guidelines
which shall be adopted by the Economic Development Authority.



      (2)   Loans made under the Program shall be eligible for
interest rate reduction payments in the amounts, and upon the terms and
conditions as may be authorized by the Program regulations and guidelines.



      (3)   In approving applications for loans pursuant to this
chapter and the Program, at least the following factors and conditions shall
be considered:



         (a)   The availability and affordability of private
mortgage credit;



         (b)   The availability and affordability of other
governmental programs;



         (c)   Whether the building is required, pursuant to any
court order, statute, or provision of this code of ordinances to be repaired,
improved, or rehabilitated; and



         (d)   Whether the proposed improvements will result in
conformance with building and zoning codes and improvement of the aesthetic
quality of existing commercial areas.



   (F)   Limitations. The Loan Program shall be operated within the
following limitations.



      (1)   Only buildings located within the Downtown Development
District shall be eligible for loans under this Program.



      (2)   The terms and conditions of all loans made under the
Program shall be fixed so that the sum of all repayments of principal and
interest on them, not then delinquent, and all fees and charges collected,
together with other sums to be contributed by the city, shall, over the
duration of the Program, be estimated to be equal to or greater than the sum
of all estimated costs of the Program, as determined by the Program
Administrator and approved by the Council, including administrative costs,
mortgage foreclosure costs, and principal and interest payments on bonds
issued to finance the Program to the extent not paid from bond proceeds.



      (3)   No loan shall be made for a period exceeding 20 years.



      (4)   No loan shall exceed 80% of the estimated market value
of the property to be rehabilitated upon completion of the rehabilitation,
less the principal balance of any prior mortgage existing on the property at
the time the loan is made.



      (5)   No loan shall be made in excess of $200,000 for the
rehabilitation of any particular small or medium sized commercial building.



      (6)   No grants of any money shall be allowed or made as a
part of the Loan Program authorized by this section.



(2013 Code, § 2.71)  (Ord. 102, passed 9-16-1982; Ord. 408, passed
3-7-1995; Ord. 410, passed 4-13-1995)



§ 34.02  FRANCHISES.



   (A)   Definition. FRANCHISE as used in this section shall be
construed to mean any special privileges granted to any person in, over,
upon, or under any of the streets or public places of the city, whether such
privilege has heretofore been granted by it or by the state, or shall
hereafter be granted by the city or by the state.



   (B)   Franchise ordinances. The Council may grant franchises by
ordinance. Franchise rights shall always be subject to the superior right of
the public to the use of streets and public places. All persons desiring to
make any burdensome use of the streets or public places, inconsistent with
the public’s right in such places, or desiring the privilege of placing in,
over, upon, or under any street or public place any permanent or
semi-permanent fixtures for the purpose of constructing or operating
railways, telegraphing, or transmitting electricity, or transporting by
pneumatic tubes, or for furnishing to the city or its inhabitants or any
portion thereof, transportation facilities, water, light, heat, power, gas,
or any other such utility, or for any other purpose, shall be required to
obtain a franchise before proceeding to make such use of the streets or
public places or before proceeding to place such fixtures in such places.



   (C)   Power of regulation reserved. The city shall have the right
and power to regulate and control the exercise by any person, of any
franchise however acquired, and whether such franchise has been heretofore
granted by it or by the state.



   (D)   Conditions in every franchise. All conditions specified in
this section shall be a part of every franchise even though they may not be
expressly contained in the franchise.



      (1)   The grantee shall be subject to and will perform on its
part all the terms of this section and will comply with all pertinent
provisions of any City Charter and city code, as the same may from time to
time be amended.



      (2)   The grantee shall in no case claim or pretend to
exercise any power to fix fares, rates, and charges; but that such fares,
rates, and charges shall at all times be just, fair, and reasonable for the
services rendered and shall in all cases be fixed and from time to time
changed, unless regulated by an agency of the state, in the manner following:



         (a)   A reasonable rate shall be construed to be one
which will, with efficient management, normally yield above all operating
expenses and depreciation, a fair return upon all money invested;



         (b)   If possible maximum rates and charges shall be
arrived at by direct negotiation with the Council; and



         (c)   If direct negotiations fail to produce agreement,
the Council shall, not less than 30 days before the expiration of any
existing rate schedule or agreement, appoint an expert as its representative,
the franchisee shall likewise appoint an expert as its representative and the
2 of them shall appoint a third person, preferably an expert, and the 3 of
them shall constitute a Board of Arbitration. The Board shall report its
findings as soon as possible and the rates, and charges it shall agree upon
by majority vote shall be legal and binding, subject only to review by a
court of competent jurisdiction upon application of one of the parties.



      (3)   The Council shall have the right to require reasonable
extensions of any public service system from time to time, and to make such
rules and regulations as may be required to secure adequate and proper
service and to provide sufficient accommodations for the public.



      (4)   The grantee shall not issue any capital stock on account
of the franchise or the value thereof, and that the grantee shall have no
right to receive upon condemnation proceedings brought by the city to acquire
the public utility exercising such franchise, any return on account of the
franchise or its value.



      (5)   No sale or lease of said franchise shall be effective
until the assignee or lessee shall have filed with the city an instrument,
duly executed, reciting the facts of such sale or lease, accepting the terms
of the franchise, and agreeing to perform all the conditions required of the
grantee thereunder.



      (6)   Every grant contained in said franchise of permission
for the erection of poles, masts, or other fixtures in the streets and for
the attachment of wires thereto, or for the laying of tracks in, or of pipes
or conduits under the streets or public places, or for the placing in the
streets or other public places of any permanent or semi-permanent fixtures
whatsoever, shall be subject to the conditions that the Council shall have
the power to require such alterations therein, or relocation or rerouting
thereof, as the Council may at any time deem necessary for the safety,
health, or convenience of the public, and particularly that it shall have the
power to require the removal of poles, masts, and other fixtures bearing
wires and the placing underground of all facilities for whatsoever purpose
used.



      (7)   Every franchise shall contain a provision granting the
city the right to acquire the same in accordance with statute.



      (8)   The franchisee may be obligated by the city to pay the
city fees to raise revenue or defray increased costs accruing as a result of
utility operations, or both, including, but not limited to, a sum of money
based upon gross operating revenues or gross earnings from its operations in
the city.



   (E)   Further provisions of franchises. The enumeration and
specification of particular matters which must be included in every franchise
or renewal or extension thereof, shall not be construed as impairing the
right of the city to insert in any such franchise or renewal or extension
thereof such other and further conditions and restrictions as the Council may
deem proper to protect the city’s interests, nor shall anything contained
in this section limit any right of power possessed by the city over existing
franchises.



   (F)   Term of franchise. No exclusive or perpetual franchise shall
ever be granted. No franchise for a term exceeding 20 years shall be
effective until approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon.



   (G)   Exception. Nothing in this section shall pertain to the City
Public Utilities Commission.



(2013 Code, § 2.80)  (Ord. 1, passed 1-1-1978)



§ 34.03  PARTIAL PRE-PAYMENT OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS PERMITTED.



   (A)   When made. Partial pre-payments of special assessments for
local improvements may be made after the adoption of the assessment and prior
to the first certification thereof to the County Auditor.



   (B)   Amount. There may be only 1 partial pre-payment and it must be
in an amount not less than $100.



(2013 Code, § 2.81)  (Ord. 82, passed 12-24-1981)



§ 34.04  DEFERMENT OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.



   (A)   Qualifications. The Council may defer the payment of any
special assessment on homestead property owned by a person who is 65 years of
age or older, or who is retired by virtue of permanent and total disability,
and the Finance Director is hereby authorized to record the deferment of
special assessments where the following conditions are met; but nothing
herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the determination of such a
hardship on the basis of exceptional and unusual circumstances not covered by
these standards and guidelines where the determination is made by the Council
in a nondiscriminatory manner that a deferment should be granted when such
deferment does not give the applicant an unreasonable preference or advantage
over other applicants.



      (1)   Any applicant must be 65 years of age, or older, or
retired by virtue of permanent and total disability, and must own a legal or
equitable interest in the property applied for which must be the homestead of
the applicant.



      (2)   The applicant and any other owner of said property who
resides therein with the applicant shall not have an annual gross income in
excess of the Section 8, low-income limits in effect at the time of the
application as established by the Department of Housing and Urban
Development. Income specified in the application should be the income of the
year preceding the year in which the application is made, or the average
income of the 3 years prior to the year in which the application is made.



      (3)   The applicant and any other owner of said property who
resides therein with the applicant shall not have gross assets (excluding the
homestead property) in excess of $48,000.



      (4)   The limitations on an applicant’s assets, and property
market value may be adjusted on an annual basis upon recommendation of the
City Administrator and motion of the Council.



      (5)   Unless otherwise provided under the resolution adopting
said assessments, all such deferred assessments shall bear interest at the
rate of 8% per annum.



      (6)   This procedure shall not apply to any assessment of $100
or less.



   (B)   Length. The deferment shall be granted for as long a period of
time as the hardship exists and the conditions as aforementioned have been
met; however, it shall be the duty of the applicant to notify the City Clerk
of any change in status that would affect eligibility for deferment.



   (C)   Interest.



      (1)   The entire amount of deferred special assessments shall
be due within 60 days after loss of eligibility by the applicant. If the
special assessment is not paid within 60 days, the City Clerk shall add
thereto interest at 8% per annum from date assessments were adopted through
December 31 of the following year and the total amount of principal and
interest shall be certified to the County Auditor for collection with taxes
the following year.



      (2)    Should the applicant plead and prove to the
satisfaction of the Council that full repayment of the deferred special
assessment would cause the applicant particular undue financial hardship, the
Council may order that the applicant pay within 60 days a sum equal to the
number of installments of deferred special assessments outstanding and unpaid
to date (including principal and interest) with the balance thereafter paid
according to the terms and conditions of the original special assessment.



   (D)   When due. The option to defer the payment of special
assessments shall terminate and all amounts accumulated plus applicable
interest shall become due upon the occurrence of any one of the



following:



      (1)   The death of the owner when there is no spouse who is
eligible for deferment;



      (2)   The sale, transfer, or subdivision of all or any part of
the property;



      (3)   Loss of homestead status on the property; and



      (4)   Determination by the Council for any reason that there
would be no hardship to require immediate or partial payment.



(2013 Code, § 2.82)  (Ord. 121, passed 8-4-1983; Ord. 268, passed
7-21-1989; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992; Ord. 561, passed 11-25-1999)



§ 34.05  CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND.



   (A)   Established. A Public Works Reserve Fund, to be known as the
Capital Improvement Fund, is hereby established pursuant to the authority
granted by M.S. § 471.57, as it may be amended from time to time, with
authority to levy taxes annually within the existing limits for the support
of such Fund and into which Fund may be paid any other revenues or monies not
required by statute to be paid into some other fund or used for purposes
other than those provided for by this section for the use of the Capital
Improvement Fund.



   (B)   Purpose of Fund. This Capital Improvement Fund shall be used
only to finance local capital improvements of a type for which the city is
authorized to issue bonds and including, but not limited to, sanitary and
drainage sewers, watermains and appurtenances, buildings, streets, street
lighting, and street signaling. Whenever the Capital Improvement Fund balance
falls below $75,000 the City Treasurer must immediately advise the Council
and the Council shall take steps by resolution to replenish the Fund, with or
without interest.



(2013 Code, § 2.83)  (Ord. 134, passed 10-6-1983)



§ 34.99  PENALTY.



   Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or provision
of this chapter when that person performs an act thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a
misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.



(2013 Code, § 2.99)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   UTILITIES



      51.   REFUSE AND RECYCLABLES



      52.   SEWER



      53.   STORMWATER



      54.   WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT



CHAPTER 50:  UTILITIES



Section




General Provisions




   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Fixing rates and charges for sewerage service



   50.03   Prohibited acts




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPANY. COMPANY, GRANTEE, and FRANCHISEE shall refer to any public
utility system to which a franchise has been granted by the city.



   MUNICIPAL UTILITY. Any city-owned utility system, including, but not by
way of limitation, water, sewerage, and refuse service.



   SERVICE. Providing a particular utility to a customer or consumer.



   UTILITY. All utility services, whether the same be public city-owned
facilities or furnished by public utility companies.



(2013 Code, § 3.01)



§ 50.02  FIXING RATES AND CHARGES FOR SEWERAGE SERVICE.



   All rates and charges for sewerage service including, but not by way of
limitation, rates for service, availability, connection, disconnection, and
reconnection fees, including penalties for non-payment, if any, shall be
fixed, determined, and amended by the Council and adopted by resolution. 
The owners of all property served with sanitary sewer service must pay their
proportionate cost and charges for the collection and disposal of sewage. 
If a property owner defaults in the payment of these costs and charges, the
City Council may, pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, levy an annual assessment
equal to such unpaid costs and charges against each lot or parcel of land for
which such charges and costs remain unpaid. The assessment shall be certified
to the County Auditor and shall be collected and remitted to the city in the
same manner as assessments for local improvements.



(2013 Code, § 3.02)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 402, passed 2-16-1995;
Ord. 917, passed 10-6-2015)



§ 50.03  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   It is unlawful for any person, firm, association, or corporation other
than an authorized agent or employee of the city and its various commissions
to, in any manner whatever, interfere with or change or interrupt the
operation of any municipally-owned or controlled public utility by
manipulating, turning, operating, or working with any valve, switch, or lever
or any appurtenance connected thereto or used in connection therewith,
including, but not limited to, all mains, pipes, outlets, inlets, hydrants,
poles, wires, and cables whether buried or overhead.



(2013 Code, § 3.03)  (Ord. 76, passed 11-12-1981)



CHAPTER 51:  REFUSE AND RECYCLABLES



Section



   51.01   Definitions



   51.02   Disposal required



   51.03   City’s contractor to collect and dispose of refuse



   51.04   Kind and placement of receptacles



   51.05   Separation of recyclable materials



   51.06   Fees



   51.07   Collection of costs and charges



   51.08   Illegal acts



   51.09   License requirements



   51.10   Exemptions



   51.11   Duties and obligations of licensed hauler



   51.12   Suspension or revocation of license



   51.13   Reservation of rights



 



   51.99   Penalty



§ 51.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CANS.All disposable containers made and fabricated primarily of metal,
aluminum, and tin.



   GLASS. Includes products used as bottles, jars, and other glass
containers, excluding however, blue and flat glass commonly known as
“window glass”.



   NEWSPAPER. Paper of the type commonly referred to as newsprint.



   RECEPTACLE. Means, with respect to refuse receptacles, individual
containers constructed of weather-proof, insect- and rodent-proof materials
such as plastic or metal for refuse and recycling purposes and, with respect
to recycling receptacles, individual containers constructed of a durable
material such as plastic or metal suitable for holding recyclable materials.



   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Materials which can be reused through recycling,
including newspaper, glass, cans, and yard waste.



   RECYCLING. Any process by which materials which would otherwise become
solid waste are collected, separated, or processed and returned to the
economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.



   REFUSE. Includes garbage, refuse, and litter, but shall exclude
construction materials.



   REFUSE/RECYCLING SERVICE AREA. The area in which the city shall
contract for the collection and disposal of refuse, recyclable materials, and
yard waste, defined as the area within the city’s metropolitan urban
service area.



   YARD WASTE. Grass clippings and leaves.



(2013 Code, § 3.15)  (Ord. 273, passed 10-13-1989; Ord. 324, passed
12-12-1991; Ord. 330, passed 2-27-1992; Ord. 490, passed 7-10-1997; Ord. 825,
passed 8-27-2009)



§ 51.02  DISPOSAL REQUIRED.



   Every person shall, in a sanitary manner, store and dispose of refuse
and recyclable materials that may accumulate upon property owned or occupied
by that person in accordance with the terms of this chapter. Refuse shall be
collected or otherwise disposed of at least once a week.



(2013 Code, § 3.15)  (Ord. 273, passed 10-13-1989; Ord. 324, passed
12-12-1991; Ord. 330, passed 2-27-1992)



§ 51.03  CITY’S CONTRACTOR TO COLLECT AND DISPOSE OF REFUSE.



   (A)   Within the refuse/recycling service area, the city’s
contractor shall collect and dispose of refuse, yard waste, and recyclable
materials from single-family dwellings, duplexes, and triplexes and all other
residential dwelling units that receive individual curbside pickup of refuse.



   (B)   Owners of residential property larger than triplexes that do
not receive individual curbside pickup of refuse, residential dwelling units
located outside the refuse/recycling service area, and all business
establishments, shall contract with refuse collectors directly and may not
receive city collection service.



   (C)   Refuse and recyclable materials shall be collected weekly or
every other week. In the event that a property is found to be without refuse
collection service, that address shall be added to the list of address
serviced by the city’s contractor, and the service provided and billed
accordingly.



(2013 Code, § 3.15)  (Ord. 273, passed 10-13-1989; Ord. 324, passed
12-12-1991; Ord. 330, passed 2-27-1992; Ord. 594, passed 3-15-2001; Ord. 893,
passed 10-7-2014)



§ 51.04  KIND AND PLACEMENT OF RECEPTACLES.



   (A)   Residential units. The refuse hauler shall provide separate
refuse and recycling receptacles to each living unit in a single-family
dwelling, duplex, or triplex. The refuse receptacles shall be made of plastic
and equipped with handles. These receptacles shall be water-tight and use a
substantially tight-fitting cover to prevent the disturbance of contents
thereof by cats and dogs, and to prevent the propagation of, and infestation
by, rats, flies, and other vermin. The refuse hauler also shall provide each
living unit with a recycling receptacle that shall be constructed of
weather-proof; insect- and rodent- proof material such as plastic. The cost
of the receptacles shall be included in the refuse and recycling collection
fees and receptacles shall not exceed 95 gallons in capacity.



   (B)   Commercial and industrial establishments. The owner of any
residential unit larger than a triplex, and the manager of any business shall
provide refuse receptacles. The refuse receptacle or receptacles shall be in
excess of 65 gallons in capacity and shall be of sufficient size and/or
number to handle the accumulation of refuse between collections by the
hauler. These receptacles shall be water-tight and equipped with
substantially tight-fitting covers to prevent the disturbance of contents,
and to prevent the propagation of, and infestation by rats, flies, and other
vermin. They shall be well maintained and bear identification of the refuse
hauler supplying the containers, including the phone number.



   (C)   Placement of receptacles. Insofar as practical, receptacles
shall be kept in the rear yard of homes and other places served as near to
the alley and accessible to the collector as possible, and in those instances
where homes and other places are not adjacent to alleys, the receptacles
shall be placed on the driveway or other place convenient to the collector by
6:00 a.m., on the designated day of collection. Receptacles shall be removed
by 7:00 p.m. on the designated day of collection and shall not otherwise be
stored in areas of the front yard visible from the front curb line.



   (D)   Wrapped. All refuse from residential units shall be wrapped.



(2013 Code, § 3.15)  (Ord. 273, passed 10-13-1989; Ord. 324, passed
12-12-1991; Ord. 330, passed 2-27-1992; Ord. 893, passed 10-7-2014)



§ 51.05  SEPARATION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.



   Materials collected by the city’s contractor shall be separated,
prepared, and placed for collection in the manner hereinafter set forth.



   (A)   Refuse. Refuse shall only be placed into its designated
receptacle. No hazardous material, yard waste, or hot ashes should be placed
into this receptacle. All material shall fit within the confines of the
receptacle.



   (B)   Recycling. Recyclable material shall be placed into its
designated receptacle (newspaper, glass, cans, and the like). No garbage,
hazardous material, yard waste, or hot ashes should be placed into a
receptacle designated as recycling. All recyclable material shall fit within
the confines of the receptacle.



   (C)   Bulk items. Bulk item removal is available for residents upon
request to the contracted hauler, which shall provide specific instructions
for collection and may impose additional fees for bulk items.



   (D)   Yard waste. Yard waste shall be placed in compostable bags or
a designated waste cart. Yard waste should be free from refuse and recyclable
material.



(2013 Code, § 3.15)  (Ord. 273, passed 10-13-1989; Ord. 324, passed
12-12-1991; Ord. 330, passed 2-27-1992; Ord. 893, passed 10-7-2014) 
Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.06  FEES.



   The city shall charge a fee for the collection and disposal of refuse
and recyclable material. The fee shall be set annually by the City Council.



(2013 Code, § 3.15)  (Ord. 273, passed 10-13-1989; Ord. 324, passed
12-12-1991; Ord. 330, passed 2-27-1992)



§ 51.07  COLLECTION OF COSTS AND CHARGES.



   The owners of all property within the refuse/recycling service area
must pay their proportionate cost and charges for the collection and disposal
of refuse and recyclable materials. If a property owner defaults in the
payment of these costs and charges, the City Council may annually levy an
assessment equal to such unpaid costs and charges as of September 1 of each
year against each lot or parcel of land for which such charges and costs
remain unpaid. Such assessment may include a penalty not to exceed 10% of the
amount due and must bear interest at such amount as the Council determines,
not to exceed 6% per annum. The assessment shall be certified to the County
Auditor and shall be collected and remitted to the city in the same manner as
assessments for local improvements.



(2013 Code, § 3.15)  (Ord. 273, passed 10-13-1989; Ord. 324, passed
12-12-1991; Ord. 330, passed 2-27-1992; Ord. 583, passed 10-26-2000)



§ 51.08  ILLEGAL ACTS.



   (A)   General prohibition. No person shall collect, haul, or dispose
of refuse or recyclable materials collected in the city except as provided in
this chapter.



   (B)   Storing of refuse. It is unlawful for any person to throw,
place, or deposit rubbish in any street, alley, sidewalk, or on any public or
private property except in a receptacle as described in this chapter.



   (C)   Removal of refuse. It is unlawful for any person to remove any
refuse from a receptacle other than the refuse haulers or persons having the
consent of the owner or occupant of the property served or law enforcement
agencies in the pursuit of evidence.



   (D)   Property maintenance. The owner and occupant of any private
property shall maintain the property in a condition free of strewn or piled
refuse.



   (E)   Adequate receptacles. The owner of any residential unit larger
than a triplex, and the manager of any business shall provide sufficient
refuse receptacles to contain all refuse generated at that location.



   (F)   Removal of recyclable materials. From the time of placement of
the recyclable materials at the curb or other designated place of collection,
said recyclable materials shall become and be the property of the city or its
duly authorized contractor as determined by the city. It is unlawful for any
person other than as specified in this chapter to collect or cause to be
collected any recyclable materials placed at the curb or other designated
place for collection. Any and each such unauthorized collection in violation
hereof from 1 or more residences shall constitute a separate distinct offense.



   (G)   Unwarranted disposal. It is unlawful for any person to throw,
place, or deposit refuse, recyclable materials, construction materials, or
brush upon public or private property unless otherwise permitted by the
property owner.



(2013 Code, § 3.15)  (Ord. 273, passed 10-13-1989; Ord. 324, passed
12-12-1991; Ord. 330, passed 2-27-1992)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.09  LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Each person desiring to collect, haul, or dispose of refuse or
recyclable materials shall first secure a license from the city.



   (B)   The license shall be valid for 1 calendar year and shall
expire on December 31 of each year unless revoked sooner. For the purposes of
implementing this chapter, all persons engaged in the business of refuse
collection shall secure a license.



   (C)   An applicant for a license shall make application to the City
Clerk through forms and procedures prescribed by the City Clerk. The
application for a license, shall contain the following information:



      (1)   A list of the equipment proposed to be used in the
collection, including information about the number, type, license number, and
capacity of the collection vehicles and equipment to be used in the city;



      (2)   A description of the services to be rendered, including
a brief description of recycling service offered;



      (3)   The place or places to which mixed municipal solid waste
are to be hauled; and



      (4)   A detailed description of the applicant’s service
area. This description must include customer names and addresses, number of
units for each customer, if applicable, and the types of services provided to
each customer.



   (D)   An applicant must provide insurance as required by the city.
This shall include $1,000,000 coverage of comprehensive general liability,
personal injury, and automobile liability, completed operations. Insurance
certificates evidencing that this insurance is in force with companies
licensed in the state shall be provided to the city prior to approval of the
license.



   (E)   The annual license fee shall be established by resolution of
the City Council.



   (F)   The City Clerk shall issue licenses only after receipt and
review of all required forms, certificates, and fees. Upon review of the
documents submitted, the City Clerk shall issue a license if the documents
comply with the provisions of this title.



(2013 Code, § 3.15)  (Ord. 273, passed 10-13-1989; Ord. 324, passed
12-12-1991; Ord. 330, passed 2-27-1992; Ord. 594, passed 3-15-2001)



§ 51.10  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The license requirements of this title shall not apply to
those entities listed below; provided, that the following conditions are met.



      (1)   Refuse shall be hauled in containers equipped with
tight-fitting covers and which are also water-tight on all sides and the
bottom.



      (2)   Refuse and recyclables are hauled in a manner that
prevents leakage or any possibility of a loss of cargo.



      (3)   Refuse shall be disposed of only at designated sanitary
landfills or other facilities authorized by the county.



      (4)   Recyclable materials shall be disposed of only at a
recycling facility, an organized recycling drive, or through licensed
collectors.



      (5)   Yard waste shall be privately composted, or disposed of
at a composting facility authorized by the county, or through a licensed
collector.



   (B)   Exempt entities are as follows:



      (1)   Nonprofit groups participating in recycling programs;



      (2)   Persons who haul garbage, refuse, or recyclables from
their own residences or business properties; and



      (3)   Companies renting a dumpster or bin for construction
debris.



(2013 Code, § 3.15)  (Ord. 273, passed 10-13-1989; Ord. 324, passed
12-12-1991; Ord. 330, passed 2-27-1992)



§ 51.11  DUTIES AND OBLIGATIONS OF LICENSED HAULER.



   A licensed hauler must comply with the following operational
requirements. Failure to observe these provisions may be a basis for
suspension or revocation of a license.



   (A)   The licensee shall operate in a manner consistent with its
application materials and shall provide notice to the city within 10 days of
any changes in the information, forms, or certificates filed as a part of the
license application process.



   (B)   No collections of refuse or recyclable materials shall be made
except between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
Operations during these hours also may be conducted on Saturdays, to
accommodate recognized national holidays and snow emergencies. Customers
shall be notified of the specific day and approximate hours for the
collection of their refuse and recyclable materials and the licensee shall
collect the materials within those time periods.



   (C)   Each licensed hauler shall only use vehicles and equipment so
constructed that the contents will not leak or spill. The vehicles and
equipment also shall be kept clean and free from offensive odor, and shall
not stand in any street, alley, or public place longer than is reasonably
necessary to collect mixed municipal solid waste. The licensee also shall
ensure that the collection site is left tidy and free of litter.



   (D)   Each licensed hauler shall provide its customers with an
opportunity to recycle through a weekly or every other week curbside
collection of recyclable materials.



   (E)   Each licensee shall submit an annual report to the city that
identifies the weight, in tons, of refuse, recyclables materials, and special
pick-up materials that were collected by the licensee from city sources. The
report shall be provided on or before January 20. The report also shall
identify the weight of each type of collected recyclable. It shall
distinguish residential collection tonnage from business tonnage. The report
shall include a brief description of how the reported weights were
calculated. The report must include an address list of every account
collected by the licensee.



(2013 Code, § 3.15)  (Ord. 273, passed 10-13-1989; Ord. 324, passed
12-12-1991; Ord. 330, passed 2-27-1992)



§ 51.12  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   Upon the recommendation of the City Administrator, the City Council may
suspend or revoke the license of any person whose conduct is found to be in
violation of the provisions of this title. Suspension or revocation also may
be based on other health, safety, and welfare concerns arising out of the
performance of the licensee, its employees, agents, and/or vehicles and
equipment. Revocation or suspension of a license by the Council shall be
preceded by a public hearing. The City Council may appoint a hearing examiner
or may conduct the hearing itself. The hearing notice shall be given at least
10 days prior to the hearing, include notice of the time and place of the
hearing, and shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee.



(2013 Code, § 3.15)  (Ord. 273, passed 10-13-1989; Ord. 324, passed
12-12-1991; Ord. 330, passed 2-27-1992)



§ 51.13  RESERVATION OF RIGHTS.



   No hauler licensed pursuant to this chapter shall acquire a vested
right in the license. The city may, upon finding that public necessity so
requires, establish other means of refuse collection.



(2013 Code, § 3.15)  (Ord. 273, passed 10-13-1989; Ord. 324, passed
12-12-1991; Ord. 330, passed 2-27-1992)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or provision
of this chapter when the person performs an act thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a
misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.



(2013 Code, § 3.99)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



CHAPTER 52:  SEWER



Section



   52.01   Definitions



   52.02   Metered water not discharges



   52.03   Classification of industrial wastes



   52.04   Deleterious substances



   52.05   Unlawful discharge



   52.06   Unmetered water supply



   52.07   Size of pipe



   52.08   Hook-up required



   52.09   Permitted uses of private wells



   52.10   Grease interceptors required



   52.11   Sewage and waste control rules and regulations for the
Metropolitan Sewer Board adopted



   52.12   Construction and reconstruction of sanitary sewermains



   52.13   Trunk sanitary sewer charges



   52.14   Industrial user strength charge



   52.15   Construction and deconstruction of storm sewer



 



   52.99   Penalty



§ 52.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any liquid, gaseous, or solid waste substance
resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business, or
from development of any natural resources.



   SEWAGE. Water-carried waste products from residences, public buildings,
institutions, or other buildings or premises, including the excrement or
other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals, together with
such ground water infiltration and surface water as may be present.



   SEWERAGE SERVICE. The use of and benefit from the sewerage system,
including the collection, transportation, pumping, treatment, and final
disposal of sewage.



   SEWERAGE SYSTEM. Includes all street lateral, main, and intersecting
sewers and structures by which sewage or industrial wastes are collected,
transported, treated, and disposed of; provided, that this shall not include
plumbing inside or a part of a building or premises served, or service sewers
from a building to the street lateral.



(2013 Code, § 3.10)



§ 52.02  METERED WATER NOT DISCHARGES.



   If a portion of the water furnished to any premises is not directly or
indirectly discharged into the sewerage system, the quantity of such water
shall be deducted in computing the sewerage service charge or rental;
provided, a separate meter shall be installed and operated to register the
quantity so not discharged into the sewerage system; provided, also, that
where it is not practicable to meter the portion of the water not discharged
into the sewerage system, such adjustment may be made as shall be fair and
equitable in order to determine the amount of such service charge or rental,
but until such adjustment shall be effected that water consumption basis
hereinbefore prescribed shall remain in full force and effect.



(2013 Code, § 3.10)



§ 52.03  CLASSIFICATION OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES.



    The city shall have power to classify the industrial wastes from any
lot, parcel of land, building, or premises discharged therefrom into the
sewerage system of the city, taking into consideration the quantity of sewage
produced and its concentration, strength of river pollution qualities in
general, and any other factors entering into the cost of its disposal. For
the purpose of fixing and prescribing a distinct rate of rental or use
charge, should it be found that as to such sewer uses, the water basis
consumption does not provide a practicable method in the premises, but until
so determined and such distinct rate fixed, the water consumption basis
herein before prescribed shall remain in full force and effect as to such
commercial or industrial users.



(2013 Code, § 3.10)



§ 52.04  DELETERIOUS SUBSTANCES.



   No sewage including industrial wastes, shall contain any substance
which is deemed deleterious by the city to the operation of the sewerage
system or to any plant or facilities used in the treatment or disposal of
such sewage. If a user of the sewerage system discharges excessive loads or
any deleterious substances therein which are likely to retard or injuriously
affect sewerage operations, the user shall discontinue such practice and such
practice is hereby declared to be a violation of this chapter. Each day of
such violation continuing after having been notified in writing by the City
Administrator to discontinue such practice shall be deemed a separate
violation.



(2013 Code, § 3.10)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.05  UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE.



   It is unlawful to discharge any of the following described wastes into
the sewerage system:



   (A)   Liquids having a temperature higher than 150°F;



   (B)   Water or waste which contains more than 500 milligrams/liter
of fat, oil, or grease;



   (C)   Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other inflammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas;



   (D)   Garbage, except such as has been property shredded;



   (E)   Ashes, cinders, shavings, feathers, tar, or other liquid or
viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewerage
system or other interference with the proper operation of the system;



   (F)   Noxious or malodorous substances capable of creating a public
nuisance; or



   (G)   Roof water, ground water, or any other natural precipitation.



(2013 Code, § 3.10)  (Ord. 766, passed 8-17-2006)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.06  UNMETERED WATER SUPPLY.



   (A)   If any premises discharge normal sewage or industrial waste
into the sanitary sewerage system, either directly or indirectly, or obtain
part or all of the water used thereon from sources other than the city, and
the water so obtained is not measured by a meter of equivalent specifications
to the meters used by the city, then in such case the city shall permit the
discharge of normal sewage or industrial waste into its sanitary sewerage
system only when the owner of such premises or some other interested party
shall, at that person’s own expense, install and maintain for the purpose
of metering such water supply a water meter of equivalent specifications to
those installed by the city in connection with the city water system.



   (B)   (1)   Each water meter shall be installed to measure all
water received on such premises and the above charges and rates shall be
applied to the quantity of water received as measured by such meter. If,
because of the nature of the source of the water supply, the city deems it
impracticable to thus meter the water on any premises, the Council may by
resolution establish a flat charge per month in accordance with the estimated
use of water on such premises.



      (2)   In the alternative, at the option of the city, discharge
into the city sewerage system may be metered; provided, that special
equipment necessary therefor shall be installed at the expense of the
consumer.



(2013 Code, § 3.10)



§ 52.07  SIZE OF PIPE.



   The city may prescribe the kind and size of sewerage service pipe and
connections, but the minimum when placed underground shall be 4 inches in
diameter.



(2013 Code, § 3.10)



§ 52.08  HOOK-UP REQUIRED.



   Any property abutting a public street or alley in which sanitary sewer
mains have been constructed, and any residential property abutting a public
street or alley in which city water lines have been constructed, must be
connected to said sewermains and water line within 3 years or immediately
upon a private system becoming defective, whichever occurs first. A system
becomes defective when substantial repair is needed, such as replacement of
drain field lines, pumping of tanks, or replacement of a well pump motor.



(2013 Code, § 3.10)



§ 52.09  PERMITTED USES OF PRIVATE WELLS.



   Owners of private wells may continue to use such wells for yard
watering, car washing, and similar uses providing it is entirely disconnected
from the interior supply lines and there is no cross-connection to public
water systems.



(2013 Code, § 3.10)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 77, passed 10-29-1981;
Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992; Ord. 365, passed 6-24-1993)



§ 52.10  GREASE INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Scope and purpose. To aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer
blockages and obstructions from the contribution and accumulation of fats,
oils, and greases into the sewer system from industrial or commercial
establishments, particularly food preparation and serving facilities. This
chapter shall apply to the city and to persons outside of the city who, by
contract or agreement with the city, are users of the city’s sanitary sewer
system.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any facility that:



         (a)   Cuts, cooks, bakes, prepares, or serves food or
which disposes of food-related wastes or has a local, state, and/or federal
food service permit or license; and



         (b)   Is connected to the city’s sanitary sewer system.



      GREASE INTERCEPTOR. A water-tight receptacle utilized by
commercial or industrial generators of liquid waste to intercept, collect,
and restrict the passage of grease and food particles into the sewer system
to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected and to separate
and retain grease and food particles from the wastewater discharged by the
facility.



   (C)   Grease interceptors required.



      (1)   Grease interceptors shall be required at all food
service establishments in the city, unless otherwise exempted by this
chapter. Grease interceptors shall be installed at the food service
establishment’s expense. All grease interceptors required under this
division (C) shall be of a type, design, and capacity in accordance with the
requirements set forth in the State Plumbing Code, M. S. Ch. 4715, as it may
be amended from time to time, and this chapter. All grease interceptor
construction, installation, and maintenance shall be in accordance with the
State Plumbing Code, M. S. Ch. 4715, as it may be amended from time to time,
and this chapter.



      (2)   New food service establishments required by this chapter
to maintain a grease interceptor shall install a unit prior to commencement
of discharge to the sewer system.



      (3)   An existing food service establishment shall be required
to install an approved, adequately sized, and properly operated and
maintained grease interceptor within 18 months of the effective date of this
chapter, if prior to the 18-month period, the food service establishment is
making improvements to its food preparation or kitchen waste plumbing
facilities, a grease interceptor must be installed at that time.



   (D)   Exemptions. A food service establishment that discharges less
than 500 milligrams/liter of grease into the city’s sanitary sewer system
may be exempted from the grease interceptor requirement if the food service
establishment can provide documentation satisfactory to the city that shows
that its grease discharge is less than 500 milligrams/liter.



   (E)   Inspection, cleaning, and monitoring.



      (1)   All food service establishments having grease
interceptors shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal of the
captured materials by appropriate means, and shall maintain written records
indicating inspection, maintenance, and cleaning of the grease interceptor.
The volumes of greases and solids in the grease interceptor must not exceed
the designed grease and solids storage capacity of the unit at any time.
Grease interceptors shall be inspected by the food service establishment at
least once per week. Unless otherwise specified by the city’s Public Works
Director, each grease interceptor shall be cleaned at least once every 3
months or more frequently as needed to prevent carry over of grease into the
sewer system.



      (2)   The written records to be maintained by the food service
establishment shall indicate: dates of inspection; dates of maintenance;
person performing maintenance; dates of cleaning; estimated volume of grease
removed; receipts from haulers; disposal locations; and the facility
manager’s verification. These records shall be retained by the food service
establishment for a period of 3 years and shall be available at the facility
for inspection by the city.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful for a food service establishment to
refuse to allow the city’s inspectors to enter its premises during
reasonable hours to determine whether the food service establishment is
complying with all of the requirements of this section. A food service
establishment shall allow the city inspectors access to all parts of the
premises for purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and
copying, and the performance of additional duties. The city shall make
arrangements for access ahead of time, but the city’s failure to make
arrangements ahead of time shall not be considered a legitimate reason to
refuse admittance of the city inspectors.



      (4)   If the city has been refused access to a building,
structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as a part of a routine
inspection and sampling program of the city designated to verify compliance
with this chapter or to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, then
the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction.



   (F)   Violations.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any food service establishment to
discharge into the sewer system in any manner that is in violation of this
chapter, or of any condition set forth in this chapter. Additionally, an
individual commits an offense if the individual causes or permits the
plugging or blocking of, or otherwise interferes with or permits the
interference of a grease interceptor or the sewer system, including
alteration or removal of any flow constricting devices so as to cause flow to
rise above the design capacity of the grease interceptor.



      (2)   No person and/or facility shall discharge grease in
excess of 500 milligrams/liter to the sewer system. If such discharge occurs,
the person or facility shall be considered to be in violation of this chapter
and subject to the remedies described. This includes facilities that are not
required by this chapter to install grease interceptors.



      (3)   In addition to prohibiting certain conduct by natural
persons, it is the intent of this chapter to hold a corporation, association,
limited liability company, or limited liability partnership legally
responsible for prohibited conduct performed by an agent acting on behalf of
the corporation or association and within the scope of their office or
employment.



   (G)   Enforcement.



      (1)   The requirements set forth in this chapter shall be
administered and enforced pursuant to the direction of the Public Works
Director of the city. Employees of the city’s Public Works Department may
issue appropriate orders, issue tags for violation, or institute any other
appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator as provided for in this
chapter. Any violation of an order issued pursuant to this chapter by the
Public Works Department of the city shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.



      (2)   Any person, operator, or owner who shall violate any
provision of this chapter, or who shall fail to comply with any provision,
shall be prosecuted and punished in accordance with § 52.99.



      (3)   The city may also assess the violator’s property for
any expense, loss, or damage incurred by the city for reason of appropriate
clean up and proper disposal of the waste materials. Additionally, an
administrative fee equal to 1/4 of the assessed clean-up costs may be levied
by the city against the violator.



(2013 Code, § 3.10)  (Ord. 766, passed 8-17-2006)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.11  SEWAGE AND WASTE CONTROL RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE
METROPOLITAN SEWER BOARD ADOPTED.



   Sewage and waste control rules and regulations for the Metropolitan
Disposal System, as adopted under Minn. Rules 5900 pursuant to statutory
authority, are hereby adopted by reference as though repeated verbatim herein.



(2013 Code, § 3.11)  (Ord. 89, passed 2-25-1982; Ord. 408, passed 3-7-1995)



§ 52.12  CONSTRUCTION AND RECONSTRUCTION OF SANITARY SEWERMAINS.



   (A)   Design criteria and standard specifications. All construction
of sanitary sewer mains and service laterals shall be strictly in accordance
with the design criteria and standard specifications on file in the office of
the City Engineer and open to public inspection during regular office hours.
Such design criteria and standard specifications may be adopted and amended
by resolution from time to time by the city and shall be uniformly enforced.



   (B)   Permit required.



      (1)   A written permit is required from the City Engineer to
construct or reconstruct sanitary sewer or service laterals. Application for
such permit shall be made on forms approved by the city and shall
sufficiently describe the contemplated improvements, the contemplated date of
beginning work, and the length of time required to complete the same;
provided, that no permit shall be required for any such improvement ordered
installed by the Council.



      (2)   All applications shall be referred to the City Engineer
and no permit shall be issued until approval has been received from the City
Engineer. All such applications shall contain an agreement by the applicant
to be bound by this title. Plans and specifications consistent with the
design criteria and standard specifications shall be approved by the City
Engineer and shall also accompany the application. A permit from the city
shall not relieve the permit holder from damages to the person or property of
another caused by such work.



   (C)   Inspection. The City Engineer shall inspect sanitary sewer
construction and reconstruction. Any work not done according to the approved
design criteria and standard specifications shall be removed and corrected at
the expense of the permit holder. Any work done hereunder may be stopped by
the City Engineer if found to be unsatisfactory and not in accordance with
the design criteria and standard specifications, but this shall not place a
continuing burden on the city to inspect or supervise such work.



(2013 Code, § 3.12)  (Ord. 136, passed 10-27-1983)



§ 52.13  TRUNK SANITARY SEWER CHARGES.



   (A)   Each property located within the area described in the
city’s trunk sanitary sewer charge policy shall be bound by that policy.



   (B)   Each such property owner shall submit to the city the
applicable trunk sanitary sewer charge at the earliest of the following times:



      (1)   For property being platted, prior to the recording of
the final plat;



      (2)   For vacant property, at the time of issuance of a
building permit; or



      (3)   For developed property, at the time of issuance of a
permit to connect to the sanitary sewer system.



(2013 Code, § 3.13)  (Ord. 398, passed 2-16-1995)



§ 52.14  INDUSTRIAL USER STRENGTH CHARGE.



   (A)   Recitals.



      (1)   The Metropolitan Waste Control Commission, a
metropolitan commission organized and existing under the laws of the state
(the “Commission”), in order to receive and retain grants in compliance
with the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.
and regulations thereunder (the “Act”), has determined to impose an
industrial user sewer strength charge upon users of the Metropolitan Disposal
System (as defined in M.S. § 473.121, subd. 24, as it may be amended from
time to time, to recover operation and maintenance costs of treatment works
attributable to the strength of the discharge of industrial waste, such sewer
strength charge being in addition to the charge based upon the volume of
discharge.



      (2)   In order to pay such costs based upon strength of
industrial discharge and allocated to it each year by the Commission, it is
hereby found, determined, and declared to be necessary to establish sewer
strength charges and a formula for the computation thereof for all industrial
users receiving waste treatment services within or served by the city.
Furthermore, M.S. § 444.075, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to
time, empowers the city to make such sewer charge a charge against the owner,
lessee, occupant, or all of them and certify unpaid charges to the County
Auditor as a tax lien against the property served.



   (B)   Establishment of strength charges. For the purpose of paying
the costs allocated to industries in the city each year by the Commission
that are based upon the strength of discharge of all industrial users
receiving waste treatment services within or served by the city, there is
hereby approved, adopted, and established, in addition to the sewer charge
based upon the volume of discharge a sewer charge upon each company or
corporation receiving waste treatment services within or served by the city,
based upon strength of industrial waste discharged into the sewer system of
the city (the “strength charge”).



   (C)   Establishment of strength charge formula. For the purpose of
computation of the strength charge established by division (B) above, there
is hereby established, approved, and adopted in compliance with the Act the
same strength charge formula designated in Resolution No. 76-172, adopted by
the governing body of the Commission on June 15, 1976, such formula being
based upon pollution qualities and difficulty of disposal of the sewage
produced through an evaluation of pollution qualities and quantities in
excess of an annual average base and the proportionate costs of operation and
maintenance of waste treatment services provided by the Commission.



   (D)   Strength charge payment. It is hereby approved, adopted, and
established that the strength charge established by division (B) above shall
be paid by each industrial user receiving waste treatment services and
subject thereto to the Commission directly before the twentieth day next
succeeding the date of billing thereof to such user by the Commission, and
such payment thereof shall be deemed to be delinquent if not so paid to the
Commission before such date.



   (E)   Establishment of tax lien. As provided by M.S. § 444.075,
subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time, it is hereby approved,
adopted, and established that if payment of the strength charge established
by division (B) above is not paid before the 60th day next succeeding the
date of billing thereof to the industrial user by the Commission, said
delinquent sewer strength charge may be deemed to be a charge against the
owner, lessee, and occupant of the property served, and the Commission may
request the city to certify such unpaid delinquent balance to the County
Auditor with taxes against the property served for collection as other taxes
are collected; provided, however, that such certification shall not preclude
the Commission or its agent from recovery of such delinquent sewer strength
charge and interest thereon under any other available remedy from the
delinquent industry. If requested to certify the delinquent charges as
assessments against the industries, the city shall certify the charges in
accordance with normal procedures.



(2013 Code, § 3.20)  (Ord. 384, passed 1-11-1977; Ord. 408, passed 3-4-1995)



§ 52.15  CONSTRUCTION AND DECONSTRUCTION OF STORM SEWER.



   (A)   Design criteria and standard specifications. All construction
of storm sewers shall be strictly in accordance with the design criteria and
standard specifications on file in the office of the City Engineer and open
to public inspection during regular office hours. Such design criteria and
standard specifications may be adopted and amended by resolution from time to
time by the city and shall be uniformly enforced.



   (B)   Permit required.



      (1)   A written permit is required from the City Engineer to
construct or reconstruct a storm sewer in public easement, public
right-of-way, or other public property in the city. Application for such
permit shall be made on forms approved and provided by the city and shall
sufficiently describe the contemplated improvements, the contemplated date of
beginning work and the length of time required to complete the same;
provided, that no permit shall be required for any such improvement ordered
installed by the Council.



      (2)   All applications shall be referred to the City Engineer
and no permit shall be issued until approval has been received from the City
Engineer. All such applications shall contain an agreement by the applicant
to be bound by this title. Plans and specifications consistent with the
design criteria and standard specifications shall be approved by the City
Engineer and shall also accompany the application. A permit from the city
shall not relieve the permit holder from damages to the person or property of
another caused by such work.



   (C)   Inspection. The City Engineer shall inspect storm sewer
construction and reconstruction. Any work not done according to the approved
design criteria and standard specifications shall be removed and corrected at
the expense of the permit holder. Any work done hereunder may be stopped by
the City Engineer if found to be unsatisfactory or not in accordance with the
design criteria and standard specifications, but this shall not place a
continuing burden on the city to inspect or supervise such work.



(2013 Code, § 3.41)  (Ord. 136, passed 10-27-1983)



§ 52.99  PENALTY.



   Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or provision
of this chapter when the person performs an act thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a
misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.



(2013 Code, § 3.99)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



CHAPTER 53:  STORMWATER



Section



   53.01   Stormwater draining utility established



   53.02   Residential equivalent factor (REF) defined



   53.03   Stormwater drainage fees



   53.04   Credits



   53.05   Exemptions



   53.06   Payment of fee



   53.07   Recalculation of fee



   53.08   Certification of past-due fees on taxes



   53.09   Trunk stormwater charges



 



   53.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Water Resources Management, see Ch. 54



§ 53.01  STORMWATER DRAINING UTILITY ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   The municipal storm sewer system shall be operated as a public
utility pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from time to time,
from which revenues will be derived subject to the provisions of this title
and state statutes.



   (B)   The storm sewer drainage utility will be part of the
Engineering Department and under the administration of the City Engineer.



(2013 Code, § 3.42)



§ 53.02  RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT FACTOR (REF) DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT FACTOR (REF) - ONE (1) REF.The ratio of
the average volume of runoff generated by 1 acre of a given land use to the
average volume of runoff generated by 1 acre of typical single-family
residential land, during a standard 1-year rainfall event.



(2013 Code, § 3.42)



§ 53.03  STORMWATER DRAINAGE FEES.



   (A)   Storm water drainage fees for parcels of land shall be
determined by multiplying the REF for a parcel’s land use by the parcel’s
acreage and then multiplying the resulting product by the stormwater drainage
rate.



   (B)   The REF values for various land uses are as follows.



 

 

Impervious Category

 

REFs per Acre



 

Water Quality Provided

 

Water Quality Not Provided






Infiltration Provided

 
A: Less than 35% impervious
 

1.0

 

1.0



B: 35-60% impervious
 

1.4

 

1.4



C: Greater than 60% impervious
 

1.7

 

1.7




Infiltration Not Provided

 
A: Less than 35% impervious
 

1.8

 

2.2



B: 35-60% impervious
 

2.6

 

3.2



C: Greater than 60% impervious
 

3.3

 

3.8





 



   (C)   For the purpose of calculating stormwater drainage fees, all
developed 1-family and duplex parcels and improved agricultural parcels shall
be considered to have an acreage of 1/3 acre and an REF of 1.00.



(2013 Code, § 3.42)  (Ord. 920, passed 12-1-2015)



§ 53.04  CREDITS.



   The Council may adopt policies recommended by the City Engineer, by
resolution, for adjustment of the stormwater drainage fee for parcels based
upon hydrologic data to be supplied by property owners, which data
demonstrates a hydrologic response substantially different from the
standards. Such adjustments of stormwater drainage fees shall not be made
retroactively.



(2013 Code, § 3.42)



§ 53.05  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following land uses are exempt from stormwater drainage fees:



   (A)   Public rights-of-way;



   (B)   Vacant, unimproved land with ground cover, including
unimproved agricultural land with ground cover; and



   (C)   Cemetery lands.



(2013 Code, § 3.42)



§ 53.06  PAYMENT OF FEE.



   Policy governing the payment of fees shall be specified by resolution.



(2013 Code, § 3.42)



§ 53.07  RECALCULATION OF FEE.



   If a property owner or person responsible for paying the stormwater
drainage fee questions the correctness of an invoice for such charge, such
person may have the determination of the charge recomputed by written request
to the City Engineer made within 12 months of mailing of the invoice in
question by the city. The property owner may appeal the decision of the City
Engineer to the Council by filing notice of said appeal with the City
Administrator within 60 days of the City Engineer’s decision.



(2013 Code, § 3.42)



§ 53.08  CERTIFICATION OF PAST-DUE FEES ON TAXES.



   Any past-due stormwater drainage fees in excess of 90 days past due on
October 1 of any year may be certified to the County Auditor for collection
with real estate taxes in the following year pursuant to M.S. § 444.075,
subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time. In addition, the city shall
also have the right to bring a civil action or to take other legal remedies
to collect unpaid fees.



(2013 Code, § 3.42)  (Ord. 176, passed 8-8-1985; Ord. 240, passed 2-26-1988)



§ 53.09  TRUNK STORMWATER CHARGES.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from time to time,
gives the city authority to impose just and equitable charges to pay for the
acquisition, construction, reconstruction, repair, enlargement, improvement,
maintenance, operation, and use of storm sewer systems for the collection and
disposal of stormwater. The City Council has determined that new development
in the city will create the need for acquisition, construction,
reconstruction, improvement, maintenance, operation, and use of trunk
stormwater facilities and regional ponding systems.



      (2)   The City Council has further determined that the
stormwater drainage fees imposed by this section are inadequate to pay for
the costs of these facilities and systems that are needed to accommodate
development in the city. The City Council has further determined that it
would be inequitable to increase the stormwater drainage fees to pay for new
trunk stormwater facilities and regional ponding systems because such an
increase would require previously developed properties to pay for facilities,
the need for which is being generated primarily by new development rather
than existing development.



      (3)   These new trunk stormwater facilities and regional
ponding systems will be acquired, constructed, operated, used, and maintained
in accordance with the city’s comprehensive stormwater management plan. The
City Council has considered the information, recommendations, and conclusions
contained in the July 1996 (revised September 13, 1996) Trunk Stormwater Fee
Justification Report prepared by WSB & Associates. Based on all of the above
information, the City Council finds that it is necessary to impose trunk
stormwater charges and stormwater storage and treatment charges to provide
assurances that:



         (a)   An adequate stormwater drainage system can be
financed, constructed, improved, and operated so that stormwater runoff from
developing properties within the city can be reasonably accommodated, not
only within these properties but also by downstream properties;



         (b)   The city will be able to acquire property for the
construction of a trunk stormwater system as new development takes place so
that the stormwater drainage needs of the city are met and so that property
owners within the city will be treated fairly and equitably; and



         (c)   New development, which is creating the need for
and being benefitted by new trunk stormwater drainage facilities and existing
regional ponding systems, will pay its proportionate and equitable share of
the cost of infrastructure improvements.



   (B)   Trunk stormwater charges. For the purpose of paying for the
acquisition, construction, reconstruction, repair, enlargement, improvement,
maintenance, operation, and use of trunk stormwater drainage facilities and
regional ponding systems, there is hereby established and imposed trunk
stormwater charges and stormwater storage and treatment charges. The amount
of the charges and method of collection will be set by resolution of the City
Council from time to time.



(2013 Code, § 3.43)  (Ord. 463, passed 9-26-1996)



§ 53.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or
provision of this chapter when the person performs an act thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a
misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.



(2013 Code, § 3.99)



   (B)   Penalty for late payment shall be contained in the policy
established for payment of fees.



(2013 Code, § 3.42)



(Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



CHAPTER 54:  WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT



Section




General Provisions




   54.01   Title



   54.02   Purpose



   54.03   Scope



   54.04   Application of this chapter



   54.05   Incorporation by reference




Stormwater Management




   54.14   Definitions



   54.15   Stormwater management plan



   54.16   Stormwater and urban runoff pollution control



   54.17   Lawn fertilization restrictions




Wetland Management




   54.30   Areas affected



   54.31   Wetland assessment and delineation



   54.32   Wetland buffers



   54.33   Structure setbacks




Erosion and Sediment Control




   54.45   Erosion control plan



   54.46   Process



   54.47   Implementation of an erosion control plan



   54.48   Financial security



   54.49   Inspection of erosion control plan



   54.50   Application review and inspection fees



   54.51   Notification of failure of erosion control plan



   54.52   Erosion off-site



   54.53   Erosion into streets, wetlands, or water bodies



   54.54   Failure to do corrective work



 



   54.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Stormwater, see Ch. 53



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 54.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the “Water
Resource Ordinance” or the “Water Resource Chapter.” When referred to
herein it shall be known as “this chapter.”



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



§ 54.02  PURPOSE.



   (A)   This chapter is established to promote, preserve and enhance
natural resources within the city and protect them from adverse effects
occasioned by poorly-sited development or incompatible activities by
regulating land disturbing or development activities that would have an
adverse and potentially irreversible impact on water quality and unique or
fragile environmentally sensitive land.



   (B)   This chapter minimizes conflicts and encourages compatibility
between land disturbing and development activities and environmentally
sensitive lands. By requiring detailed review standards and procedures for
land disturbing or development activities proposed for such areas, this
chapter achieves a balance between urban growth and development and the
protection of water and natural resources within the city.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



§ 54.03  SCOPE.



   (A)   Applicability.



      (1)   Every applicant for subdivision approval, a conditional
use permit, or a grading permit to allow land disturbing activities must
submit a stormwater management plan to the Engineering Division of the city's
Public Works Department. The stormwater management plan shall be submitted
with the land use application, grading permit application, or as directed by
the Public Works Director. No subdivision approval or grading permit will be
issued until approval of the stormwater management plan or a waiver has been
obtained in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   Every applicant for subdivision approval or a grading
permit that involves wetland disturbing activities or work near wetlands must
submit a wetland assessment and delineation report to the Engineering
Division. The wetland assessment and delineation report shall be submitted
with the land use application, grading permit application, or as directed by
the Public Works Director. No subdivision approval or grading permit will be
issued until approval of the wetland replacement plan application or a
certificate of exemption has been obtained in conformance with the provisions
of this chapter and the State Wetland Conservation Act of 1991, M.S. §§
103G.222 through 103G.2375, as they may be amended from time to time,
(“WCA”).



      (3)   Every applicant for a building permit, subdivision
approval, conditional use permit, or a grading permit must submit an erosion
control plan to the Engineering Division. The erosion control plan shall be
submitted with the building permit application, land use application, grading
permit application, or as directed by the Public Works Director. No grading
permit or building permit will be issued until approval of the erosion
control plan has been obtained in conformance with the erosion control
measures, standards, and specifications contained in the State Pollution
Control Agency publication, Minnesota Stormwater Manual, or as otherwise
approved by the Public Works Director.



      (4)   Construction, improvement, repair, or alteration of
bridges, culvert crossings, driveways, roads, or utilities must obtain a
grading permit if the activity involves crossing or impacting a watercourse
with a tributary area in excess of 100 acres. The applicant shall provide
documentation prepared by an engineer demonstrating that the hydraulic
capacity of the watercourse conforms to the city's comprehensive water
resources management plan and that activities improve watercourse stability.



   (B)   Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:



      (1)   Any part of a subdivision if a preliminary plat for the
subdivision that has been approved by the City Council on or before the
effective date hereof;



      (2)   Any land disturbing activity for which plans have been
approved by the watershed management organization having jurisdictional
control of the land within six months prior to the effective date hereof;



      (3)   Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric
poles and other kinds of posts or poles; and



      (4)   Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property.



   (C)   Waiver. The Public Works Director may waive any of the
requirements of this chapter upon making a finding that compliance with the
requirement will involve an unnecessary hardship and the waiver of such
requirement will not adversely affect the water quality and natural resources
of the city or adversely impact environmentally sensitive land. The Public
Works Director may require as a condition of the waiver that the applicant
dedicate easements or construct certain facilities as the Public Works
Director deems necessary.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



§ 54.04  APPLICATION OF THIS CHAPTER.



   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be the requirements for the promotion of water resource
management within the city.



   (B)   Where any provision of this chapter is either more restrictive
or less restrictive than a comparable provision imposed by any other code,
ordinance, statute, rule, or regulation of any kind, the more restrictive
provision, or the provision which imposes a higher standard or requirement
shall prevail.



   (C)   Words or terms defined in this chapter shall have the meanings
assigned to them unless such meaning is clearly contrary to the intent of
this chapter. The present tense shall include the past and future tenses.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



§ 54.05  INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.



   The following are hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference:



   (A)   The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit, MN
Rl 00001 (NPDES Construction General Permit) issued by the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency, August 1, 2013, as amended. The NPDES Construction
General Permit is incorporated into this chapter by reference.



   (B)   The city's design criteria document. These standards shall
serve as the official guide for stormwater principles, methods, and practices
for proposed development activities. The city's design criteria document is
incorporated into this chapter by reference.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



STORMWATER MANAGEMENT



§ 54.14  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT. Any person who wishes to obtain a building permit, zoning or
subdivision approval.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP). Practices to reduce the volume of
runoff, and improve water quality, to prevent pollution of waters of the
state. Best management practices are designed to reduce stormwater runoff
volume, peak flows, and nonpoint source pollution through evapotranspiration,
infiltration, detention, and filtration, and may include activities,
prohibitions of practices, treatment requirements, operating procedures, and
other management practices.



   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Any disturbance to the land that results in a
change in the topography, existing soil cover, or the existing soil
topography that may result in accelerated stormwater runoff, including
clearing, grading, filling, and excavating.



   CONTROL MEASURE. A practice or combination of practices to control
erosion and attendant pollution.



   FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the flood plain outside of the flood way.



   FLOOD PLAIN. The areas adjoining a watercourse or water basin that have
been or may be covered by a regional flood.



   FLOOD WAY. The channel of the watercourse, the bed of water basins, and
those portions of the adjoining flood plains that are reasonably required to
carry and discharge flood water and provide water storage during a regional
flood.



   HYDRIC SOILS. Soils that are saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough
during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part.



   HYDROPHYTIC VEGETATION. Macrophytic plant life growing in water, soil,
or on a substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a
result of excessive water content.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any surface area that releases as runoff all or a
majority of the precipitation that falls on it. Impervious surface includes
rooftops, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, and streets unless specifically
designed, constructed, and maintained to be pervious.



   LAND DISTURBING OR DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES. Any change of the land
surface including removing vegetative cover, excavating, filling, grading,
and the construction of any structure.



   NEW DEVELOPMENT. Any construction activity that is not defined as
redevelopment.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, franchisee, and
association.



   PERVIOUS SURFACE. Any surface area that allows infiltration of all or
the majority of the precipitation that falls on it. Pervious surfaces include
turfgrass, rain gardens, planting beds, and other infiltration BMPs.



   PLAN. A storm water management plan governed by this chapter.



   PUBLIC WATERS. Waters of the state as defined in M.S. § 103G.005,
Subd. 15, as it may be amended from time to time.



   REDEVELOPMENT. Any construction activity where, prior to the start of
construction, the areas to be disturbed have 15% or more of impervious
surface.



   REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood that is representative of large floods known to
have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what
can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of a
100-year recurrence interval.



   SEDIMENT. Solid matter carried by water, sewage, or other liquids.



   STRUCTURE. Anything manufactured, constructed, or erected which is
normally attached to or positioned on land, including portable structures,
earthen structures, roads, parking lots, and paved storage areas.



   WETLANDS. Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems
where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is
covered by shallow water. For purposes of this definition, WETLANDS must have
the following three attributes:



      (1)   Have a predominance of hydric soils;



      (2)   Are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at
a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and



      (3)   Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of the
vegetation.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



§ 54.15  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.



   (A)   Application procedure.



      (1)   Application. A mitten application for stormwater
management plan approval, along with a proposed stormwater management plan
and maintenance agreement, shall be filed with the Engineering Division of
the city's Public Works Department. The application shall include a statement
indicating the grounds upon which the approval is being requested, that the
proposed use is permitted by right or as an exception in the underlying
zoning district, and adequate evidence showing that the proposed use will
conform to the standards set forth in this chapter.



      (2)   Required plan submittals.



         (a)   Two sets of clearly legible blue or black lined
copies of drawings, electronic copy of drawings, and required information
shall be submitted to the Engineering Division along with the process and
approval fee. Information provided shall be prepared per the most recent
edition of the city design criteria and certified by an engineer licensed in
the state. Drawings shall be prepared to a scale appropriate to the site of
the project and suitable for the review to be performed.



         (b)   The plans shall be drawn at a minimum scale of one
inch equals 100 feet and shall contain the following information:



            1.   Existing site map. A map of existing
conditions showing the site and immediately adjacent areas within 200 feet of
the site, including:



               A.   The name and address of the applicant,
the section, township and range, north point, date, and scale of drawing and
number of sheets;



               B.   The location of the property by showing
an insert map at a scale sufficient to clearly identify its location and
giving such information as the name and numbers of adjoining roads,
railroads, utilities, subdivisions, cities, townships, and districts or other
landmarks;



               C.   The existing topography with a contour
interval appropriate to the topography of the land but in no case having a
contour interval greater than two feet;



               D.   A delineation of all ponds,
infiltration features, streams, rivers, public waters, and wetlands located
on and immediately adjacent to the site, including the depth of the water,
the normal water level (NWL), the 100-year high water level (ETWL), the
ordinary high water level (OHW), a description of all vegetation which may be
found in the water, a statement of general water quality and any
classification given to the water body or wetland by the State Department of
Natural Resources, the State Pollution Control Agency, or the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers;



               E.   The location and dimensions of existing
stormwater drainage systems and natural drainage patterns on and immediately
adjacent to the site delineating in which direction and at what rate
stormwater is conveyed from the site, identifying the receiving stream,
river, public water, or wetland, and setting forth those areas of the
unaltered site where stormwater collects;



               F.   A description of the soils of the site,
including a map indicating soil types of areas to be disturbed as well as a
soil report containing information on the suitability of the soils for the
type of stormwater system proposed and describing any remedial steps to be
taken by the applicant to render the soils suitable;



               G.   The location and description of any
vegetative cover and a clear delineation of any vegetation proposed for
removal;



               H.   The location of 100-year floodpiains,
flood fringes, and floodways;



               I.   The locations of any existing overhead
or underground utilities;



               J.   The locations of property lines and
easements; and



               K.   A city approved benchmark listing
location and elevation.



            2.   Site construction plan. A site construction
plan including:



               A.   Locations and dimensions of all
proposed land disturbing activities and any phasing of those activities;



               B.   Total site area;



               C.   Total area to be disturbed;



               D.   Locations and dimensions of all
temporary soil or dirt stockpiles;



               E.   Locations and dimensions of all
construction site erosion control measures necessary to meet the requirements
of this chapter;



               F.   A schedule of the anticipated start and
completion date of each land disturbing activity including the installation
of construction site erosion control measures needed to meet the requirements
of this chapter; and



               G.   Provisions for maintenance of the
construction site erosion control measures during construction.



            3.   Plan of final site conditions. A plan of
final site conditions on the same scale as the existing site map showing the
proposed site changes including:



               A.   Finished grading shown at contours at
the same interval as provided above or as required to clearly indicate the
relationship of proposed changes to existing topography and remaining
features;



               B.   A landscape plan, drawn to an
appropriate scale, including dimensions and distances and the location, type,
size, and description of all proposed landscape materials which will be added
to the site as part of the development;



               C.   A drainage plan of the developed site
delineating in which direction and at what rate stormwater will be conveyed
from the site and setting forth the areas of the site where stormwater will
be allowed to collect;



               D.   The proposed size, alignment, and
intended use of any structures to be erected on the site;



               E.   A clear delineation and tabulation of
all areas which will be paved or surfaced, including a description of the
surfacing material to be used;



               F.   Any other information pertinent to the
particular project which, in the opinion of the applicant or the Public Works
Director, is necessary for the review of the project;



               G.   Proposed normal water level (KWL),
100-year high water level (HWL), ordinary high water level (OHW) of any
ponds, infiltration facilities, streams, rivers, public waters, or wetlands
on or downstream from the site;



               H.   Building elevations including low floor
elevations and low building opening elevations; and



               I.   Overland emergency overflow routes and
their elevations.



            4.   Stormwater calculations. Calculations
demonstrating the following data shall be provided, according to the method
established by the engineering division:



               A.   Drainage maps that show the site, land
that drains onto the site, and land that the site drains onto for existing
and proposed conditions. Delineated drainage areas for ponds, wetlands, or
other relevant waters should be indicated on these maps;



               B.   A stormwater model conforming to
engineering division standards that includes drainage areas, cover types,
pond and wetland sizes, pond and wetland outlets, and natural or piped
conveyance systems;



               C.   Peak runoff rates from the site before
and after development demonstrating that the proposed conditions conform to
the policies outlined in the city's comprehensive water resources management
plan;



               D.   Volume of runoff from the site before
and after development;



               E.   National urban runoff program ("NURP")
volume below and normal outlet required and provided in each pond;



               F.   Infiltration calculations for proposed
conditions; and



               G.   A narrative summarizing the
calculations and demonstrating that proposed drainage alterations do not
unreasonably burden upstream or downstream land.



            5.   Soil borings. If requested by the Public
Works Director.



            6.   Maintenance agreement. The applicant shall
enter into a maintenance agreement with the city that documents all
responsibilities for operation and maintenance of long-term stormwater
treatment BMPs. Such responsibility shall be documented in a maintenance plan
and executed through a maintenance agreement. All maintenance agreements must
be approved by the city and recorded at the Scott County recorder's office
prior to applying for permit termination. At a minimum, the maintenance
agreement shall describe the inspection and maintenance obligations:



               A.   The party who is permanently
responsible for maintenance of the structural and nonstructural measures.



               B.   Pass responsibilities for such
maintenance to successors in title.



               C.   Allow the city and its representatives
the right of entry for the purpose of inspecting all permanent stormwater
management systems.



               D.   Allow the city the right to repair and
maintain the facility, if necessary maintenance is not performed after proper
and reasonable notice to the responsible party of the permanent stormwater
management systems.



               E.   Include a maintenance plan that
contains, but is not limited to the following:



                  i.   Identification of all structural
permanent stormwater management systems.



                  ii.   A schedule for regular
inspections, monitoring, and maintenance for each practice. Monitoring shall
verify whether the practice is functioning as designed and may include, but
is not limited to, quality, temperature, and quantity of runoff.



                  iii.   Identification of the
responsible party for conducting the inspection, monitoring, and maintenance
of each practice.



                  iv.   Include a schedule and format
for reporting compliance with the maintenance agreement to the city.



               F.   The issuance of a permit constitutes a
right-of-entry for the city, its contractors, and agents to enter upon the
site. The applicant shall allow the city, its contractors, agents, and any
authorized representatives, upon presentation of credentials, to:



                  i.   Enter upon the permitted site for
the purpose of obtaining information, examination of records, conducting
investigations or surveys.



                  ii.   Bring such equipment upon the
permitted development as is necessary to conduct such surveys and
investigations.



                  iii.   Examine and copy any books,
papers, records, or memoranda pertaining to activities or records required to
be kept under the terms and conditions of the permit.



                  iv.   Inspect the stormwater pollution
control measures.



                  v.   Sample and monitor any items or
activities pertaining to stormwater pollution control measures.



                  vi.   Correct deficiencies in
stormwater and erosion and sediment control measures.



                  vii.   Fees. All applications for
stormwater management plan or maintenance agreement approval shall be
accompanied by a processing and approval fee as set by the most recent
edition of the city's adopted fee schedule.



   (B)   Stormwater management plan review procedure.



      (1)   Process. Stormwater management plans and maintenance
agreements meeting the requirements of this chapter shall be submitted to the
Engineering Division of the city's Public Works Department for the Public
Works Director's review and approval. The Public Works Director shall
recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the stormwater
management plan and maintenance agreement to the Planning Commission.
Following Planning Commission review, the stormwater management plan and
maintenance agreement shall be submitted to the City Council for its review
along with the Planning Commission's recommendation.



      (2)   Duration. Approval of a stormwater management plan
submitted under the provisions of this chapter shall expire two years after
the date of approval by the City Council unless construction has commenced in
accordance with the plan; however, if prior to the expiration of the
approval, the applicant makes a written request to the Public Works Director
for an extension of time to commence construction setting forth the reasons
for the requested extension, the City Council may grant one extension of not
greater than one single year.



      (3)   Revisions. A stormwater management plan or maintenance
agreement may be revised. All revised plans or agreements must contain all
information required by this chapter and must be reviewed and approved by the
Public Works Director.



      (4)   Conditions. A stormwater management plan and maintenance
agreement may be approved by the City Council subject to compliance with
conditions that are necessary to ensure that the requirements contained in
this chapter are met. Such conditions may, among other matters, limit the
size, kind, or character of the proposed development; require the
construction of structures, drainage facilities, storage basins, and other
facilities; require replacement of vegetation; establish required monitoring
procedures; require that the work be staged over time; require alteration of
the site's design to ensure buffering; or require the conveyance to the city
or other public entity of certain lands or interests therein.



      (5)   Approval. Upon approval of the stormwater management
plan or maintenance agreement by the City Council, the applicant shall enter
into an agreement with the city to ensure that any required improvements are
constructed, any required easements are granted or dedicated, and that there
is compliance with any conditions imposed by the City Council. The agreement
shall guarantee completion and compliance with the conditions within a
specific time, which time may be extended by the City Council. The agreement
shall be in a form acceptable to the city.



      (6)   Financial guarantee. Upon approval of the stormwater
management plan by the City Council, the applicant shall submit a letter of
credit, or cash escrow, to cover 125% of the amount of the established cost
of complying with the stormwater management plan. This financial guarantee
shall be in a form acceptable to the city and may be incorporated into the
financial guarantee provided for grading activities or the financial
guarantee provided for street and utility activities.



   (C)   Stormwater management plan approval and implementation
standards.



      (1)   Compliance with standards. No stormwater management plan
which fails to meet the standards contained in this chapter shall be approved
by the City Council.



      (2)   All stormwater management plans must be submitted to and
approved by the Public Works Director prior to the start of construction
activity. At a minimum all applicants shall meet the criteria set forth below
and observe the standards established by the NPDES Construction General
Permit.



      (3)   All stormwater management plans must address erosion and
sediment control and shall meet the criteria of Chs. 54.45 through 54.54,
inclusive.



      (4)   Stormwater management requirements for permanent
facilities.



         (a)   An applicant shall install or construct, on or for
the proposed land disturbing or development activity, all stormwater
management facilities necessary to meet the criteria of the city's
comprehensive water resources management plan, design criteria, and the NPDES
construction general permit. No private stormwater facilities will be
approved by the city unless a maintenance plan and maintenance agreement are
provided that defines who will conduct the maintenance, the type of
maintenance, and intervals of the maintenance. In the alternative, or in
partial fulfillment of this requirement and upon approval of the Public Works
Director, an applicant may make an in-kind or monetary contribution to the
development and maintenance of regional stormwater management facilities
designed to serve multiple land disturbing and development activities
undertaken by one or more persons, including the applicant.



         (b)   Proposed stormwater management plans shall
incorporate volume control, water quality control, and rate control as the
basis for stormwater management in the proposed development plan on sites
without restrictions. All proposed development and redevelopment projects
shall be in conformance with the City of Shakopee's comprehensive water
resources management plan, design criteria, and the most current requirements
of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) Municipal Separate Storm
Sewer Systems (MS4) Permit, as applicable, meeting the more restrictive
criteria.



         (c)   The applicant shall reduce the need for stormwater
management facilities by incorporating the use of natural topography and land
cover such as wetlands, ponds, natural swales, and depressions as they exist
before development to the degree that they can accommodate the additional
flow of water without compromising the integrity or quality of the wetland or
pond.



         (d)   The following stormwater management practices
shall be investigated by the applicant in developing a stormwater management
plan in the following descending order of preference, and the results of that
investigation shall be provided to the city in written form as a part of the
application:



            1.   Natural infiltration of precipitation on-site;



            2.   Flow attenuation by use of open vegetated
swales and natural depressions;



            3.   Green infrastructure by use of ram gardens,
bioswales, constructed wetlands, and other constructed infiltration practices;



            4.   Stormwater retention facilities; and



            5.   Stormwater detention facilities.



         (e)   A combination of stormwater management practices
may be used to achieve the applicable minimum control requirements specified
in this chapter. Justification shall be provided by the applicant for the
method selected.



         (f)   A vegetative buffer shall be required for proposed
open channel watercourses that drain 50 acres or more. All provisions in this
chapter relating to wetland buffers shall also apply to watercourse buffers.



         (g)   The following additional provisions shall also
apply:



            1.   Watercourses shall have a wetland management
class of “low” as outlined in this chapter to determine the required area
and minimum width of the watercourse buffer.



            2.   The required area of the buffer shall be
calculated using the average buffer width as measured from the ordinary high
water level (OHWL). If the OHWL has not been established, the normal water
level may be used. If the normal water level is used, the applicant shall
provide documentation prepared by an engineer defining the normal water level
of the watercourse.



            3.   Buffers for watercourses are not required for
those watercourses that require mowing to maintain their designed hydraulic
capacity, as determined by the Public Works Director.



            4.   Alterations to facilitate erosion control
improvements to stabilize the watercourse, including the use of hard-armoring
such as riprap is allowed in watercourse buffers with an approved grading
permit for the activities. Equivalent water quality treatment shall be
provided for buffer areas impacted by these activities.



      (5)   Pond design standards. Stormwater detention facilities
constructed in the city shall be designed according to standards established
by the engineering division, and as prescribed in the city's design criteria.



      (6)   Infiltration requirements.



         (a)   Best management practices to manage for volume
control and infiltration will be required to the maximum extent practical in
accordance with the city's design criteria.



         (b)   The maximum extent practical required may be less
if the Public Works Director determines that one or more of the following
conditions apply. If one or more of the following conditions apply, the
Public Works Director shall quantity the amount of infiltration that will be
deemed as the maximum extent practical for the site:



            1.   The infiltration characteristics of soils on
the site are not favorable for the infiltration of stormwater;



            2.   The site's drainage course is to regional
infiltration or detention facilities controlled by the city that reduce
runoff volumes;



            3.   The development of the site does not increase
the site's impervious areas; or



            4.   Other site conditions that make the
infiltration of stormwater impractical as determined by the Public Works
Director.



      (7)   Mitigation. Where construction projects cannot meet the
volume, TSS, or TP reduction requirements for new development or
redevelopment projects on the site of original construction, all methods must
be exhausted prior to considering alternative locations where volume and
treatment standards can be achieved. If the city has determined that all
methods have been exhausted, the permittee will be required to identify
alternative locations where the standards can be achieved or alternative
methods in accordance with the city's design criteria.



      (8)   Facilities. Stormwater and infiltration facilities must
be located at least 50 feet away from the top of a bluff.



      (9)   Watershed management plans/groundwater management plans.
Stormwater management plans shall be consistent with adopted watershed
management plans and groundwater management plans approved by the State Board
of Water and Soil Resources.



      (10)   Easement. If the stormwater management plan involves
direction of some or all runoff off of the site, it shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to obtain from adjacent property owners any
necessary easements or other property interests to permit the flow of water
across the property.



      (11)   Low-floor/building opening elevations.



         (a)   Any new development or redevelopment shall
maintain a minimum building opening elevation of at least three feet above
the anticipated 100-year high water elevation as a standard practice;
however, if the applicant demonstrates that this requirement would be a
hardship, the standard may be reduced to two feet if all of the following can
be demonstrated:



            1.   Within the two foot freeboard area,
stormwater storage is available which is equal to or exceeds 50% of the
stormwater storage currently available in the basin below the 100-year
elevation;



            2.   A 25% obstruction of the basin outlet over a
24-hour period would not result in more than one foot of additional bounce in
the basin; and



            3.   An adequate overflow route from the basin is
available that will provide one foot of freeboard for the proposed low
building opening.



         (b)   Basement floor elevations must be set to an
elevation that meets all of the following criteria:



            1.   The lowest floor elevation must be at least
four feet above the currently observed groundwater elevations in the area;



            2.   The lowest floor elevation must be at least
two feet above the elevation of any known historic high groundwater
elevations for the area. Information on historic high groundwater elevations
can be derived from any reasonable sources including piezometer data, soil
boring data, percolation testing logs, and the like; and



            3.   The lowest floor elevation must be at least
two feet above the 100-year high surface water elevation for the area unless
it can be demonstrated that this standard creates a hardship, if the two-foot
standard is determined by the City Council to constitute a hardship, the
standard shall be at least one foot above the highest anticipated groundwater
elevation resulting from a 100-year critical duration rainfall event. The
impact of high surface water elevations on groundwater elevations in the
vicinity of the structure should take into consideration the site's distance
from the floodplain area, the soils, the normal water elevation of surface
depressions in the area, the static groundwater table, and historic water
elevations in the area. This information shall be provided by a registered
engineer or soil scientist.



      (12)   Impervious surface coverage. The impervious surface
coverage of each lot must not exceed the impervious surface coverage allowed
under Ch. 151.



      (13)   Accommodation of discharge rates. Storm sewers shall be
designed to accommodate discharge rates associated with a ten-year, 24-hour
rainfall event in accordance to the Atlas 14 data.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



§ 54.16  STORMWATER AND URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION CONTROL.



   (A)   Illegal disposal, discharges, and connections.



      (1)   No person shall intentionally dispose of leaves, grass
clippings, dirt, gravel, other landscape debris, or anything other than
stormwater into a street, road, alley, catch basin, culvert, curb, gutter,
inlet, ditch, natural watercourse, flood control channel, canal, or storm
drain. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this section:



         (a)   Water line flushing, landscape irrigation,
diverted stream flows, rising ground waters, uncontaminated ground water
infiltration, uncontaminated pumped ground water, discharges from potable
water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation
water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering,
individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and
wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, and street wash water;



         (b)   Discharges or flow from firefighting, and other
discharges authorized by the city in writing that are necessary to protect
public health and safety;



         (c)   Discharges associated With dye testing, however
this activity requires verbal notification to the city prior to the time of
the test.



         (d)   The prohibition shall not apply to any
non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste
discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority
of the federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger
is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order
and other applicable laws and regulations, and further provided that written
approval has been granted for any discharges to the storm drain system.



      (2)   No person shall cause any illicit discharge to enter the
city stormwater system. For the purpose of this chapter, ILLICIT DISCHARGE is
as defined in the city's stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)
completed for the city's municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) permit.



      (3)   No person shall use any illicit connection to
intentionally convey non-stormwater to the city stormwater system.



         (a)   This prohibition expressly includes, without
limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the
connection was permissible under the law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time of the connection.



         (b)   A person is considered to be in violation of this
chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage into the storm dram
system, or allows such connection to continue.



      (4)   No person shall leave, deposit, discharge, dump, or
otherwise expose any chemical or septic waste in an area where discharge to
streets, or a storm drain system may occur.



   (B)   Suspension of MS4 access.



      (1)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency
situations. The city may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access
to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present ixnmment and substantial danger to
the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or
Waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the city may take such steps as
deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the
United States, or to minimize danger to persons.



      (2)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharges.
Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their
MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit
discharge. The city will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its
MS4 access. The violator may petition the city for a reconsideration and
hearing. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to
premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of
the city.



   (C)   Monitoring of discharges.



      (1)   Applicability. This section applies to all facilities
that have storm water discharges associated with industrial activity,
including construction activity.



      (2)   Access to facilities.



         (a)   The City of Shakopee or its designee shall be
permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this
chapter as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this
chapter. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger
shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of
the city.



         (b)   Facility operators shall allow the city or its
designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept
under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the
performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.



         (c)   The city or its designee shall have the right to
set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion
of the city to conduct monitoring and sampling of the facility's storm water
discharge.



         (d)   The city or its designee has the right to require
the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All
devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to
ensure their accuracy.



         (e)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and
easy access to the facility to be inspected and sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the mitten or oral request of the city and shall
not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
operator.



         (f)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city or its
designee access to a permitted facility is a violation of a storm water
discharge permit and of this chapter. A person who is the operator of a
facility with a NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with
industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the city
reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any
activity authorized or required by this chapter.



         (g)   If the city or its designee have been refused
access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and
he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect or sample as
part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify
compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the
overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the city
may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction.



   (D)   Watercourse protection. Every person owning or occupying
premises through which a watercourse passes, shall keep and maintain that
part of the watercourse within the premises free of trash, debris, excessive
vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or
significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition,
the owner or occupant shall maintain existing privately owned structures
within or adjacent to a watercourse so that such structures will not become a
hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.



   (E)   Notification of spills. Notwithstanding other requirements of
law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation or
responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has
information of any known or suspected release of materials which are
resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into
stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the state, said person shall
take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of
such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said
person must immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence
via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the city no later than the next business
day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the city within three business days of the personal
or phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials originates from an
industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall
also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken
to prevent its recurrence. Such records must be retained for at least three
years.



   (F)   Enforcement.



      (1)   Notice of violation. Whenever the city finds that a
person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this
chapter, the city may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:



         (a)   The performance of monitoring, analysis, and
reporting;



         (b)   The elimination of illicit connections or
discharges;



         (c)   That violating discharges, practices, or
operations shall cease and desist;



         (d)   The abatement or remediation of storm water
pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;



         (e)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and
remediation costs; and



         (f)   The implementation of source control or treatment
BMPs.



      (2)   Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a
notice of violation may appeal the determination to the City Council. The
notice of appeal must be received within 15 days after the date



of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal shall take place within 30
days after the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the
City Council shall be final.



      (3)   Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has
not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of
violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 15 days after the decision
of the City Council, the city may enter upon the subject property and take
any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and restore the
property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in
possession of any premises to refuse to allow the city or its designated
contractor to enter upon the property for the purposes set forth above.



      (4)   Cost of abatement of the violation. Within 30 days after
abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the
cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may
file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within 15
days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by
the decision of the City Council or by the expiration of the time in which to
file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the
property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the
assessment.



      (5)   Injunctive relief. If a person has violated or continues
to violate the provisions of this chapter, the city may petition the district
court for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from
activities that would create further violations or compelling the person to
perform abatement or remediation of the violation.



      (6)   Compensatory action. In lieu of enforcement proceedings,
penalties, and remedies authorized by this chapter, the city may impose upon
a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling,
attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.



      (7)   Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the
enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or
permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a
threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a
nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense,
and a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of
such nuisance may be taken.



      (8)   Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this
section are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any
applicable Federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the
city to seek cumulative remedies.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.17  LAWN FERTILIZATION RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Timing of fertilizer application. No lawn fertilizer shall be
applied when the ground is frozen and in no event during the period of
November 15 through April 1 of the succeeding year.



   (B)   Impervious surfaces. Lawn fertilizer shall not be applied,
spilled, or otherwise deposited on any impervious surface. Any lawn
fertilizer applied, spilled, or deposited, either intentionally or
accidentally, on an impervious surface shall be immediately and completely
removed.



   (C)   Buffer zones. No lawn fertilizer shall be applied within any
established wetland buffer zone or within 20 feet of the edge of any wetland,
pond, river, creek, or lake.



   (D)   Lawn fertilizer content and application rate. No lawn
fertilizer containing any amount of phosphorus or other compounds containing
phosphorus, such as phosphate shall be applied to any turf within the city
except when the following conditions apply;



      (1)   Newly established turf areas for the turfs first growing
season; or



      (2)   In turf areas in which a soil test confirms that the
turf area is below phosphorus levels established by the University of
Minnesota Extension Service. The fertilizer to be applied shall not contain
an amount of phosphorus that exceeds the amount recommended in the soil test
evaluation.



   (E)   Notice requirement. Retail businesses selling lawn fertilizer
containing phosphorus shall post a notice in a conspicuous location near the
law fertilizer notifying customers of the limitation on the use of lawn
fertilizer containing phosphorous contained in this chapter.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



WETLAND MANAGEMENT



§ 54.30  AREAS AFFECTED.



   This chapter applies to all parcels containing wetlands as defined by
the 1987 Corp of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual. This chapter also
applies to any parcel located near a wetland that would be required by this
chapter to have a wetland buffer or wetland buffer setback.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



§ 54.31  WETLAND ASSESSMENT AND DELINEATION.



   (A)   A wetland assessment and delineation shall be submitted to the
Engineering Division of the city's Public Works Department when required by
this chapter for review. The Public Works Director shall recommend approval,
approval with conditions, or denial of the wetland assessment and delineation
to the Planning Commission. Following Planning Commission review, the wetland
assessment and delineation shall be submitted to the City Council for its
review along with the Planning Commission's recommendation.



   (B)   The wetland assessment report and delineation must be
performed and prepared by a qualified wetland specialist. Wetland delineation
in the report shall be shown on a scaled drawing that also shows the location
of existing and proposed property lines, buildings, and other topographic
features of the site. For each wetland delineated in the report, a wetland
management class as defined by the State Routine Assessment Method (MNRAM)
for evaluating wetland functions - Version 3.1 or later version - must be
assigned.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



§ 54.32  WETLAND BUFFERS.



   For any parcel created or redeveloped, a wetland buffer as defined in
this chapter is required.



   (A)   Required wetland buffer dimensions.



      (1)   Wetland buffer dimensions will be based on the wetland's
management class as defined by MNRAM.



 

 

Wetland Management Class (MNRAM)

 

Average Required Buffer Width (feet)

 

Minimum Required Buffer Width (feet)




A

 
Exceptional
 
65
 
25



B

 
High
 
50
 
25



C

 
Medium
 
35
 
25



D

 
Low
 
25
 
25



 



      (2)   The required area of the wetland buffer shall be
calculated using the average buffer width as measured from the delineated
wetland edge.



   (B)   Required wetland buffer vegetation. Vegetation within a
wetland buffer shall be established and maintained as follows:



      (1)   The first 25 feet of the wetland buffer as measured from
the wetland delineation or public waters wetland ordinary high water level
(OHWL) must not be disturbed during project construction (i.e. cleared or
graded), with the exception of temporary disturbances for public roads and
utility construction. This area must be protected from disturbance with
temporary fencing prior to construction. If it is necessary to establish
acceptable vegetation within the area so that it is in compliance with the
vegetation requirements of this chapter, vegetation may be removed and
replaced, and site soils preparation work may be performed within this area.



      (2)   Where acceptable natural vegetation exists within the
wetland buffer, the retention of such vegetation in an undisturbed state is
required unless the applicant receives approval from the Public Works
Director to replace such vegetation. A wetland buffer is considered to have
acceptable natural vegetation if it has a continuous, dense layer of
perennial grasses, or an overstory of trees or shrubs that have been
uncultivated or unbroken for at least five consecutive years. The city may
determine existing vegetation to be unacceptable if the wetland buffer has
undesirable characteristics such as noxious or invasive plant species or
topography that channelizes the flow of runoff.



      (3)   (a)   In cases where the wetland buffer does not
contain vegetation or has been cultivated or otherwise disturbed within five
years of the application, the wetland buffer area must be replanted with
native seed mix approved by the Public Works Director and maintained until it
is established.



         (b)   The proposed types of wetland buffer plantings,
proposed maintenance, and monitoring activities and schedule must be
identified on the application. Any vegetation planted within the wetland
buffer are independent of any landscaping that may be required elsewhere on
the property by the city.



         (c)   During the first two full growing seasons, the
owner must replant any wetland buffer vegetation that does not survive. After
this time, the owner shall remain responsible for re-seeding or replanting
vegetation within the wetland buffer if it changes at any time due to human
intervention or activities.



   (C)   Wetland buffer easements and markers. When a wetland buffer is
required pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall prior to issuance of
any building permits by the city:



      (1)   Submit to the city for its approval a conservation
easement in favor of the city for protection of the wetland buffers and
wetlands on the property, or include the wetland buffer and wetlands in an
outlot dedicated to the city as part of the plat. The conservation easement
shall legally describe the boundaries of the wetland or public waters wetland
and the wetland buffer and identity the marker locations;



      (2)   Record the conservation easement or final plat with the
county and submit evidence thereof to the city;



      (3)   Wetland buffers shall be marked to clearly designate
their boundaries. At least one marker shall be required on each lot. There
shall be at least one marker every 200 feet along the edge of the wetland
buffer; and



      (4)   A marker shall consist of a post and a sign indicating
the presence of a wetland buffer. The applicant will be required to furnish
and install four by four inch sign posts to a height of five feet above
finished grade. The city will furnish and install the signs. If the applicant
does not install the posts, the city will furnish and install them. Fees
incurred by the city for post furnishing and installation will be paid by the
applicant.



   (D)   Wetland buffer alterations.



      (1)   Alterations including building or placement of
structures, storage of materials, paving, mowing, plowing, introduction of
noxious vegetation, cutting for non-management puiposes, dredging, filling,
mining, dumping, grazing livestock, agricultural production, yard waste
disposal, or fertilizer application, are prohibited within the wetland buffer.



      (2)   The following activities shall be permitted in the
wetland buffer and shall not constitute prohibited alterations:



         (a)   Removal of noxious vegetation such as, but not
limited to, European buckthorn, purple loosestrife, and reed canary grass;



         (b)   Installation of new plantings that enhance the
natural vegetation;



         (c)   Selective clearing or pruning of trees or
vegetation that are dead, diseased, or pose similar hazards;



         (d)   Use and maintenance of one unimproved access strip
through the wetland buffer for recreational access to a watercourse, where
permitted. The strip shall be no greater than 20 feet in width;



         (e)   Construction, maintenance, repair, reconstruction,
or replacement of existing and future public roads, utilities, or drainage
systems within a wetland buffer, so long as any adverse impacts of the
construction and installation on the function of the wetland buffer have been
avoided or minimized to the extent practical and the activity has been
approved by the city;



         (f)   Construction of individual sewage treatment
systems (ISTS) so long as the vegetation growing on the system is maintained
in accordance with this chapter, the area for the ISTS is not credited as
wetland buffer area, and the edge of the ISTS is located at least 35 feet
from the delineated wetland edge;



         (g)   Clearing, grading, and seeding if part of a
wetland replacement plan approved by the city;



         (h)   Maintenance, repair, or replacement of trails; and



         (i)   Placement or maintenance of ponds or other
stormwater treatment facilities, so long as the area of the pond is not
credited as wetland buffer area and the embankment of the pond is located at
least 35 feet from the delineated wetland edge.



   (E)   Exceptions.



      (1)   Wetland buffers and structure setbacks are not requited
for any residentially zoned lot of record as of the effective date of this
chapter.



      (2)   Wetland buffers and structure setbacks are not required
for any wetland that qualifies for a de minimus exemption under the Wetland
Conservation Act.



      (3)   Wetland buffers and structure setbacks are not required
for any wetland qualifying for an incidental wetland exemption under the
Wetland Conservation Act.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



§ 54.33  STRUCTURE SETBACKS.



   (A)   Parcels that are newly created or redeveloped after the
effective date of this chapter are required to have a structure setback from
the wetland buffer for all new structures.



   (B)   The structure setback shall be measured from outer edge of the
wetland buffer.



   (C)   For residential parcels, a 30-foot front and rear yard
structure setback and a ten-foot side yard structure setback is required from
the wetland buffer.



   (D)   All nonresidential parcels shall be required to provide a
ten-foot structure setback for front, rear and side yards.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL



§ 54.45  EROSION CONTROL PLAN.



   (A)   An erosion control plan shall be submitted to the Engineering
Division of the city's Public Works Department when required by this chapter
along with a grading permit application. All applications for a grading
permit shall be accompanied by a processing and approval fee as set by the
city fee schedule.



   (B)   The erosion control plan shall contain all of the following
with respect to conditions existing on site during construction and after
final structures and improvements have been completed.



      (1)   A description of and specifications for sediment
retention and settling devices;



      (2)   A description of, specifications for, and detail plates
for surface runoff and erosion control devices;



      (3)   A description of vegetative measures;



      (4)   A detailed timetable for restoring all disturbed areas;



      (5)   A graphic representation of the location of all
specified erosion and sediment control devices;



      (6)   An implementation schedule for installing and
subsequently removing devices described above;



      (7)   A maintenance schedule for all sediment and erosion
control devices specified;



      (8)   An estimate of the costs to implement all final and
temporary erosion and sediment control measures;



      (9)   An information sheet on the parties responsible for
constructing and maintaining the erosion control measures as shown on the
erosion control plan. The information sheet should contain the phone numbers
and addresses of at least two persons and indicate how they can be contacted
at all times (days, nights, weekends, and the like) regarding repairing and
maintaining the erosion control measures;



      (10)   The erosion control plan must contain details to
specify which erosion and sediment control facilities are permanent and which
are temporary; and



      (11)   If required, a nationwide pollutant discharge
elimination system (NPDES) general stormwater permit must be obtained from
the State Pollution Control Agency prior to commencing construction
activities. The associated stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)
should be included in the erosion control plan and approved by the Public
Works Director prior to construction. A copy of the NPDES permit must be
provided to tire city prior to construction.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



§ 54.46  PROCESS.



   Erosion control plans meeting the requirements of this chapter shall be
submitted to the Engineering Division of the city's Public Works Department
for the Public Works Director's review and approval. The Public Works
Director shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the
erosion control plan to the Planning Commission. Following Planning
Commission review, the erosion control plan shall be submitted to the City
Council for its review along with the Planning Commission's recommendation.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



§ 54.47  IMPLEMENTATION OF AN EROSION CONTROL PLAN.



   Prior to the start of any earthwork activities, the permittee must have
in place and functional the erosion controls as outlined on the approved
erosion control plan. Additional erosion control measures may be required as
directed by the Public Works Director.



   (A)   No earth moving activities shall commence until the erosion
controls have been field inspected and approved by the Public Works Director.



   (B)   At a minimum, the permittee must meet the erosion control
specifications set forth within the city's design criteria and observe the
standards established in the NPDES Construction General Permit requirements.



   (C)   The permittee must maintain the erosion control on the site to
the process. If the erosion control is not being maintained to the Director's
satisfaction, the city may perform remedial work on the site as outlined in
this chapter.



   (D)   All erosion control systems must be maintained by the
permittee in an acceptable condition until turf is established or structural
surfaces are constructed to protect the soil from erosion.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



§ 54.48  FINANCIAL SECURITY.



   (A)   Upon approval of the erosion control plan by the City Council,
the applicant shall submit a letter of credit, or cash escrow, to cover 125%
of the amount of the established cost of complying with the erosion control
plan. This financial guarantee shall be in a form acceptable to the city and
may be incorporated into the financial guarantee required for grading
activities.



   (B)   The city may draw on the letter of credit or cash escrow after
providing the permittee with at least five business days' notice.



   (C)   The city may act against the financial security if any of the
conditions listed below exist:



      (1)   The permittee ceases land-disturbing activities or
filling and abandons the work site prior to completion of the grading plan;



      (2)   The permittee fails to conform to the approved grading
or erosion control plan;



      (3)   The techniques utilized under the erosion control plan
fail within one year of installation; or



      (4)   The Public Works Director has determined that additional
action on the site is necessary to prevent excessive erosion from occurring.



   (D)   The city may use the funds from the financial security to
reimburse itself for any remedial work undertaken by the city or its
contractor, and for any administrative costs incurred in the process of
performing the remedial work including, but not limited to, staff time, and
attorney's fees.



   (E)   The financial security deposited with the city for faithful
performance of the grading and erosion control work shall be released one
year after the ground cover and other erosion control measures have been
installed. All temporary erosion control measures, such as silt fences and
hay bales, must be removed from the site prior to the city releasing the
financial security.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



§ 54.49  INSPECTION OF EROSION CONTROL PLAN.



   The city will make periodic inspections of the site to ensure
compliance with the erosion control plan.



   (A)   The permittee or his/her agent shall ensure that a trained and
certified person will regularly inspect the construction site at least once
every seven days until final stabilization and within 24 hours of a rainfall
event of one-half inch or greater in a 24 hour period. All inspection and
maintenance activities conducted on the site during construction must be
recorded in writing and retained within the erosion control plan and provided
to the city. Records of each inspection and maintenance activity shall
include the following;



      (1)   Date and time of inspection;



      (2)   Name(s) of persons conducting the inspection;



      (3)   Findings of inspections, including recommendations for
corrective actions;



      (4)   Corrective actions taken, including the dates, times and
the name of the party completing the corrective action;



      (5)   Date and the amount of rainfall events that are greater
than one-half inch in a 24 hour period; and



      (6)   Documentation of any changes made to the erosion and
sediment control plan.



   (B)   Site and BMP maintenance. Prior to any construction, the
developer shall provide the Public Works Director with a schedule for erosion
and sediment control inspection and maintenance, including schedules for
street cleaning, and street sweeping. All site and BMP maintenance activities
must comply with the requirements of the NPDES construction general permit.
The applicant shall investigate and comply with the following BMP maintenance
requirements:



      (1)   Silt fence. All silt fences must be repaired, replaced
or supplemented when they become nonfunctional or the sediment reaches
one-half of the height of the fence. Repairs shall be made by the end of the
next business day after discovery or as soon as field conditions allow access.



      (2)   Temporary sediment basins. Temporary sedimentation
basins must be drained and the sediment must be removed when the depth of the
sediment collected in the basin reaches one-half the storage volume. Drainage
and removal must be completed within 72 hours of discovery or as soon as
field conditions allow access.



      (3)   Surface waters and conveyance systems. Surface water,
including drainage ditches and conveyance systems, must be inspected for
visible signs of sediment being deposited by erosion. The applicant must
remove all sediment deposited hi surface waters, including drainage ways,
catch basins, and other drainage systems and must restabilize the areas of
exposed soil as a result of sediment removal. The removal and stabilization
must take place within seven days of discovery unless legal, regulatory or
physical access constraints prevent remediation. In the event of an access
constraint, the applicant shall use all reasonable efforts to obtain access.
If access is precluded, removal and stabilization must take place within
seven calendar days of obtaining access. The applicant is responsible for
contacting all local, regional, state and federal authorities and obtaining
any required permits prior to conducting any work.



      (4)   Streets and paved surfaces. Where vehicle traffic leaves
any part of the site, the exit locations must be inspected for visible signs
of off-site sediment tracking onto paved surfaces. The construction entrance
pad BMP must remain clean and tracked sediment must be removed from all
off-site paved surfaces as soon as possible or within 24 hours of discovery.



      (5)   General maintenance. The applicant shall be responsible
for the operation and maintenance of temporary and permanent water quality
management BMPs, as well as erosion prevention and sediment control BMPs for
the duration of the construction work on the site. The applicant remains
responsible until another party has assumed control over all areas of the
site that have not established final stabilization and a Notice of
Termination (NOT) has been submitted to the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency.



      (6)   Infiltration areas. All infiltration areas must be
inspected to ensure that no sediment from ongoing construction activities is
reaching the infiltration area and these areas are protected from compaction
caused by construction equipment driving across the infiltration area.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



§ 54.50  APPLICATION REVIEW AND INSPECTION FEES.



   (A)   The city shall charge an application review fee for the review
of the erosion control permit application and the erosion control plan. As
part of this review, the city will review the permittee's as-built survey
submitted after the completion of grading activities to ensure that it
conforms to the overall erosion control plan for the area. The application
fee shall be set by the city fee schedule. If this fee is not paid with 45
days, the fee may be taken from the financial security provided by the
applicant.



   (B)   (1)   An inspection fee will be charged for any inspections
of the site by the city that are needed to review corrective erosion control
work or to follow up on previously incomplete work. This inspection fee will
be deducted from the financial security.



      (2)   The amount will be set by the city fee schedule. If this
fee is not paid within 45 days, the fee may be taken from the financial
security posted by the applicant.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



§ 54.51  NOTIFICATION OF FAILURE OF EROSION CONTROL PLAN.



   The city shall notify the permittee of the failure of the erosion
control measures that have been constructed. The notification will be by
phone or fax to the parties listed on the information sheet required by
this-chapter. The city, at its discretion, may begin remedial work within 48
hours after notification has been provided.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



§ 54.52  EROSION OFF-SITE.



   If erosion breaches the perimeter of the site, the permittee shall
immediately develop a cleanup and restoration plan, obtain a right-of-entry
from the adjoining property owner, and implement the cleanup and restoration
plan within 48 hours of obtaining the adjoining property owner's permission.
In no case, unless written approval is received from the Public Works
Director may more than seven calendar days pass without any corrective action
being taken. If at the discretion of the city, the permittee does not repair
the damage caused by the erosion, the city may perform the remedial work
required, after notice is provided to the permittee.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



§ 54.53  EROSION INTO STREETS, WETLANDS, OR WATER BODIES.



   If eroded soils enter, or entrance appears imminent into streets,
wetlands, or other water bodies, cleanup and repair shall be immediate. The
permittee shall provide all traffic control and flagging required to protect
the traveling public during the cleanup operations. If, at the discretion of
the city, the permittee does not repair the erosion, the city may perform the
remedial work required, after notice is provided to the permittee.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



§ 54.54  FAILURE TO DO CORRECTIVE WORK.



   When a permittee fails to conform to any provision of this chapter
within the time stipulated, the city may take the following actions:



   (A)   Withhold the scheduling of inspections;



   (B)   Withhold the issuance of a certificate of occupancy;



   (C)   Issue a notice of violation. When the city determines that an
activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the
property. The notice of violation shall contain:



      (1)   The name and address of the owner or applicant;



      (2)   The address when available or a description of the land
upon which the violation is occurring;



      (3)   A statement specifying the nature of the violation;



      (4)   A description of the remedial measures necessary to
bring the development activity into compliance with this chapter and a time
schedule for the completion of such remedial action(s);



      (5)   A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or
may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed; and



      (6)   A statement that the determination of violation may be
appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days of
service of the notice of violation. Service may be accomplished by mail or by
personal delivery of the notice.



   (D)   Issue a stop-work order;



   (E)   Direct the correction of the deficiency by city forces or
separate contract. The issuance of an erosion control permit constitutes a
right-of-entry for the city or its contractor to enter upon the construction
site for the purpose of correcting deficiencies with respect to erosion
control. All costs incurred by the city in correcting erosion control
deficiencies, including administrative expenses, shall be reimbursed by the
permittee. If payment is not made within 30 days after an invoice is issued,
the city may draw from the financial security, if the financial security is
of an insufficient amount, the city may assess the remaining amount against
the property. As a condition of the permit, the owner shall be required to
waive notice of any assessment hearing to be conducted by the city, concur
that the benefit to the property exceeds the amount of the proposed
assessment, and waive all rights by virtue of M.S. § 429.081, as it may be
amended from time to time, to challenge the amount or validity of the
assessment.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



§ 54.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties
imposed by state statutes for misdemeanor offenses.



   (B)   For the first 12 months following the effective date of  §§
54.15 through 54.17, no penalty shall attach to a violation of §§ 54.15
through 54.17. Thereafter, a person violating any provision of §§ 54.15
through 54.17 shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall be subject to the penalties imposed by state statutes for petty
misdemeanor offenses.



(Ord. 972, passed 10-17-2017)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   TRAFFIC RULES



      71.   PARKING REGULATIONS



      72.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



      73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      74.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  TRAFFIC RULES



Section



   70.01   M.S. Ch. 168, 169, and 171 adopted by reference



   70.02   Truck route



   70.03   Exhibition driving



   70.04   U-turns



   70.05   Driving through private property to avoid traffic signal



   70.06   Non-motorized wheeled transformation



   70.07   Emergency vehicle preemption system



 



   70.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Traffic Schedules, see Ch. 73



§ 70.01  M.S. CH. 168, 169, AND 171 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Chs. 71 or 90, the
regulatory and procedural provisions of M.S. Ch. 168, Ch. 169, as they may be
amended from time to time, (and commonly referred to as the Highway Traffic
Regulation Act), Ch. 171, are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of this
code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein, including the
penalty provisions thereof.



(2013 Code, § 8.01)  (Ord. 278, passed 12-1-1989; Ord. 408, passed 3-7-1995)



§ 70.02  TRUCK ROUTE.



   It is unlawful for any person to drive a tractor, agricultural
implement truck (other than a pick-up truck of 1/2-ton capacity or less),
truck-trailer, tractor-trailer or truck-tractor, automobile trailer, or
automobile to which a trailer is attached, in through traffic, or upon any
street except those which have been designated and sign-posted as truck
routes. For the purpose of this chapter, THROUGH TRAFFIC means originating
without the city and with a destination without the city, as distinguished
from LOCAL TRAFFIC which means traffic either originating or having a
destination within the city.



(2013 Code, § 8.02)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.03  EXHIBITION DRIVING.



   (A)   Prima facie evidence. It is prima facie evidence of exhibition
driving when a motor vehicle stops, starts, accelerates, decelerates, or
turns at an unnecessary rate of speed so as to cause tires to squeal, gears
to grind, soil to be thrown, engine backfire, fishtailing, or skidding, or,
as to 2-wheeled or 3-wheeled motor vehicles, the front wheel to lose contact
with the ground or roadway surface.



   (B)   Unlawful act. It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any
exhibition driving on any street, parking lot, or other public or private
property, except when an emergency creates necessity for such operation to
prevent injury to persons or damage to property; provided, that this section
shall not apply to driving on a racetrack. For purposes of this section, a
RACETRACK means any track or premises whereon motorized vehicles, horses,
dogs, or other animals or fowl legally compete in a race or timed contest for
an audience, the members of which have directly or indirectly paid a
consideration for admission.



(2013 Code, § 8.03) (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 126, passed 8-4-1983) 
Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.04  U-TURNS.



   It is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle by turning so as to
proceed in the opposite direction upon any street except at a street
intersection, and then only if the street intersection is not sign-posted
prohibiting a U-turn or otherwise controlled by a traffic signal; provided,
that any person making a permitted U-turn shall yield the right-of-way to all
other vehicles.



(2013 Code, § 8.04)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.05  DRIVING THROUGH PRIVATE PROPERTY TO AVOID TRAFFIC SIGNAL.



   It is unlawful for any person to avoid obedience to any traffic-control
device by driving upon or through any private property.



(2013 Code, § 8.05)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.06  NON-MOTORIZED WHEELED TRANSFORMATION.



   (A)   Application. The provisions of this section shall apply to all
non-motorized wheeled transportation which travels at a pace faster than a
walk. This includes, but is not limited to, bicycles, rollerblades,
rollerskates, skateboards, and scooters. For purposes of this section, a
person using such non-motorized wheeled transportation shall be referred to
as being “on wheels”.



   (B)   Traffic laws apply. Every person on wheels on a roadway or any
path set aside for the exclusive use of non-motorized wheeled transportation
shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to the driver of a vehicle under this chapter, except as to those
provisions of this chapter which by their nature can have no application.



   (C)   Manner and number riding.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person propelling a bicycle to
ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.



      (2)   No non-motorized wheeled transportation shall be used to
carry more persons at 1 time than the number for which it is designed and
equipped. Any baby seat shall be equipped with a harness to hold the child
securely in the seat and provide protection against the child’s feet
hitting the spokes of a wheel.



   (D)   Hitching rides. It is unlawful for any person on wheels to
attach the same or themselves to any vehicle upon a roadway.



   (E)   Where to ride.



      (1)   Every person on wheels upon a roadway shall ride as near
to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.



      (2)   Persons on wheels upon a roadway shall not ride more
than 2 abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the
exclusive use of non-motorized wheeled transportation.



      (3)   Whenever a path for non-motorized wheeled transportation
has been provided adjacent to a roadway, a person on wheels shall use such
path and shall not use the roadway.



      (4)   Persons on wheels are prohibited on private property
without the express permission of the property owner.



   (F)   Right-of-way. Whenever a person on wheels is on a sidewalk or
private property, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian.



   (G)   Carrying articles. It is unlawful for any person operating a
bicycle to carry any package, bundle, or article which prevents the driver
from keeping at least 1 hand upon the handlebars.



   (H)   Lighting and brake equipment.



      (1)   Bicycle lights and reflectors. Every bicycle when in use
at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a
white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front, and
with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the Department of
Public Safety which is visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet
to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a
motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. In addition,
each bicycle shall have reflective materials on each side of each pedal
clearly visible from the front or the rear.



      (2)   Reflective clothing. Between sunset and sunrise, each
person on wheels shall wear clothing with a minimum of 20 square inches of
reflective surfaces on the front and on the back, which is visible for a
distance of 600 feet. Persons on bicycles with lights and reflectors as
specified above shall not be required to wear reflective clothing. All
reflective materials shall meet the requirements prescribed by the
Commissioner of Public Safety.



      (3)   Brakes. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake
which will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level,
clean pavement.



   (I)   Sale of bicycles. It is unlawful for any person to sell or
offer for sale any new bicycle unless it is equipped with such reflectors as
are prescribed above.



(2013 Code, § 8.06)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 396, passed
1-12-1995)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.07  EMERGENCY VEHICLE PREEMPTION SYSTEM.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The purpose for using the Emergency Vehicle Preemption
System (EVPS) is to allow emergency vehicles to perform emergency services in
a safe and timely manner by temporarily controlling motorized vehicle traffic
flow at signalized intersections.



      (2)   The City Council deems it advisable to formulate
policies and procedures for the use of the EVPS which are to be followed by
drivers of all emergency vehicles equipped with EVPS emitters so that both
pedestrians and drivers of motorized vehicles have adequate warning that
emergency vehicles are changing normal traffic-control timing at signalized
intersections.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      EMERGENCY VEHICLE. A vehicle equipped and identified according to
law and operated by the City Police or Fire Department or any other vehicle
so designated by the state statute.



      EMERGENCY VEHICLE PREEMPTION SYSTEM (EVPS). A traffic-control
system designated for use by emergency vehicles to improve traffic movement
by temporarily controlling signalized intersections. The EVPS is comprised of
4 separate components: an emitter; a detector; an indicator; and a phase
selector. The emitter (a high intensity light source) is attached to the
emergency vehicle and functions like a strobe light, pulsating at a frequency
in excess of 10“beats” per second. As an emergency vehicle approaches the
intersections, this pulsating light is received by a detector that is located
at or near the traffic signal. The detector relays the coded message to the
phase selector, located in the traffic light control box, which then either
holds the existing green light in favor of the approaching emergency vehicle
or accelerates the normal cycle of a signal change to provide green by the
time the vehicle reaches the intersection. The indicator is a light source
located near the detector that is directed toward the oncoming emergency
vehicle to indicate to the driver whether or not the traffic light has been
preempted in their favor.



      FIRE CHIEF. The Fire Chief of the city or his or her designee.



      SYSTEM CONTROL OFFICER. An individual, designated by the City
Council, to be responsible for the oversight of the EVPS.



   (C)   Conditions for using the Emergency Vehicle Preemption System
(EVPS).



      (1)   Fire Department. City-owned Fire Department vehicles may
use the EVPS while on emergency responses only. Conditions for the use of
EVPS hereby become a part of the Fire Department standard operating
procedures.



      (2)   Police Department. City-owned Police Department vehicles
may use the EVPS while on emergency responses only. Conditions for the use
EVPS of hereby become a part of the Police Department standard operating
procedures. May activate in a non-emergency situation to enhance the flow of
traffic.



      (3)   City or county maintenance personnel. The county or city
maintenance personnel, or their contractors under written agreement, may
activate the EVPS only when testing or repairing the system. Sirens and
flashing red lights need not be used except when the test vehicle must exceed
the posted speed limits. In such instances, the test must be pre-approved and
coordinated through the Fire Chief.



      (4)   Emergency vehicles not owned or operated by the city.
The use of EVPS within the city by non-city emergency vehicles is allowed if
the emergency vehicle is one that is recognized by the city in which it is
based or which receives approval as in division (C)(3) above. The
participating organization or unit of government shall follow all procedures
prescribed by the city in utilizing the EVPS.



      (5)   Fire Chief designated as the System Control Officer.
Requests for use of the EVPS by other organizations or governmental units and
the conditions required for such use shall be approved yearly by the System
Control Officer.



      (6)   Prohibitions. Except as authorized in this section, it
is unlawful for any person:



         (1)   To activate the EVPS;



         (2)   To use an EVPS emitter; or



         (3)   To operate any motor vehicle containing an EVPS
emitter.



(2013 Code, § 8.07)  (Ord. 533, passed 12-17-1998)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or
provision of this chapter when the person performs an act thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
follows.



      (1)   Misdemeanor. Where the specific section, subdivision,
paragraph, or provision specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, the
person shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed
in a manner or under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger
any person or property the person shall be punished as for a misdemeanor;
where the person stands convicted of violation of any provision of this
chapter, exclusive of violations relating to the standing or parking of an
unattended vehicle, within the immediate preceding 12-month period for the
third or subsequent time, the person shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.



      (2)   Petty misdemeanor. As to any violations not constituting
a misdemeanor under the provisions of division (A)(1) above, the person shall
be punished as for a petty misdemeanor.



      (3)   Adopted by reference. As to any violation of a provision
adopted by reference, the person shall be punished as specified in such
provision, so adopted.



      (4)   Impoundment. Any vehicle used in or during the violation
of any provision of this chapter may be impounded for 60 days in addition to
any other penalty provided in this chapter.



(2013 Code, § 8.99) 



   (B)   Any violation of § 70.07 is a misdemeanor.



(2013 Code, § 8.07)



(Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 141, passed 1-26-1984; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992; Ord. 533, passed 12-17-1998; Ord. 589, passed 1-25-2001)



CHAPTER 71:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



   71.01   Presumption



   71.02   General parking prohibitions



   71.03   Unauthorized removal



   71.04   House trailer, mobile home, camping trailer, and bus parking



   71.05   Parallel parking



   71.06   Angle parking



   71.07   Streets without curbs



   71.08   Parking hours



   71.09   Disabled parking



   71.10   Truck parking



   71.11   Loading zones



   71.12   Parking rules in municipal parking lots and ramps



   71.13   Impounding and removing vehicles



   71.14   Unattended vehicle



   71.15   Vehicle repair on street



   71.16   Parking for the purpose of advertising or selling merchandise



   71.17   Inoperable vehicles



   71.18   Parking during maintenance, snowy weather, and in the
Central Business District



 



   71.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Parking Schedules, see Ch. 74



§ 71.01  PRESUMPTION.



   As to any vehicle parking in violation of Ch. 70, this chapter, and Ch.
90, when the driver thereof is not present, it shall be presumed that the
owner parked the same, or that the driver was acting as the agent of the
owner.



(2013 Code, § 9.01)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)



§ 71.02  GENERAL PARKING PROHIBITIONS.



   It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
specific directions of a police officer or traffic-control device in any of
the following places:



   (A)   On a sidewalk;



   (B)   In front of a public or private driveway;



   (C)   Within an intersection;



   (D)   Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant;



   (E)   On a crosswalk;



   (F)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at any intersection;



   (G)   In a sign-posted fire lane;



   (H)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop
sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;



   (I)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing
except in a parking lot;



   (J)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
75 feet of said entrance when properly sign-posted;



   (K)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when such stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;



   (L)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street;



   (M)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street;



   (N)   At any place where official signs prohibit or restrict
stopping, parking, or both;



   (O)   In any alley, except for loading or unloading and then only so
long as reasonably necessary for such loading and unloading to or from
adjacent premises;



   (P)   On any boulevard which has been curbed; or



   (Q)   Within 20 feet of a mailbox during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.



(2013 Code, § 9.02)  (Ord. 127, passed 8-4-1983; Ord. 681, passed
8-25-2003)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.03  UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL.



   It is unlawful for any person to move a vehicle not owned by such
person into any prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is
unlawful.



(2013 Code, § 9.03)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.04  HOUSE TRAILER, MOBILE HOME, CAMPING TRAILER, AND BUS PARKING.



   It is unlawful for any person to leave or park a house trailer, mobile
home, camping trailer, bus, or other similar recreational vehicle on or
within the limits of any street or right-of-way, except where signs are
erected designating the place as a campsite, for more than 24 consecutive
hours; provided, however, that during such 24-hour period, such vehicle shall
not be occupied as living quarters.



(2013 Code, § 9.04)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.05  PARALLEL PARKING.



   Except where angle parking is specifically allowed and indicated by
curb marking or sign-posting, or both, each vehicle stopped or parked upon a
2-way road where there is an adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with
the right hand wheels of the vehicle parallel with, and within 12 inches of,
the right hand curb, and, where painted markings appear on the curb or the
street, such vehicle shall be within such markings, front, and rear;
provided, that upon a 1-way roadway all vehicles shall be so parked, except
that the left hand wheels of the vehicle may be parallel with and within 12
inches from the left hand curb, but the front of the vehicle in any event and
with respect to the remainder of the vehicle, shall be in the direction of
the flow of traffic upon such 1-way street; and it is unlawful to park in
violation of this section.



(2013 Code, § 9.05)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.06  ANGLE PARKING.



   Where angle parking has been established by Council resolution, and is
allowed, as shown by curb marking or sign-posting, or both, each vehicle
stopped or parked shall be at an angle of approximately 45 to 60 degrees with
the front wheel touching the curb and within any parking lines painted on the
curb or street; provided, that the front wheel not touching the curb shall be
the portion of the vehicle furthest in the direction of 1-way traffic; and it
is unlawful to park in violation of this section.



(2013 Code, § 9.06)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.07  STREETS WITHOUT CURBS.



   Upon streets not having a curb, each vehicle shall be stopped or parked
parallel and to the right of the paving, improved or main traveled part of
the street; and it is unlawful to park in violation of this section.



(2013 Code, § 9.07)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.08  PARKING HOURS.



   (A)   Over 24 hours. It is unlawful for any person to stop, park, or
leave standing any vehicle upon any street for a continuous period in excess
of 24 hours; provided, however, upon showing of undue hardship in individual
cases, the Council may grant modification or exemption from the above upon
notifying the City Engineer, the Street Department, and the Police Department.



   (B)   Designated zones. The Chief of Police may, when authorized by
action of the Council, designate certain streets, blocks, or portions of
streets or blocks as 5-minute, 10-minute, 15-minute, 30-minute, 1-hour,
2-hour, 4-hour, 6-hour, or 8-hour limited parking zones and shall mark by
appropriate signs any zones so established. Such zones shall be established
whenever necessary for the convenience of the public or to minimize traffic
hazards and preserve a free flow of traffic.



(2013 Code, § 9.08)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 107, passed
10-28-1982)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.09  DISABLED PARKING.



   Pursuant to the authority given to the city in M.S. § 626.862, as it
may be amended from time to time, the city’s Community Services Officers
shall be empowered to enforce the parking restrictions of M. S. § 169.346,
as it may be amended from time to time, relating to parking spaces for the
physically disabled by issuing lawful citations to violators.



(2013 Code, § 9.09)  (Ord. 762, passed 6-15-2006)



§ 71.10  TRUCK PARKING.



   (A)   Public property. It is unlawful to park a detached
semi-trailer upon any street, municipally-owned parking lot, or other public
property.



   (B)   Residential district. It is unlawful to park a semi-trailer,
whether or not attached to a truck-tractor, within an area zoned as a
residential district, except for the purpose of loading or unloading the same.



   (C)   Loading zones and alleys. Parking of commercial vehicles is
permitted in duly designated and sign-posted loading zones, and in alleys,
for a period of up to 20 minutes; provided, that such alley parking does not
prevent the flow of traffic, all of which shall be for the purpose of access
to abutting or adjacent property for loading or unloading.



   (D)   Hardship. Upon showing of undue hardship in individual cases
the Council may grant modification or exemption from the above provisions and
shall forthwith notify the City Engineer, the City Street Department, and the
Police Department.



(2013 Code, § 9.30)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 140, passed
12-29-1983)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.11  LOADING ZONES.



   The Council may, by resolution, establish loading zones to be used for
the specific purpose of loading or unloading merchandise from a commercial
vehicle or vehicle temporarily being utilized in the transport of
merchandise. Such loading zones shall be installed by order of the City
Administrator where in the judgment of the Council, a commercial loading zone
is justified and duly sign-posted.



(2013 Code, § 9.31)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)



§ 71.12  PARKING RULES IN MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS AND RAMPS.



   In municipally-owned parking lots and ramps, the Council may limit the
sizes and types of motor vehicles to be parked, hours of parking, and
prescribed method of parking; provided, that such limitations and
restrictions are sign-posted. It is unlawful to park or leave standing any
vehicle backed into a parking place, or to drive in a direction opposite the
flow of traffic marked by 1-way signs or arrows. It is also unlawful to park
any vehicle in any municipally-owned parking lot or ramp contrary to the
restrictions or limitations sign-posted without a permit in writing from the
city.



(2013 Code, § 9.40)  (Ord. 62, passed 6-18-1981)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.13  IMPOUNDING AND REMOVING VEHICLES.



   (A)   When any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street
or municipally-owned parking lot in violation of any parking regulation, such
officer is hereby authorized to require the driver or other person in charge
of such vehicle to remove the same to a position in compliance with this
chapter.



   (B)   When any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any
street or municipally-owned parking lot in violation of any parking
regulation, such officer is hereby authorized to impound such unlawfully
parked vehicle and to provide for the removal and to remove the same to a
convenient garage or other facility or place of safety; provided, that if any
charge shall be placed against such vehicle for cost of removal or storage,
or both, by anyone called upon to assist therewith the same shall be paid
prior to removal from such place of storage or safekeeping.



(2013 Code, § 9.41)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.14  UNATTENDED VEHICLE.



   (A)   Engine running. It is unlawful for any person to leave a motor
vehicle unattended while the engine is running with the key in the ignition.



   (B)   Key in ignition. It is unlawful for any person to leave a
motor vehicle unattended with the key in the ignition.



   (C)   Exception. This section does not apply to police, fire, or
other emergency vehicles.



(2013 Code, § 9.42)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 726, passed
3-24-2005)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.15  VEHICLE REPAIR ON STREET.



   It is unlawful for any person to service, repair, assemble, or
dismantle any vehicle parked upon a street, or attempt to do so, except to
service such vehicle with gasoline or oil or to provide emergency repairs.



(2013 Code, § 9.43)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.16  PARKING FOR THE PURPOSE OF ADVERTISING OR SELLING MERCHANDISE.



   It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on any street for the
purpose of selling merchandise, or advertising any merchandise for sale or a
forthcoming event.



(2013 Code, § 9.44)  (Ord. 174, passed 6-27-1985)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.17  INOPERABLE VEHICLES.



   (A)   Passenger vehicles and trucks in an inoperative state or
without a current license plate registration, shall not be parked in
residential districts for a period exceeding 7 days.



   (B)   INOPERATIVE means incapable of movement under its own power
and in need of repairs.



(2013 Code, § 9.45)  (Ord. 338, passed 8-6-1992)



§ 71.18  PARKING DURING MAINTENANCE, SNOWY WEATHER, AND IN THE CENTRAL
BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   During maintenance. There shall be no parking on any city
street, alley, or public parking lot when all or any of said street, alley,
or public parking lot is designated and/or posted for maintenance work by
proper city officials or employees.



   (B)   Parking restrictions from November 1 through March 31. From
November 1 of each year through March 31 of the following year, no person may
park or leave standing a vehicle on any public street between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., on any day. This restriction does not apply to any
public street located in the area described in division (G) below and Ch. 74,
Schd. I.



   (C)   Snow on public right-of-way. No snow shall be removed from
private property and subsequently deposited on public right-of-way such as,
but not limited to, streets and alleys.



   (D)   Hardship. Upon showing of undue hardship in individual cases,
the Council may grant modification or exemption from the above upon notifying
the City Engineer, the Street Department, and the Police Department.



   (E)   Unlawful act. It is unlawful to park in violation of this
section and Ch. 74, Schd. I(C).



   (F)   Towing. Persons in violation of the parking restrictions
outlined in this section and Ch. 74 shall be tagged and subject to being
towed at their own expense.



   (G)   Parking restrictions during snow emergencies. After a snowfall
of 2 inches or more or upon the declaration of a snow emergency by the City
Administrator:



      (1)   No person may park or leave standing any vehicle on a
snow emergency route until the snow has been plowed on those streets; and



      (2)   Except for the streets in the Central Business District
described in Ch. 74, Schd. I(B), the parking restrictions set forth in
division (B) above, and shall be in effect 24 hours a day until the snow has
been plowed on those public streets.



(2013 Code, § 9.50)  (Ord. 107, passed 10-28-1982; Ord. 127, passed
8-4-1983; Ord. 171, passed 7-4-1985; Ord. 217, passed 5-28-1987; Ord. 281,
passed 2-1-1990; Ord. 321, passed 12-12-1991; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992;
Ord. 346, passed 11-3-1992; Ord. 350, passed 12-10-1992; Ord. 363, passed
10-28-1993; Ord. 364, passed 11-25-1993; Ord. 462, passed 9-26-1996; Ord.
504, passed 11-20-1997; Ord. 560, passed 10-28-1999; Ord. 614, passed
10-25-2001; Ord. 740, passed 10-27-2005; Ord. 770, passed 10-26-2006; Ord.
787, passed 10-25-2007; Ord. 838, passed 9-30-2010; Ord. 849, passed
10-27-2011)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   Every person who violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or
provision of this chapter when the person performs an act thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
follows.



   (A)   Misdemeanor. Where the specific section, subdivision,
paragraph, or provision specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, the
person shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed
in a manner or under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger
any person or property, the person shall be punished for a misdemeanor; where
the person stands convicted of violation of any provision of this chapter,
exclusive of violations relating to the standing or parking of an unattended
vehicle, within the immediate preceding 12-month period for the third or
subsequent time, the person shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.



   (B)   Petty misdemeanor. As to any violation not constituting a
misdemeanor under the provisions of division (A) above, the person shall be
punished as for a petty misdemeanor.



(2013 Code, § 9.99)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



CHAPTER 72:  RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



Section




Snowmobile and All-Terrain Vehicle Traffic Control




   72.01   Definitions



   72.02   Scope of application



   72.03   Operation



   72.04   Special orders



   72.05   Direct crossings



   72.06   Yielding the right-of-way



   72.07   Persons under 18 years of age



   72.08   Equipment



   72.09   Locking vehicles



   72.10   Emergencies



   72.11   Animals



   72.12   Signal from officer to stop




Motorized Golf Carts




   72.25   Purpose



   72.26   Permit; generally, required, and application



   72.27   Designated roadways



   72.28   Times of operation



   72.29   Slow-moving emblem



   72.30   Crossing intersection highways



   72.31   Application of traffic laws



   72.32   Suspension or revocation of permits



 



   72.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Traffic rules, see Ch. 70




SNOWMOBILE AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE TRAFFIC CONTROL




§ 72.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE or ATV. Trail bikes, mini bikes, mopeds, amphibious
vehicles, and similar devices other than snowmobiles used at least partially
for travel on natural terrain but not “special mobile equipment” defined
in M.S.§ 168.002, subd. 31, as it may be amended from time to time, which is
hereby incorporated herein by reference.



   DEADMAN THROTTLE or SAFETY THROTTLE. A device which when pressure is
removed from the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be
disengaged from the driving mechanism.



   NATURAL TERRAIN. Areas other than roadways or driveways (private or
public), parking lots, and other areas the surface of which has been
intentionally modified for motor vehicle operation thereon.



   OPERATE. To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile or
ATV.



   OPERATOR. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of
a snowmobile or ATV.



   OWNER. A person, other than a lienholder having the property in or
title to a snowmobile or ATV entitled to the use or possession thereof.



   SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice
steered by skis or runners.



(2013 Code, § 8.30)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 187, passed 1-30-1986;
Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 72.02  SCOPE OF APPLICATION.



   (A)   Notwithstanding provisions of this subchapter to the contrary,
this section shall apply to control of traffic and regulation of that certain
class of vehicles falling within the definition of snowmobiles or ATV as to
matters set forth herein.



   (B)   All provisions of this subchapter, not relating to matters
herein stated, apply as equally to snowmobiles or ATV as other vehicles.



(2013 Code, § 8.30)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 187, passed 1-30-1986;
Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 72.03  OPERATION.



   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile or ATV not
licensed as a motor vehicle as follows:



   (A)   On the portion of any right-of-way of any public highway,
street, road, trail, or alley used for motor vehicle travel, except as
follows.



      (1)   A snowmobile may operate upon the most right hand lane
of a municipal street or alley and may in passing or making a left hand turn,
operate on other lanes which are used for vehicle traffic in the same
direction only when the snowmobile is traveling directly to or from the
residence of the operator and the nearest lawfully designated snowmobile
trail, and only when traveling at a rate of speed not in excess of 15 mph.



      (2)   A snowmobile may also be operated upon the ditch bottom
or the outside bank of trunk, county state-aid, and county highways where
such highways are so configured within the corporate limits.



      (3)   A snowmobile may operate on Levee Drive and Fuller
Street only if the snowmobile is traveling to or from a lawfully designated
snowmobile trail and the designated snowmobile parking area at 219 West 1st
Avenue.



   (B)   On a public sidewalk or bicycle trail provided for pedestrian
or bicycle travel;



   (C)   On boulevards within any public right-of-way;



   (D)   On private property of another without specific permission of
the owner or person in control of said property;



   (E)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all
surrounding circumstances;



   (F)   At any place in a careless, reckless, or negligent manner or
heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others, or in a manner so
as to endanger or be likely to endanger or cause injury or damage to any
person or property;



   (G)   On any publicly-owned or publicly-controlled property or land,
other than lawfully designated snowmobile trails, except as otherwise allowed
in this subchapter;



   (H)   So as to tow any person or thing except through use of a rigid
towbar attached to the rear of the snowmobile or ATV;



   (I)   At any place while under the influence of alcohol or drugs as
defined in M.S. § 169A.20, as it may be amended from time to time, which is
hereby incorporated herein by reference; and



   (J)   Within 100 feet of any pedestrian, fisherman, skating rink, or
sliding area where the operation would conflict with the use or endanger
other persons or property.



(2013 Code, § 8.30)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 187, passed 1-30-1986;
Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992; Ord. 589, passed 1-25-2001; Ord. 918, passed
10-6-2015)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.04  SPECIAL ORDERS.



   (A)   In addition to the regulations provided in § 72.03, it is
unlawful to operate a snowmobile or ATV on any public place where prohibited
by order of the city.



   (B)   The city shall have the power, by written order, to prohibit
such operation whenever in its discretion the same would be likely to produce
damage to property or endanger the safety or repose of other persons.



   (C)   Such areas shall be appropriately sign-posted before such
order shall become effective.



(2013 Code, § 8.30)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 187, passed 1-30-1986;
Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.05  DIRECT CROSSINGS.



   A snowmobile or ATV may make a direct crossing of a street or highway,
except an interstate highway or freeway, provided:



   (A)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees
to the direction of the street or highway and at a place where no obstruction
prevents a quick and safe crossing;



   (B)   The snowmobile or ATV is brought to a complete stop before
crossing the shoulder or main traveled way;



   (C)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic
which constitutes an immediate hazard;



   (D)   In crossing a divided street or highway, the crossing is made
only at an intersection of such street or highway with another public street
or highway; and/or



   (E)   (1)   If the crossing is made between the hours of 1/2 hour
after sunset to 1/2 hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced
visibility, only if both front and rear lights are on. ATVs not licensed as a
motor vehicle are forbidden to cross highways or streets except when they are
pushed across by human power; and



      (2)   ATVs when pushed across highways or streets shall be
subject to all the regulations of this subchapter.



(2013 Code, § 8.30)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 187, passed 1-30-1986;
Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.06  YIELDING THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   It is unlawful for any person operating a snowmobile to enter any
intersection without yielding the right-of-way to any vehicles or pedestrians
at the intersection, or so close to the intersection as to constitute an
immediate hazard.



(2013 Code, § 8.30)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 187, passed 1-30-1986;
Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.07  PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE.



   (A)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 14
years to operate a snowmobile on streets, in city parks or other public land,
or the roadway surface of highways, or make a direct crossing of a trunk,
county state-aid, or county highway as the operator of a snowmobile.



      (2)   A person 14 years of age or older, but less than 18
years of age, may operate a snowmobile as permitted under this subchapter,
only if that person has in his or her possession, a safety certificate issued
by the Commissioner of Natural Resources as provided by M.S. § 84.872, as it
may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   It is unlawful for the owner of a snowmobile to permit the
snowmobile to be operated contrary to the provisions of this subchapter.



(2013 Code, § 8.30)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 187, passed 1-30-1986;
Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.08  EQUIPMENT.



   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile or ATV any place
within the city unless it is equipped with the following:



   (A)   Standard mufflers that are properly attached and reduce the
noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation. No
person shall use a muffler cut-out, by-pass, straight pipe, or similar device
on a snowmobile or ATV motor;



   (B)   Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and
hold the snowmobile or ATV under any condition of operation;



   (C)   A safety or so-called “deadman” throttle in operating
condition;



   (D)   (1)   When operated between the hours of 1/2 hour after
sunset to 1/2 hour before sunrise or at a time of reduced visibility, at
least 1 clear lamp attached to the front, with sufficient intensity to reveal
persons, and vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead during the
hours of darkness and under normal atmospheric conditions;



      (2)   Such head lamp shall be so aimed that glaring rays are
not projected into the eyes of an oncoming snowmobile or ATV operator; and



      (3)   It shall also be equipped with at least 1 red tail lamp
having a minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to exhibit a red light
plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear during the hours of
darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.



   (E)   Reflective material at least 16 square inches on each side,
forward of the handlebars, or steering device of a snowmobile or ATV and at
the highest practical point on any towed object, as to reflect light at a 90
degree angle.



(2013 Code, § 8.30)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 187, passed 1-30-1986;
Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.09  LOCKING VEHICLES.



   It is unlawful for any person to leave a snowmobile or ATV in a public
place unless that person locks the ignition, removes the key and takes the
same with them.



(2013 Code, § 8.30)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 187, passed 1-30-1986;
Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.10  EMERGENCIES.



   Notwithstanding the prohibition of operating a snowmobile upon a
roadway to the contrary, a snowmobile may be operated on a public
thoroughfare in an emergency during the period of time when, at locations
where, snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile impractical.



(2013 Code, § 8.30)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 187, passed 1-30-1986;
Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.11  ANIMALS.



   It is unlawful to intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any
animal with a snowmobile or ATV.



(2013 Code, § 8.30)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 187, passed 1-30-1986;
Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.12  SIGNAL FROM OFFICER TO STOP.



   It is unlawful for a snowmobile or ATV operator, after having received
a visible or audible signal from any law enforcement officer to come to a
stop, to:



   (A)   Operate a snowmobile or ATV in willful or wanton disregard of
such signal;



   (B)   Interfere with or endanger the law enforcement officer or any
other person or vehicle; or



   (C)   Increase speed or attempt to flee or elude the officer.



(2013 Code, § 8.30)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 187, passed 1-30-1986;
Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 72.99




MOTORIZED GOLF CARTS




§ 72.25  PURPOSE.



   Pursuant to its authority under M.S. § 169.045, as it may be amended
from time to time, the city authorizes the operation of motorized golf carts
on designated roadways as permitted under this subchapter.



(2013 Code, § 8.31)  (Ord. 764, passed 8-3-2006)



§ 72.26  PERMIT; GENERALLY, REQUIRED, AND APPLICATION.



   (A)   Generally. No person may operate a motorized golf cart without
first obtaining a permit from the city.



   (B)   Permit application. Every application for a permit must be
made on a form supplied by the city and must contain the following
information:



      (1)   Date;



      (2)   The name, address, and phone number of the applicant;



      (3)   The roadways on which the motorized golf cart will be
operated;



      (4)   The time of operation of the motorized golf cart; and



      (5)   Such other information as the city may require.



   (C)   Permit; term and conditions.



      (1)   Term. Permits are effective for 1 year from the date of
issuance and may be annually renewed.



      (2)   Conditions of permit.



         (a)   The applicant must provide evidence of insurance
complying with the provisions of M.S. § 65B.48, subd. 5, as it may be
amended from time to time.



         (b)   Applicants not able to obtain liability insurance
in the private market, may purchase automobile insurance, including no-fault
coverage, from the State Automobile Assigned Risk Plan at a rate to be
determined by the Commissioner of Commerce.



(2013 Code, § 8.31)  (Ord. 764, passed 8-3-2006)



§ 72.27  DESIGNATED ROADWAYS.



   Motorized golf carts may be operated on all roadways in the city with a
speed limit of 35 mph or less.



(2013 Code, § 8.31)  (Ord. 764, passed 8-3-2006)



§ 72.28  TIMES OF OPERATION.



   (A)   Motorized golf carts may only be operated on the designated
roadways from sunrise to sunset.



   (B)   They shall not be operated in inclement weather or when
visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog, or other conditions, or at any
time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons and vehicles on
the roadway at a distance of 500 feet.



(2013 Code, § 8.31)  (Ord. 764, passed 8-3-2006)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.29  SLOW-MOVING EMBLEM.



   Motorized golf carts must display the slow-moving emblem as described
in M.S. § 169.522, as it may be amended from time to time, when operated on
designated roadways.



(2013 Code, § 8.31)  (Ord. 764, passed 8-3-2006)



§ 72.30  CROSSING INTERSECTION HIGHWAYS.



   The operator, under permit, of a motorized golf cart may cross any
street or highway at signalized intersections.



(2013 Code, § 8.31)  (Ord. 764, passed 8-3-2006)



§ 72.31  APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC LAWS.



   Every person operating a motorized golf cart under permit on designated
roadways has all the rights and duties applicable to the driver of any other
vehicle under M.S. Ch. 169, as it may be amended from time to time, except
when those provisions cannot reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts
and except as otherwise specifically provided in M.S. § 169.045, subd.7, as
it may be amended from time to time.



(2013 Code, § 8.31)  (Ord. 764, passed 8-3-2006)



§ 72.32  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   The City Council may suspend or revoke a permit if the permittee has
violated any of the provisions of this subchapter or M.S. Ch. 169, as it may
be amended from time to time, or if there is evidence that the permittee
cannot safely operate the motorized golf cart on the designated roadways.



(2013 Code, § 8.31)  (Ord. 764, passed 8-3-2006)



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or
provision of this chapter when the person performs an act thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
follows.



      (1)   Misdemeanor. Where the specific section, subdivision,
paragraph, or provision specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, the
person shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed
in a manner or under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger
any person or property the person shall be punished as for a misdemeanor;
where the person stands convicted of violation of any provision of this
chapter, exclusive of violations relating to the standing or parking of an
unattended vehicle, within the immediate preceding 12-month period for the
third or subsequent time, the person shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.



      (2)   Petty misdemeanor. As to any violations not constituting
a misdemeanor under the provisions of division (A)(1) above, the person shall
be punished as for a petty misdemeanor.



      (3)   Adoption by reference. As to any violation of a
provision adopted by reference, the person shall be punished as specified in
such provision, so adopted.



      (4)   Impoundment. Any vehicle used in or during the violation
of any provision of §§ 72.01 through 72.12 may be impounded for 60 days in
addition to any other penalty provided in this section.



(2013 Code, § 8.99)



   (B)   A violation of §§ 72.25 through 72.32 is a petty misdemeanor.



(2013 Code, § 8.31)



(Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 141, passed 1-26-1984; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992; Ord. 589, passed 1-25-2001)



CHAPTER 73:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULE



Schedule



      I.   Prohibition of persons on wheels other than bicycles



SCHEDULE I.  PROHIBITION OF PERSONS ON WHEELS OTHER THAN BICYCLES.



   (A)   Persons on wheels other than bicycles are prohibited on any
state highway or county road, in the industrial park and on the busiest
streets.



   (B)   These streets are as follows.



 


Street

 

Location





1st Avenue (Highway 101)
 
Its entire length


4th Avenue
 
From Cass to County Road 83


6th Avenue
 
From Holmes Street west to 10th Avenue


10th Avenue
 
West of Harrison


12th Avenue
 
From County Road 83 to Valley Park Drive


13th Avenue
 
East of Bloomington Ferry Bridge Road (County Road 18)


Adams Street (County Road 15)
 
Its entire length


Bloomington Ferry Bridge Road (County Road 18)
 
Its entire length


County Road 14
 
Its entire length


County Road 42
 
Its entire length


County Road 77
 
From Marschall Road (County Road 17) to Spencer Street (County Road 79)


County Road 83
 
NA


Eagle Creek Boulevard (County Road 16)
 
From Marschall Road (County Road 17) to Bloomington Ferry Bridge Road (County
Road 18)


Fuller Street
 
Its entire length


Highway 169
 
Its entire length


Marschall Road (County Road 17)
 
Its entire length


Shenandoah Drive
 
Its entire length


Spencer Street (County Road 79)
 
South of 10th Avenue


Valley Industrial Boulevard
 
Its entire length


Valley Park Drive
 
From 12th Avenue to Highway 101


Vierling Drive
 
Its entire length




 



(2013 Code, § 8.06)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 396, passed
1-12-1995)  Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 74:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Parking during maintenance, snowy weather, and in Central
Business District



SCHEDULE I. PARKING DURING MAINTENANCE, SNOWY WEATHER, AND IN CENTRAL
BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Parking restrictions from November 1 through March 31.



      (1)   From November 1 of each year through March 31 of the
following year, no person may park or leave standing a vehicle on any public
street located west of Marschall Road, north of 10th Avenue, east of County
Road 69, and south of the Minnesota River between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.,except that on even-number calendar days period vehicle parking is
allowed during this time on the even-number address sides of public streets
located in this area, and on odd-numbered calendar days vehicle parking is
allowed during this time on the odd-number address sides of public streets in
this area.



   (B)   Parking hours in the Central Business District.
Notwithstanding any other provision in this division (B), no person may park
or leave standing a vehicle on the following streets in the Central Business
District between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., on any day of the year: 2nd Avenue;
1st Avenue between Sommerville and Fuller Street and Lewis Street; and Holmes
Street and Fuller Street between 3rd Avenue and 1st Avenue.



   (C)   Parking restrictions during snow emergencies. The following
streets are designated as snow emergency routes.



 


Street

 

Location





Either side of 2nd Avenue
 
From Sommerville to Naumkeag Street


3rd Avenue
 
From Harrison Street to Fuller Street


4th Avenue
 
From Fuller Street to County Road 83


6th Avenue
 
From Holmes Street to 10th Avenue


10th Avenue
 
From County Road 69 to Shakopee Avenue


12th Avenue
 
From Adams Street to Taylor Street


12th Avenue
 
From Vierling Drive to Valley Park Drive


Adams Street
 
From 6th Avenue to Vierling Drive


Crossings Boulevard
 
From Foothill Trail to 900 feet north of Hansen Avenue


Dakota Street
 
From 4th Avenue to 10th Avenue


Dean Lakes Boulevard
 
From cul-de-sac to County Road 83


Dean Lakes Trail
 
From Dean Lakes Boulevard to County Road 16


Eagle Creek Boulevard
 
From County Road 17 to County Road 83


Foothill Trail
 
From County Road 16 to Crossings Boulevard


Fuller Street
 
From 1st Avenue to 4th Avenue and 6th Avenue to County Road 78


Gorman Street
 
From 4th Avenue to Marschall Road


Hansen Avenue
 
From Stagecoach Road to County Road 21


Harrison Street
 
From 3rd Avenue to 6th Avenue


Holmes Street
 
From 4th Avenue to 6th Avenue


Independence Drive
 
From 17th Avenue to Valley View Road


Market Street
 
From 1st Avenue to 10th Avenue


Pike Lake Road
 
From County Road 16 to County Road 21


Preserve Trail
 
From County Road 18 to Creek Ridge Court


Sarazin Street
 
From County Road 16 to County Road 101


Sarazin Street
 
From 17th Avenue to Valley View Road


Scott Street
 
From 1st Avenue to 6th Avenue


Shakopee Avenue
 
From 10th Avenue to 11th Avenue


Southbridge Parkway
 
From County Road 21 to County Road 21


Spencer Street
 
From 1st Avenue to 10th Avenue


Stagecoach Road
 
From Preserve Trail to County Road 101


St. Francis Avenue
 
From Marschall Road to Sarazin Street


Taylor Street
 
From Vierling Drive to 12th Avenue


Valley Park Drive
 
From County Road 101 to 12th Avenue


Valley View Road
 
From Sarazin Street to County Road 83


Valley View Road
 
From 17th Avenue East to Evergreen Lane


Vierling Drive
 
From 12th Avenue to Taylor Street




 



(2013 Code, § 9.50)  (Ord. 107, passed 10-28-1982; Ord. 127, passed
8-4-1983; Ord. 171, passed 7-4-1985; Ord. 217, passed 5-28-1987; Ord. 281,
passed 2-1-1990; Ord. 321, passed 12-12-1291; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992;
Ord. 346, passed 11-3-1992; Ord. 350, passed 12-10-1992; Ord. 363, passed
10-28-1993; Ord. 364, passed 11-25-1993; Ord. 462, passed 9-26-1996; Ord.
504, passed 11-20-1997; Ord. 560, passed 10-28-1999; Ord. 614, passed
10-25-2001; Ord. 740, passed 10-27-2005; Ord. 770, passed 10-26-2006; Ord.
787, passed 10-25-2007; Ord. 838, passed 9-30-2010; Ord. 849, passed
10-27-2011; Ord. 946, passed 10-4-2016)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      91.   PARKS AND RECREATION



CHAPTER 90:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section




General Provisions




   90.01   Application



   90.02   Scope and orders of police officer



   90.03   Traffic and parking control



   90.04   Ice and snow on public streets



   90.05   Regulation of grass, weeds, and trees along streets



   90.06   Construction and reconstruction of roadway surfacing,
sidewalks, curbs, and gutters



   90.07   Work in public right-of-way



   90.08   Obstructions, fire, dumping, signs, and other structures



   90.09   Curb and gutter, street, and sidewalk painting or coloring



   90.10   Curb setback



   90.11   Limiting time of railway street crossing obstruction



   90.12   Load limits



   90.13   Requirement of sewer and water and service lateral
installation



   90.14   Streets intersected by railroads



   90.15   Railroad grades



   90.16   Encroachments in easement areas




Right-of-Way Management




   90.30   Findings, purpose, and intent



   90.31   Election to manage the public right-of-way



   90.32   Definitions



   90.33   Administration



   90.34   Utility Coordination Committee



   90.35   Registration; right-of-way occupancy and registration
information



   90.36   Reporting obligations



   90.37   Permits



   90.38   Issuance of permit; conditions



   90.39   Permit fees



   90.40   Right-of-way patching and restoration



   90.41   Joint applications



   90.42   Supplementary applications



   90.43   Other obligations



   90.44   Denial or revocation of permit



   90.45   Installation requirements



   90.46   Inspection



   90.47   Work done without a permit



   90.48   Supplementary notification



   90.49   Revocation of permits



   90.50   Mapping data



   90.51   Undergrounding



   90.52   Relocation of facilities



   90.53   Interference by other facilities



   90.54   Right-of-way vacation; reservation of right



   90.55   Indemnification and liability



   90.56   Abandoned and unusable facilities



   90.57   Appeal



   90.58   Reservation of regulatory and police powers



 



   90.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 90.01  APPLICATION.



   (A)   All drivers. The provisions of this chapter and Title VII
applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the streets shall apply to the
drivers of all vehicles including, but not limited to, those owned or
operated by the United States; this state; or any county, city, town,
district, or any other political subdivision of the state, subject to such
specific exemptions as may be set forth in this chapter and Title VII.



   (B)   Bicycles and animals. Every person riding a bicycle or an
animal or driving any animal drawing a vehicle upon a roadway shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter and Title VII applicable to the
driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which by their nature can have
no application. Provisions specifically referring to bicycles shall be in
addition to other provisions of these chapters applying to vehicles.



(2013 Code, § 7.01)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)



§ 90.02  SCOPE AND ORDERS OF POLICE OFFICER.



   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this chapter and Title VII relate
exclusively to the streets, alleys, and private roads in the city, and the
operation and parking of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation and
parking of vehicles upon such streets, alleys, and private roads.



   (B)   Orders of a police officer. It is a misdemeanor for any person
to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any police officer invested by law with authority to direct, control, or
regulate traffic.



(2013 Code, § 7.02)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.03  TRAFFIC AND PARKING CONTROL.



   (A)   Council action. No device, sign, or signal shall be erected or
maintained for traffic or parking control unless the Council shall first have
approved and directed the same, except as otherwise provided in this section;
provided, that when traffic and parking control is marked or sign-posted,
such marking or sign-posting shall attest to Council action thereon.



   (B)   Temporarily restricting or directing traffic and parking; curb
painting.



      (1)   When clearly marked, barricaded, or sign-posted, traffic
and parking may be temporarily restricted for any public or private use. All
such restrictions shall be in accordance with the uniform policy promulgated
by the City Administrator who may act through the Public Works Director, but
who shall be ultimately responsible to the Council for the proper enforcement
thereof.



      (2)   Restricted or prohibited use of parking and traffic
lanes may be designated by painting the same upon streets and curbs. Such
work shall be done under the direction of the City Administrator and in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and Title VII.



      (3)   It is unlawful to use traffic or parking lanes contrary
to sign-posting or marking authorized and described by this section.



      (4)   Experimental restrictions and directions may be placed
on traffic and parking by the City Administrator, and it shall be the City
Administrator’s duty to do so when an extra-hazardous condition is observed
or arises. It is unlawful to violate any restriction or direction when the
same has been duly marked, barricaded, or sign posted.



(2013 Code, § 7.03)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  ICE AND SNOW ON PUBLIC STREETS.



   (A)   Ice and snow a nuisance. All snow and ice remaining on public
sidewalks is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and shall be
abated by the owner or tenant of the abutting private property within 24
hours after such snow or ice has ceased to be deposited upon property zoned
commercial and within 36 hours after such snow or ice has ceased to be
deposited upon property zoned other than commercial.



   (B)   City to remove snow and ice. The city may cause to be removed
from all public sidewalks, beginning 24 hours after snow or ice has ceased to
fall, all snow and ice which may be discovered thereon, and it shall keep a
record of the cost of such removal and the private property adjacent to which
such accumulations were found and removed.



   (C)   Cost of removal to be assessed. The City Administrator shall,
upon direction of the Council, and on receipt of the information provided for
in division (B) above, extend the cost of such removal of snow or ice as a
special assessment against the lots or parcels of ground abutting on walks
which were cleared, and such special assessments shall at the time of
certifying taxes to the County Auditor be certified for collection as other
special assessments are certified and collected.



   (D)   Civil suit for cost of removal. The City Administrator shall,
in the alternative, upon direction of the Council, bring suit in a court of
competent jurisdiction to recover from the persons owning land adjacent to
which sidewalks were cleared, as provided in division (B) above, the cost of
such clearing and the cost and disbursements of a civil action therefor.



   (E)   City Administrator to report sidewalks cleared. The City
Administrator shall present to the Council at its first meeting after snow or
ice has been cleared from the sidewalks as provided in division (B) above
hereof the report of the city thereon, and shall request the Council to
determine by resolution the manner of collection to be used as provided in
divisions (C) or (D) above.



   (F)   Placing snow or ice in public street or on other city
property. It is a misdemeanor for any person, not acting under a specific
contract with the city, to remove snow from private property or alleys and
place the same on a public street in such quantity, or in such manner, as to
cause a hazard to travel, without adequate arrangements for the immediate
removal thereof; and it is also a misdemeanor for any person not acting under
a contract with the city to dump snow on other city property.



(2013 Code, § 7.04)  (Ord. 263, passed 4-28-1989; Ord. 341, passed
8-27-1992)  Penalty, § 90.99



§ 90.05  REGULATION OF GRASS, WEEDS, AND TREES ALONG STREETS.



   (A)   City to control tree planting (standards). The city shall have
control and supervision of planting shrubs and trees upon, or overhanging,
all streets and other public property. The city may establish and enforce
uniform standards relating to the species and types of trees to be planted,
placement, and the maintenance and removal thereof. Such standards shall be
kept on file in the office of the City Administrator and may be revised from
time to time by action of the Council upon the recommendation of the City
Administrator.



   (B)   Duty of property owners. Every owner of property abutting on
any street shall cause the grass and weeds to be cut from the line of such
property nearest to such street to the center of such street. If the grass or
weeds in such place attain a height in excess of 6 inches it shall be prima
facie evidence of a failure to comply with this division (B). Every owner of
property abutting on any street shall trim, cut, remove, and otherwise
maintain all trees and shrubs located on their property which overhang public
right-of-way, and which create a hazardous condition.



   (C)   City may order work done. The city may in cases of failure to
comply with this section, perform such work with employees of the city,
keeping an accurate account of the cost thereof for each lot, piece, or
parcel of land abutting upon such street.



   (D)   Assessment. If maintenance work described in division (C)
above is performed by the city, the City Administrator shall forthwith upon
completion thereof, ascertain the cost attributable to each lot, piece, or
parcel of abutting land. The City Administrator shall, at the next regular
meeting thereof, present such certificate to the Council and obtain its
approval thereof. When such certificate has been approved, it shall be
extended as to the cost therein stated as a special assessment against such
abutting land and such special assessment shall, at the time of certifying
taxes to the County Auditor, be certified for collection as other special
assessments are certified and collected.



(2013 Code, § 7.05)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 338, passed 8-6-1992;
Ord. 267, passed 1-13-1994; Ord. 403, passed 3-2-1995)



§ 90.06  CONSTRUCTION AND RECONSTRUCTION OF ROADWAY SURFACING, SIDEWALKS,
CURBS, AND GUTTERS.



   (A)   Design criteria and standard specifications. Design criteria
and standard specifications including details shall be fixed, determined, and
amended by the Council and adopted by resolution. Such resolution containing
the effective date thereof shall be kept on file and open to inspection in
the office of the City Administrator and shall be uniformly enforced.



   (B)   Methods of procedure.



      (1)   Abutting or affected property owners may contract for,
construct, or reconstruct roadway surfacing, sidewalk, or curb and gutter in
accordance with this section if advance payment is made therefor or
arrangements for payment considered adequate by the city are completed in
advance.



      (2)   With or without petition by the methods set forth in the
Local Improvement Code of state statutes, presently beginning with M.S. §
429.011, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (C)   Permit required.



      (1)   It is a misdemeanor to construct, reconstruct, or remove
a sidewalk, curb, and gutter, driveway, or roadway surfacing in any street or
other public property in the city without a permit in writing from the Public
Works Director or designee. Application for such permit shall be made on
forms approved and provided by the city and shall sufficiently describe the
contemplated improvements, the contemplated date of beginning of work, and
the length of time required to complete the same; provided, that no permit
shall be required for any such improvement ordered installed by the Council.



      (2)   All applications shall be referred by the City
Administrator to the City Engineer and no permit shall be issued until
approval has been received from the City Engineer. All such applications
shall contain an agreement by the applicant to be bound by this chapter and
plans and specifications consistent with the design criteria and standard
specifications shall be approved by the City Engineer and shall also
accompany the application. A permit from the city shall not relieve the
permit holder from damages to the person or property of another caused by
such work.



      (D)   Inspection. The City Engineer shall inspect roadway
construction and reconstruction. Any work not done according to the approved
design criteria and standard specifications shall be removed and corrected at
the expense of the permit holder. Any work done hereunder may be stopped by
the City Engineer if found to be unsatisfactory or not in accordance with the
design criteria and standard specifications, but this shall not place a
continuing burden upon the city to inspect or supervise such work.



(2013 Code, § 7.06)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 34, passed 11-15-1979;
Ord. 137, passed 10-27-1983)



§ 90.07  WORK IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   Misdemeanor. It is a misdemeanor for any person, except a city
employee acting within the course and scope of the employee’s employment,
or a contractor acting within the course and scope of a contract with the
city, to make any excavation, opening, or tunnel in, over, across, or upon a
street, or other public right-of-way or easement without first having
obtained a written permit from the City Engineer, as herein provided.



   (B)   Application. Application for a permit to work in public
right-of-way shall describe with reasonable particularity the name and
address and phone number of the applicant, the place, the type of work, and
such other information as may be necessary or desirable and shall be filed
with the City Engineer.



   (C)   Fixing rates and charges for permits for work in public
right-of-way. All rates and charges for permits for work in public
right-of-way shall be fixed, determined, and amended by the Council and
adopted by resolution. Such resolution containing the effective date thereof
shall be kept on file and open to inspection in the office of the City
Administrator and shall be uniformly enforced.



   (D)   Protection of the city and the public.



      (1)   Non-completion or abandonment. Work shall proceed
expeditiously to completion in accordance with any time limitation placed
thereon so as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience to the public. In the event
that work is not performed in accordance therewith, or shall cease or be
abandoned without due cause, the city may, after 6 hours’ notice in writing
to the holder of the permit of its intention to do so, correct the work, fill
the excavation, and repair the public property, and the cost thereof shall be
paid by the person holding the permit.



      (2)   Insurance.



         (a)   Prior to the commencement of work described in the
permit application, the applicant shall take out and maintain insurance at
the applicant’s own cost and expense. The insurance shall remain in force
from the commencement of the work continually until final completion of the
work under this permit.



         (b)   The insurance shall be public liability and
property damage insurance and personal injury, including accidental death,
from claims for property damage, as provided by M.S. §§ 466.01 through
466.15, as they may be amended from time to time, which may arise from
operation under this permit, whether such operation be by the applicant or by
anyone directly or indirectly employed by the applicant and including claims
arising by reason of any injury or damage sustained after the applicant has
completed the work or left the site thereof.



         (c)   The public liability insurance shall be in an
amount not less than $1,000,000 for injuries or damages including accidental
death to any 1 person and in the amount of $2,000,000 for any number of
claims out of a single occurrence. The permit shall not be issued until the
insurance has been obtained. Certificates of insurance shall be deposited
with the City Administrator and the insurance shall include general liability
coverage for comprehensive liability coverage, premises-operations explosion
and collapse hazard, underground hazard, and products/completed operations
hazard.



         (d)   Certificates shall be executed by the insurer or
its agent and shall expressly stipulate that the policies are non-cancellable
until after 10 days’ notice in writing to the city and shall be filed with
the City Administrator. Certificates of liability policies must show that the
city is 1 of the parties insured by the applicant. All certificates shall be
submitted prior to issuance of the permit and shall be subject to the
approval of the City Attorney.



         (e)   Public service corporations that are self-insured
are exempt from said insurance requirements providing that each year before
January 30 the said corporations file with the City Administrator a letter
stating that said corporation is currently self-insured.



   (E)   Issuance of permit. The City Engineer shall issue such permit
after the following conditions are met:



      (1)   Permit fees have been established;



      (2)   Payment by the applicant of the permit fee;



      (3)   Agreement by the applicant to the conditions of time and
manner as specified in the permit;



      (4)   Receipt by the city of insurance certificates of
insurance specified in the provisions of this section;



      (5)   Agreement by the applicant, in writing, to guarantee the
work covered by this permit for a period of 2 years;



      (6)   Agreement by the applicant, in writing, to pay all
actual costs of repairs and restoration necessitated by reason of such work
in public right-of-way and subsequent to final inspection of the work and
within 1 year thereafter;



      (7)   Agreement by the applicant, in writing, to save and hold
harmless the city, its employees and agents from any acts arising from the
construction and/or maintenance of the applicant’s facilities or work
covered by the permit; and



      (8)   Agreement by the applicant, in writing, to be bound by
all the provisions in this section.



(2013 Code, § 7.07)  (Ord. 69, passed 11-19-1981; Ord. 87, passed
2-16-1982; Ord. 95, passed 5-27-1982; Ord. 170, passed 6-27-1985; Ord. 337,
passed 7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.08  OBSTRUCTIONS, FIRE, DUMPING, SIGNS, AND OTHER STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Obstructions. It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit,
display, or offer for sale, any fence, goods, or other obstructions upon,
over, across, or under any street or other public property without first
having obtained a written permit from the City Administrator or their
designee, and then only in compliance in all respects with the terms and
conditions of such permit, and taking precautionary measures for the
protection of the public. An electrical cord or device of any kind is hereby
included, but not by way of limitation within the definition of an
obstruction.



   (B)   Fires. It is unlawful for any person to build or maintain a
fire upon a roadway.



   (C)   Dumping in streets. It is unlawful for any person to throw or
deposit in any street or any other public place any nails, dirt, glass, tin
cans, metal scraps, garbage, leaves, grass, or tree limbs, shreds or rubbish,
or to empty any water containing salt or other injurious chemical thereon;
the effect of this division (C) shall extend, but not by way of limitation,
to depositing grease, oil, and other fuel or lubricants in such places and to
place a motor vehicle with essential parts (as defined in state statutes)
removed, except such vehicles as are temporarily disabled for a period not in
excess of 12 hours.



   (D)   Signs and other structures. It is unlawful for any person to
place or maintain a sign or other structure in the traveled or untraveled
portion of any street or other public property without first having obtained
a written permit from the city. In a district zoned for commercial, special
permission allowing an applicant to erect and maintain signs overhanging the
street may be granted upon such terms and conditions as may be set forth in
the zoning or construction provisions of this code of ordinances.



(2013 Code, § 7.08)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 934, passed
6-21-2016)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.09  CURB AND GUTTER, STREET, AND SIDEWALK PAINTING OR COLORING.



   It is unlawful for any person to paint, letter, or color any street,
sidewalk, or curb and gutter for advertising purposes, or to paint or color
any street, sidewalk, or curb and gutter for any purpose, except as the same
may be done by city employees acting within the course or scope of their
employment; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to
uniformly coloring concrete or other surfacing, or uniformly painted house
numbers as such coloring may be approved by the City Administrator.



(2013 Code, § 7.09)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.10  CURB SETBACK.



   (A)   Permit required. It is a misdemeanor for any person to
hereafter remove, or cause to be removed, any curb from its position abutting
upon the roadway to another position without first making application to the
city and obtaining a permit therefor, approved by the Council.



   (B)   Agreement required.



      (1)   No such permit shall be issued until the applicant and
abutting landowner, if other than applicant, shall enter into a written
agreement with the city agreeing to pay all costs of constructing and
maintaining such setback area in at least as good condition as the abutting
roadway, and further agreeing to demolish and remove such setback and
reconstruct the area as was at the expense of the landowner, the
landowner’s heirs, or assigns if the area ever, in the Council’s opinion
becomes a public hazard.



      (2)   Such agreement shall be recorded in the office of the
County Recorder and shall run with the adjoining land.



   (C)   Sign-posting. “Angle Parking Only” signs shall be
purchased from the city and erected and maintained at the expense of the
adjoining landowner in all such setback areas now in use or hereafter
constructed. It is unlawful for any person to park other than at an angle in
such setback areas, as such angle parking is herein described and allowed.



   (D)   Public rights preserved. Such setback parking areas shall be
kept open for public parking and the abutting landowner shall at no time
acquire any special interest or control of or in such areas.



(2013 Code, § 7.10)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.11  LIMITING TIME OF RAILWAY STREET CROSSING OBSTRUCTION.



   It is unlawful for any person operating or in charge of a railroad
train, car, engine, or other railroad equipment, or combination of such
equipment, to permit the same to be parked or left standing upon any street
crossing so as to close such crossing to vehicular traffic for a longer
period than 10 minutes.



(2013 Code, § 7.11)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.12  LOAD LIMITS.



   The City Engineer may, from time to time, impose upon vehicular traffic
on any part or all of the streets such load limits as may be necessary or
desirable. Such limits, and the specific extent or weight to which loads are
limited, shall be clearly and legibly sign-posted thereon. It is unlawful for
any person to operate a vehicle on any street in violation of the limitation
so posted.



(2013 Code, § 7.12)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.13  REQUIREMENT OF SEWER AND WATER AND SERVICE LATERAL INSTALLATION.



   (A)   Requirement of sewer and water laterals. No petition for the
improvement of a street shall be considered by the Council if such petition
contemplates constructing therein any part of a pavement or stabilized base,
or curb and gutter, unless all sewer and water main installations shall have
been made therein, including the installation of service laterals to the
curb, if the area along such street will be served by such utilities
installed in the street unless the installation of utilities is not
practicable at that time.



   (B)   Sewer system service and water main service laterals. No sewer
system shall be hereafter constructed or extended unless service laterals to
platted lots and frontage facing thereon shall be extended simultaneously
with construction of mains.



   (C)   Waiver. The Council may waive the requirements of this section
if it finds the effects thereof are impractical and, at its option, upon such
notice and hearing as the Council may deem necessary or proper.



(2013 Code, § 7.13)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.14  STREETS INTERSECTED BY RAILROADS.



   At all intersections of streets and railroads, the owner of the
railroad shall be responsible for planking or otherwise surfacing the space
between track of the railroad in such a way as to place it on the same grade
or level as the abutting grade or level of the street and to the full width
of such street.



(2013 Code, § 7.14)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)



§ 90.15  RAILROAD GRADES.



   No railroad grade shall, whether it be by raising or lowering the same,
be made without a permit in writing from the city.



(2013 Code, § 7.15)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.16  ENCROACHMENTS IN EASEMENT AREAS.



   (A)   Encroachments prohibited. No trees, shrubs, bushes, retaining
walls, structures, hard surface areas, or other obstructions, with the
exception of shallow root plantings and garden fences, shall be placed within
an easement area held by the city, except if written permission has been
granted by the city and the encroachment is in conformance with the city’s
most recently adopted easement policy. For purposes of this section, a
SHALLOW ROOT PLANTING shall be defined as grass, ground cover, and plants
which are classified as annuals.



   (B)   Exceptions.



      (1)   Shallow root plantings and garden fences are permitted
to be placed within the city easement areas but shall not obstruct access by
city personnel, obstruct drainage, or impede the flow of surface water from
or in any drainage easement.



      (2)   All items allowed in these easement areas are subject to
the requirements of the city’s most recently adopted easement policy.



   (C)   Removal.



      (1)   City staff may require that any shallow root planting,
garden fence, or other obstruction within a city easement area or in
violation of the city’s sight triangle requirements be removed at the
owner’s expense at any time even if written permission has been obtained
for the encroachment.



      (2)   In the event that the plantings or other obstructions
are to be removed by city staff within the easement or sight triangle area
and it is not an emergency situation, city staff shall attempt to provide the
property owner with reasonable notice and an opportunity to remove the items.



      (3)   The city shall not be required to compensate the
property owner for the costs of repair, replacement, or removal of the items.



      (4)   If the items are not removed by the property owner
within the time specified in the notice, or if an emergency situation exists,
representatives of the city may remove these items and may charge the
property owner for any removal expenses incurred. If the removal expenses
remain unpaid, the City Council may assess the property.



   (D)   Enforcement.



      (1)   The requirements set forth in this section shall be
administered and enforced pursuant to the direction of the Public Works
Director of the city. Employees of the city’s Police Department may issue
appropriate removal orders, issue tags for violations, or institute any other
appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator as provided for in this
section.



      (2)   Any violation of an order issued pursuant to this
section by the Public Works Department of the city shall constitute a
violation of this section. Any property owner who violates any provision of
this section, or who fails to comply with any provision, may be prosecuted
and punished in accordance with § 90.99



   (E)   Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision of city staff
regarding the placement or removal of items within the easement or sight
triangle area may appeal such decision to the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals. An appeal must be brought within 30 days of the date of the
decision. After consideration of such appeal, the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals may make such findings and issue such orders as it deems appropriate.



(2013 Code, § 7.18)  (Ord. 780, passed 6-14-2007)  Penalty, see § 90.99




RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT




§ 90.30  FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND INTENT.



   (A)   To provide for the health, safety, and welfare of its
citizens, and to ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use
of the rights-of-way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state
of good repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances.



   (B)   Accordingly, the city enacts this new subchapter relating to
right-of-way permits and administration. This subchapter imposes reasonable
regulation on the placement and maintenance of facilities and equipment
currently within the city's rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some
future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and
federal agencies. Under this subchapter, persons excavating and obstructing
the rights-of-way will bear financial responsibility for their work through
the recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons using the
public rights-of-way.



   (C)   This section shall be interpreted consistently with 1997
Session Laws, Ch. 123, substantially codified in M.S. §§ 237.16, 237.162,
237.163, 237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the "Act"), and 2017 Session laws,
Chapter 94 amending the Act as they may be amended from time to time, and the
other laws governing applicable rights of the city and users of the
right-of-way. This subchapter shall also be interpreted consistent with Minn.
Rules 7819.0050 through 7819.9950 where possible. To the extent that any
provision of this subchapter cannot be interpreted consistently with the
Minn. Rules, the interpretation most consistent with the Act and other
applicable statutory and case law is intended. This section shall not be
interpreted to limit the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt
and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the public.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.31  ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative, and common law, the city elects pursuant M.S. §
237.163, subd. 2(b), as it may be amended from time to time, to manage
rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.32  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
References to “subdivisions” are, unless otherwise specified, references
to subdivisions in this subchapter.



   ABANDONED FACILITY. A facility no longer in service or physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other
facility, that is in use or still catties service. A facility is not
abandoned unless declared so by the right-of-way user.



   APPLICANT. Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way.



   CITY. The City of Shakopee, Minnesota. For purposes of § 90.54, CITY
means its elected officials, officers, employees, and agents.



   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate,
or replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an
existing wireless support structure or utility pole that is owned privately,
or by the city or other governmental unit. (Note: See, M.S. § 237.162, subd.
10)



   COMMISSION. The Minnesota Public Utilities Commission.



   CONGESTED RIGHT-OF-WAY. A crowded condition in the subsurface of the
public right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between
existing underground facilities does not allow for construction of new
underground facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing
lateral facilities in conformance with M.S. § 216D.04, subd. 3, as it may be
amended from time to time, over a continuous length in excess of 500 feet.



   CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND. Any of the following forms of security
provided at permittee's option:



      (1)   Individual project bond;



      (2)   Cash deposit;



      (3)   Security of a form listed or approved under M.S. §
15.73, as it may be amended from time to time;



      (4)   Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city;



      (5)   Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city; and



      (6)   A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other
form of construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to
the city.



   DEGRADATION. A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused
by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the
excavation or disturbance did not occur.



   DEGRADATION COST. Subject to Minn. Rules 7819.1100, means the cost to
achieve a level of restoration as determined by the city at the time the
permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to
13, set forth in Minn. Rules 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.



   DEGRADATION FEE. The estimated fee established at the time of
permitting by the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the
useful life of the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals
the degradation cost.



   DELAY PENALTY. The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays
in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as
established by permit.



   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Works of the city.



   DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR. Any person authorized by the city to carry out
inspections related to the provisions of this subchapter.



   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Public Works of the city,
or the Director's designee.



   EMERGENCY. A condition that:



      (1)   Poses a danger to life or health, or of a significant
loss of property; or



      (2)   Requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities
in order to restore service to a customer.



   EQUIPMENT. Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain
facilities in any right-of-way.



   EXCAVATE. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.



   EXCAVATION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this subchapter, must
be obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An EXCAVATION
PERMIT allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described
in such permit.



   EXCAVATION SUBDIVISION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by an
applicant to cover the costs as provided in § 90.39.



   FACILITY or FACILITIES. Tangible asset in the public right-of-way
required to provide utility service. The term does not include facilities to
the extent the location and relocation of such facilities are preempted by
M.S. § 161.45, as it may be amended from time to time, governing utility
facility placement in state trunk highways.



   FIVE-YEAR PROJECT PLAN. Shows projects adopted by the city for
construction within the next five years.



   HIGH-DENSITY CORRIDOR. A designated portion of the public right-of-way
within which telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and
competing facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a
common conduit system or other common structure.



   HOLE. An excavation in the right-of-way, with the excavation having a
length less than the width of the pavement or adjacent pavement.



   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE. A local person or persons, or designee of such
person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make
decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this
subchapter.



   MANAGEMENT COSTS. The actual costs the city incurs in managing its
rights-of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with
registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way or
small wireless facility permit applications; inspecting job sites and
restoration projects; maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user
facilities during right-of-way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way
restoration; restoring work inadequately performed after providing notice and
the opportunity to correct the work; and revoking right-of-way or small
wireless facility permits. MANAGEMENT COSTS do not include payment by a
telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the right-of-way,
unreasonable fees of a third-party contractor used by the city including fees
tied to or based on customer counts, access lines, or revenues generated by
the right-of-way or for the city, the fees and cost of litigation relating to
the interpretation of State Session Laws 1997, Ch. 123; M.S. §§ 237.162 or
237.163, as they may be amended from time to time, or any ordinance enacted
under those sections, or the city fees and costs related to appeals taken
pursuant to § 90.57.



   OBSTRUCT. To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to
hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.



   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this subchapter, must
be obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder
to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that
right-of-way, for the duration specified therein, including a blanket permit
for a period of time and for types of work specified by the Director, if
deemed appropriate in Director's discretion.



   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by a permittee to cover
the costs as provided in § 90.39.



   PATCH or PATCHING. A method of pavement replacement that is temporary
in nature. A PATCH consists of:



      (1)   The compaction of the sub-base and aggregate base; and



      (2)   The replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a
minimum of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions. A
PATCH is considered full restoration only when the pavement is included in
the city's five-year project plan.



   PAVEMENT. Any type of improved surface that is within the public
right-of-way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous,
concrete, aggregate, or gravel.



   PERMIT. Has the meaning given “right-of-way permit” in M.S. §
237.162, as it may be amended from time to time.



   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way has been granted by the city under this subchapter.



   PERSON. An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this
state, however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or
foreign, whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate, or
political.



   PROBATION. The status of a person that has not complied with the
conditions of this subchapter.



   PROBATIONARY PERIOD. One year from the date the permittee has been
notified in writing that it has been placed on probation.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHT-OF-WAY. Has the meaning given it in M.S.
§ 237.162, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.



   REGISTRANT. Any person who:



      (1)   Has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities located
in any right-of-way; or



      (2)   In any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use,
the right-of-way or place its facilities or equipment in the right-of-way.



   RESTORE or RESTORATION. The process by which an excavated right-of-way
and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the
same condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation.



   RESTORATION COST. The amount of money paid to the city by a permittee
to achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of Minn.
Rules 7819.1100, subp. 1, on file with the Director.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT. Either the excavation permit or the obstruction
permit, or both, depending on the context, required by this subchapter.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY USER.



      (1)   A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by
M.S. § 237.162, Subd. 4, as it may be amended from time to time; or



      (2)   A person owning or controlling a facility in the
right-of-way that is used or intended to be used for providing utility
service, and who has a right under law, franchise, or ordinance to use the
public right-of-way.



   SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE. Includes:



      (1)   “Services provided by a public utility” as defined
in M.S. § 216B.02, subds. 4 and 6, as it may be amended from time to time;



      (2)   Services of a telecommunications right-of-way user,
including transporting of voice or data information;



      (3)   “Services of a cable communications system” as
defined in M.S. § 238.02, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time;



      (4)   Natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications
services provided by a local government unit;



      (5)   Services provided by a cooperative electric association
organized under M.S. Ch. 308A; and



      (6)   Water, sewer, steam, cooling, or heating services.



   SERVICE LATERAL. An underground facility that is used to transmit,
distribute, or furnish gas, electricity, communications, or water from a
common source to an end-use customer. A SERVICE LATERAL is also an
underground facility that is used in the removal of wastewater from a
customer's premises.



   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications:



      (1)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more
than six cubic feet in volume or could fit within such an enclosure; and



      (2)   All other wireless equipment associated with the small
wireless facility provided such equipment is, in aggregate, no more than 28
cubic feet in volume, not including electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding
equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical
cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment
concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or
concealment. (Note: M.S. § 237.162, subd. 11)



   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION. An application made to excavate or obstruct
more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had
already been issued.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY USER. A person owning or controlling a
facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the
right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be used for providing wireless
service, or transporting telecommunication or other voice or data
information. For purposes of this subchapter, a cable communication system
defined and regulated under M.S. Ch. 238, as it may be amended from time to
time, and telecommunication activities related to providing natural gas or
electric energy services, a public utility as defined in M.S. § 216B.02, as
it may be amended from time to time, a municipality, a municipal gas or power
agency organized under M.S. Chs. 453 and 453A, as they may be amended from
time to time, or a cooperative electric association organized under M.S. Ch.
308A, as it may be amended from time to time, are not TELECOMMUNICATIONS
RIGHT-OF-WAY USERS for purposes of this subchapter except to the extent such
entity is offering wireless service.



   TEMPORARY SURFACE. The compaction of sub-base and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of
pavement included in the city's two-year plan, in which case it is considered
full restoration.



   TRENCH. An excavation in the right-of-way, with the excavation having a
length equal to or greater than the width of the pavement or adjacent
pavement.



   TWO-YEAR PROJECT PLAN. Shows projects adopted by the city for
construction within the next two years.



   UTILITY POLE. A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate
telecommunications or electric service. (Note: M.S. § 237.162, subd. 12)



   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables the
provision of wireless services between user equipment and a wireless service
network, including equipment associated with wireless service, a radio
transceiver, antenna, coaxial, or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and a small wireless facility, but not including wireless support
structures, wireline backhaul facilities, or cables between utility poles or
wireless support structures, or not otherwise immediately adjacent to and
directly associated with a specific antenna. (Note: M.S. § 237.162, subd. 13)



   WIRELESS SERVICE. Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless
spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or by means
of a mobile device, that is provided using wireless facilities. Wireless
service does not include services regulated under Title VI of the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including cable service.



   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A new or existing structure in a
right-of-way designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless
facilities, as reasonably determined by the city. (Note: M.S. § 237.162,
subd. 16)



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.33  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Director is the principal city official responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances
related thereto. The Director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.34  UTILITY COORDINATION COMMITTEE.



   The city may create an Advisory Utility Coordination Committee.
Participation on the Committee is voluntary. It will be composed of any
registrants that wish to assist the city in obtaining information and by
making recommendations regarding use of the right-of-way, and to improve the
process of performing construction work therein. The city may determine the
size of such Committee and shall appoint members from a list of registrants
that have expressed a desire to assist the city.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.35  REGISTRATION; RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY AND REGISTRATION INFORMATION.



   (A)   Registration and right-of-way occupancy.



      (1)   Registration generally. Each person who occupies, uses,
or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or
facilities in or on the right-of-way, including persons with installation and
maintenance responsibilities by lease, sub-lease, or assignment, must
register with the city. Registration will consist of providing application
information and paying a registration fee.



      (2)   Registration prior to work. No person may construct,
install, repair, remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any
facilities or any part thereof in any right-of-way without first being
registered with the city.



      (3)   Exceptions.



         (a)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to
repeal or amend the provisions of a city ordinance establishing the rights of
and limitations placed on persons to plant or maintain boulevard plantings or
gardens in the area of the right-of-way between their property and the street
curb.



         (b)   Persons shall not be deemed to use or occupy the
right-of-way, and shall not be required to obtain any permits or satisfy any
other requirements under this subchapter for the following:



            1.   Planting or maintaining boulevard plantings
or gardens;



            2.   Other surface landscaping works;



            3.   Maintenance of driveways and parking lots
unless such maintenance requires excavation work in the right-of-way;



            4.   Construction or maintenance of street
furnishings, bus stop benches, shelters, or posts and pillars;



            5.   Snow removal activities;



            6.   Construction and maintenance of irrigation
systems provided that the system does not connect directly to water mains in
the right-of-way; and



            7.   Nothing herein relieves a person from
complying with the provisions of the M.S. Ch. 216D, as it may be amended from
time to time, also known as the Gopher One-Call Law.



   (B)   Registration information.



      (1)   Information required. The information provided to the
city at the time of registration shall include, but not be limited to:



         (a)   Each registrant's name, address, and e-mail
address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers;



         (b)   The name, address, and e-mail address, if
applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative.
The local representative or designee shall be accessible for consultation at
all times. Current information regarding how to contact the local
representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time of registration;



         (c)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:



            1.   Verifying mat* an insurance policy has been
issued to the registrant by an insurance company authorized to do business in
the state or a form of self insurance acceptable to the city;



            2.   Verifying that the registrant is insured
against claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for
property damage arising out of the:



               A.   Use and occupancy of the right-of-way
by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees, and permittees; and



               B.   Placement and use of facilities and
equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents,
employees, and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection against
liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground
facilities, and collapse of property.



            3.   Either naming the city as an additional
insured as to whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable
and for whom defense will be provided as to all such coverages or otherwise
providing evidence satisfactory to the Director that the city is fully
covered and will be defended through registrant's insurance for all actions
included in Minn. Rules 7819.1250;



            4.   Requiring that the city be notified 30 days
in advance of cancellation of the policy or material modification of a
coverage term; and



            5.   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage,
automobile liability coverage, worker's compensation, and umbrella coverage
established by the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the
public and to carry out the purposes and policies of this subchapter.



            6.   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the
certificate is required to be filed under M.S. § 300.06 as recorded and
certified to by the Secretary of State.



            7.   A copy of the person's order granting a
certificate of authority from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or
other authorization or approval from the applicable state or Federal agency
to lawfully operate, where the person is lawfully required to have such
authorization or approval from said commission or other state or federal
agency.



         (d)   The city may require a copy of the actual
insurance policies if necessary to ensure the Director that the policy
provides adequate third-party claim coverage and city indemnity and defense
coverage for all actions included in the indemnity required by Minn. Rules
7819.1250; and



         (e)   Such evidence as the Director may require that the
person is authorized to do business in the state.



      (2)   Notice of changes. The registrant shall keep all of the
information listed above current at all times by providing to the city
information as to changes within 15 days following the date on which the
registrant has knowledge of any change.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.36  REPORTING OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   Operations.



      (1)   Bach registrant shall, at the time of registration and
by December 1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan
for underground facilities with the city. Such plan shall be submitted using
a format designated by the city and shall contain the information determined
by the city to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in
the frequency of excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way.



      (2)   The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the
following information:



         (a)   The locations and the estimated beginning and
ending dates of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year
(in this section, a “next-year project”); and



         (b)   To the extent known, the tentative locations and
estimated beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the
five years following the next calendar year (in this subchapter, a five-year
project).



      (3)   The term PROJECT in this section shall include both
next-year projects and five-year projects.



      (4)   By January 1 of each year, the city will have available
for inspection in the city's office a composite list of all projects of which
the city has been informed of the annual plans. All registrants are
responsible for keeping themselves informed of the current status of this
list. Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change any project in
its list of next-year projects, and must notify the city and all other
registrants of all such changes in said list. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
a registrant may at any time join in a next-year project of another
registrant listed by the other registrant.



   (B)   Additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the city will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure
to include a project in a plan submitted to the city if the registrant has
used commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.37 PERMITS.



   (A)   Permit required.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person may
obstruct or excavate any right-of-way, or install or place facilities in the
right-of-way, without first having obtained the appropriate right-of-way
permit from the city to do so.



         (a)   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is
required by a registrant to excavate that part of the right-of-way described
in such permit and to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion
of the right-of-way by placing facilities described therein, to the extent
and for the duration specified therein.



         (b)   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is
required by a registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified
portion of the right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the
right-of-way, to the extent and for the duration specified therein. An
obstruction permit is not required if a person already possesses a valid
excavation permit for the same project.



         (c)   Small wireless facility permit. A small wireless
facility permit is required by a registrant to erect or install a wireless
support structure, to collocate a small wireless facility, or to otherwise
install a small wireless facility in the specified portion of the
right-of-way, to the extent specified therein, provided that such permit
shall remain in effect for the length of time the facility is in use, unless
lawfully revoked. (Note: M.S. § 237.163, subd. 13)



      (2)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct
the right-of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless:



         (a)   Such person makes a supplementary application for
another right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit; and



         (b)   A new permit or permit extension is granted,



      (3)   Delay penalty.



         (a)   In accordance with Minn. Rules 7819.1000, subp. 3,
and notwithstanding § 90.31, the city shall establish and impose a delay
penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction,
patching, or restoration.



         (b)   The delay penalty shall be established from time
to time by City Council resolution. A delay penalty will not be imposed for
delays due to force majeure, including inclement weather, civil strife, acts
of God, or other circumstances beyond the control of the applicant.



      (4)   Permit display. Permits issued under this subchapter
shall be conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the
indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the city.



   (B)   Permit applications. Application for a permit is made to the
city. Right-of-way permit applications shall contain, and will be considered
complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the following
provisions:



      (1)   Registration with the city pursuant to this subchapter;



      (2)   Submission of a completed permit application form,
including all required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location
and area of the proposed project and the location of all known existing and
proposed facilities;



      (3)   Payment of money due the city for:



         (a)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs, and
other management costs;



         (b)   Prior obstructions or excavations; or



         (c)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered
by the city because of applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the
rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city;



      (4)   (a)   Payment of disputed amounts due the city by
posting security or depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at
least 100% of the amount owing; and



         (b)   Posting an additional or larger construction
performance bond for additional facilities when applicant requests an
excavation permit to install additional facilities and the city deems the
existing construction performance bond inadequate under applicable standards.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.38  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the
requirements of this subchapter, the city shall issue a permit.



   (B)   Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the
right-of-way and its current use. In addition, a permittee must comply with
all requirements of local, state and federal laws, including but not limited
to M.S. §§ 216D.01 through 216D.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice
System) and Minn. Rules Ch. 7560.



   (C)   Small wireless facility purpose and findings.



      (1)   The city desires high quality services to accommodate
the needs of residents and businesses. At the same time, the city strives to
minimize the negative impacts that small wireless facilities can create.
These negative impacts include, but are not limited to, interference with
right-of-way user sight lines, impacts to right-of-way user circulation,
incompatible aesthetics with the surrounding area, fall zone risk, clear zone
risk, creating navigation obstacles, interference with future travel way
expansion plans, interference with the delivery of other utility services,
interference with stormwater management facilities, and increased noise
pollution. To minimize these negative impacts, the city will consider impacts
to the public health, safety, and welfare when reviewing a small wireless
permit application and a request to enter into a small wireless facility
collocation agreement. The public health, safety, and welfare can be best
accommodated by locating small wireless facilities in the following order,
which affords the greatest protection of the public:



         (a)   Locate outside of the right-of-way.



         (b)   Locate in the right-of-way on or adjacent to
principal arterial, other arterial, or major/minor collector roads, as
classified by the metropolitan council functional classification system.



         (c)   Collocate on existing wireless support structures
within the right-of-way.



         (d)   Locate on a new wireless support structure within
the right-of-way that replaces an existing wireless support structure of the
same height.



         (e)   Locate on a new wireless support structure within
the right-of-way that replaces an existing wireless support structure whose
height is less than or equal to 50 feet.



         (f)   Locate on a new wireless support structure within
the right-of-way whose height is similar to nearby structures.



         (g)   Locate on a new wireless support structure within
the right-of-way whose height is less than or equal to 50 feet.



      (2)   The city will also consider factors such as aesthetic
compatibility of the small wireless facility with surrounding structures,
ability to eliminate, underground, or screen ground-mounted equipment,
dangers within the small wireless facility fall zone, distance of the small
wireless facility from roads, sidewalks, trails and bicycle lanes, and future
roadway, pedestrian, bicycle, water, wastewater, and stormwater improvement
plans for the site before issuing small wireless facility permit or entering
into a standard small wireless facility collocation agreement.



   (D)   Small wireless facility conditions. In addition to divisions
(B) and (C) above, the erection or installation of a wireless support
structure, the collocation of a small wireless facility, or other
installation of a small wireless facility in the right-of-way shall be
subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on
the particular wireless support structure, under those attachment
specification, and at the height indicated in the applicable permit
application.



      (2)   No new wireless support structure installed within the
right-of-way shall exceed 50 feet in height above ground level without the
city's written authorization, provided that the city may impose a lower
height limit in the applicable permit to protect the public health, safety
and welfare or to protect the right-of-way and its current use, and further
provided that a registrant may replace an existing wireless support structure
exceeding 50 feet in height with a structure of the same height subject to
such conditions or requirements as may be imposed in the applicable permit.



      (3)   No wireless facility may extend more than ten feet above
its wireless support structure.



      (4)   Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless
support structure in the right-of-way, a 600 feet minimum separation is
required between such structure and any existing wireless support structure
or other facilities in and around the right-of-way.



      (5)   Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative
wireless support structure, sign or other structure not intended to support
small wireless facilities, the city may impose reasonable requirements to
accommodate the particular design, appearance or intended purpose of such
structure.



      (6)   Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless
support structure, the city may impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or
relocation requirements on the replacement of such structure. The diameter of
the new wireless support structure that replaces an existing wireless support
structure shall not exceed the diameter of the existing wireless support
structure by more than 50%.



      (7)   The small wireless facility shall have limited exposed
cabling and mounting hardware. It shall also match the wireless support
structure it is attached to in color and, as close as practicable, in
material and design.



      (8)   The small wireless facility shall not interfere with
public safety wireless telecommunications.



      (9)   A small wireless facility attached to an existing
wireless support structure shall not block light emanating from the wireless
support structure and shall not otherwise interfere with the original use or
intent of the wireless support structure.



      (10)   Ground mounted equipment associated with the small
wireless facility is prohibited unless the applicant can show that
ground-mounted equipment is necessary for operation of the small wireless
facility. If ground-mounted equipment is necessary, it shall comply with
other provisions of the city ordinance and the following:



         (a)   Ground-mounted equipment shall be placed below
grade unless not technically feasible;



         (b)   Ground-mounted equipment shall not disrupt traffic
or pedestrian circulation and shall not interfere with vehicle and pedestrian
intersection sight lines and clear zones;



         (c)   Ground-mounted equipment shall not create a safety
hazard;



         (d)   If placed above grade, ground-mounted equipment
shall be separated from the nearest ground-mounted equipment on the same
block by a minimum of 330 feet unless the equipment is placed underground, or
unless waived by the Director;



         (e)   If placed above grade, ground-mounted equipment
shall be limited to three feet in height and 28 cubic feet in cumulative size.



      (11)   Exemptions. No small wireless facility permit is
required to conduct the following activities in the right-of-way:



         (a)   Routine maintenance of small wireless facility;



         (b)   Replacement of a small wireless facility that is
substantially similar or smaller in size, weight, height, and wind or
structural loading that the small wireless facility being replaced; or



         (c)   Installation, placement, maintenance, operation,
or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables
strung between existing utility poles in compliance with national safety
codes. (Note: M.S. § 237.163, subd. 3b)



   (E)   Small wireless facility agreement. A small wireless facility
shall only be collocated on a small wireless support structure owned or
controlled by the city, or any other city asset in the right-of-way, after
the applicant has executed a standard small wireless facility collocation
agreement with the city. The standard collocation agreement may require
payment of rent and maintenance associated with the collocation. Electric
service will not be provided by the city. The standard collocation agreement
shall be in addition to, and not lieu of, the required small wireless
facility permit, provided, however, that the applicant shall not be
additionally required to obtain a license or franchise in order to collocate.
Issuance of a small wireless facility permit does not supersede, alter or
affect any then-existing agreement between the city and applicant. (Note:
M.S. § 237.163, subd. 6(g))



   (F)   Action on small wireless facility permit application.



      (1)   Deadline for action. The city shall approve or deny a
small wireless facility permit application within 90 days after filing of
such application. The small wireless facility permit and any associated
building permit application, shall be deemed approved if the city fails to
approve or deny the application within the review periods established in this
section.



      (2)   Consolidated applications.



         (a)   An applicant my file a consolidated small wireless
facility permit application addressing the proposed collocation of up to 15
small wireless facilities or a greater number if agreed to by a local
government unit, provided that all small wireless facilities in the
application:



            1.   Are located within a two-mile radius;



            2.   Consist of substantially similar equipment;
and



            3.   Are to be placed on similar types of wireless
support structures.



         (b)   In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit
application, the city may approve some small wireless facilities and deny
others, but may not use denial of one or more permits as a basis to deny all
small wireless facilities in the application.



      (3)   Tolling of deadline. The 90-day deadline for action on a
small wireless facility permit application may be tolled if:



         (a)   The city receives applications from one or more
applicants seeking approval of permits for more than 30 small wireless
facilities within a seven-day period. In such case, the city may extend the
deadline for all such applications by 30 days by informing the affected
applicants in writing of such extension.



         (b)   The applicant fails to submit all required
documents or information and the city provides written notice of
incompleteness to the applicant within 30 days of receipt of the application.
Upon submission of additional documents or information, the city shall have
ten days to notify the applicant in writing of any still-missing information.



         (c)   The city and a small wireless facility applicant
agree in writing to toll the review period. (Note: M.S. § 237.163, subd. 3c)



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.39  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Fee schedule and fee allocation. The city's permit fee
schedule shall be available to the public and established in advance where
reasonably possible. The permit fees shall be designed to recover the city's
actual costs incurred in managing the right-of-way and shall be based on an
allocation among all users of the right-of-way, including the city.



   (B)   Excavation permit fee. The city shall impose an excavation
permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:



      (1)   The city management costs; and



      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.



   (C)   Obstruction permit fee. The city shall impose an obstruction
permit fee and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the city
management costs.



   (D)   Small wireless facility fee. The city shall impose a small
wireless facility permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover:



      (1)   Management costs, and;



      (2)   City engineering, make-ready, and construction costs
associated with collocation of small wireless facilities.



   (E)   Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction
permit shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit
fees. The city may allow the applicant to pay such fees within 30 days of
billing, or on some other payment plan agreed to by the Director at the
Director's discretion.



   (F)   Non-refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that
the city has revoked for a breach as stated in § 90.49 are not refundable.



   (G)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a
franchise, management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to
the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.40  RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.



   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and
the patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under §
90.43.



   (B)   Patch and restoration. The permittee must patch its own work.
The city may choose either to have the permittee restore the surface and
subgrading portions of the right-of-way or to restore the surface portion of
the right-of-way itself.



      (1)   City restoration. If the city restores the surface
portion of the right-of-way, the permittee shall pay the costs thereof within
30 days of billing. If, following such restoration, the pavement settles due
to the permittee's improper backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city,
within 30 days of billing, all costs associated with correcting the defective
work.



      (2)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the
right-of-way itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation
permit, post a construction performance bond in accordance with the
provisions of Minn. Rules 7819.3000.



      (3)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of
right-of-way restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation
fee, however, the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for replacing
and compacting the subgrade and aggregate based material in the excavation
and the degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these
responsibilities.



   (C)   Standards. The permittee shall perform patching and
restoration according to the standards and with the materials specified by
the city and shall comply with Minn. Rules 7819.1100.



   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects
in patching, restoration performed by permittee or its agents. Upon
notification from the city, the permittee shall correct all restoration work
to the extent necessary, using the method required by the city. Unless
otherwise agreed to by the Director, said work shall be completed within five
calendar days of receipt of the notice from the city, not including days
during which work cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force
majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under
§ 90.43.



   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the
right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or
fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the
city, the city shall notify the permittee in writing of the specific alleged
failure or failures and shall allow the permittee ten days from receipt of
said written notice to cure said failure or failures, unless otherwise
extended by the Director. In the event the permittee fails to cure, the city
may at its option perform the necessary work and permittee shall pay to the
city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If
permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its rights under
the construction performance bond.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.41  JOINT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits
to excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.



   (B)   Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same
obstruction or excavation, which the city does not perform, may share in the
payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee. In order to obtain a
joint permit, registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each
will pay and indicate the same on their applications.



   (C)   With city projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled
obstruction or excavation performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint
application by two or more registrants or a single application, are not
required to pay the excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the
permit fee, but a permit would still be required.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.42  SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Limitation on area.



      (1)   A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the
right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside
the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein.



      (2)   Any permittee which determines that an area greater than
that specified in the permit must be obstructed or excavated must before
working in that greater area:



      (a)   Make application for a permit extension and pay any
additional fees required thereby; and



      (b)   Be granted a new permit or permit extension.



   (B)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for
the dates specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the
permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the
end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it
must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs and receive the
new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the end
date of the previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted
before the permit end date.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.43  OTHER OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   Compliance with other laws.



      (1)   Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not relieve
permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and
authority and to pay all fees required by the city or other applicable rule,
law, or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of local,
state, and federal laws, including but not limited to, M.S. §§ 216D.01
through 216D.09, as they may be amended from time to time, (Gopher One-Call
Excavation Notice System) and Minn. Rules 7560.



      (2)   A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with
all applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is
responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit,
regardless of who does the work.



   (B)   Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval
of the city, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when
seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.



   (C)   Interference with right-of-way. A permittee shall not so
obstruct a right-of-way that the natural free and clear- passage of water
through the gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with, unless
otherwise approved by the Director. Private vehicles of those doing work in
the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit area, unless
parked in conformance with city parking regulations. The loading or unloading
of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area unless
specifically authorized by the permit.



   (D)   Trenchless excavation. As a condition of all applicable
permits, permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including but
not limited to horizontal directional drilling, shall follow all requirements
set forth in M.S. Ch. 216D, as it may be amended from time to time, and Minn.
Rules 7560, and shall require potholing or open cutting over existing
underground utilities before excavating, as determined by the Director.
Trenchless excavations deeper than five feet will not be permitted without
written approval from the Director.



   (E)   Traffic control. A permittee shall implement traffic-control
measures in the area of the work and shall use traffic-control procedures in
accordance with the most recent manuals on uniform traffic-control,
traffic-control devices, and traffic zone layouts published by the state.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.44  DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Reasons for denial. The city may deny a permit for failure to
meet the requirements and conditions of this subchapter or if the city
determines that the denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and
welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use.



   (B)   Procedural requirements. The denial or revocation of a permit
must be made in writing and must document the basis for the denial. The city
must notify the applicant or right-of-way user in writing within three
business days of the decision to deny or revoke a permit. If an application
is denied, the right-of-way user may address the reasons for denial
identified by the city and resubmit its application. If the application is
resubmitted within 30 days of receipt of the notice of denial, no additional
application fee shah be imposed. The city must approve or deny the
resubmitted application within 30 days after submission. (Note: M.S. §
237.163, subds. 4(c) and 5(f))



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.45  INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The excavation, backfilling, patching, and restoration, and
all other work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance
with Minn. Rules 7819.1100 and other applicable local requirements, in so far
as they are not inconsistent with the M.S. §§ 237.162 and 237.163, as they
may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Installation of service laterals shall be performed in
accordance with Minn. Rules Ch. 7560 and this subchapter. Service lateral
installation is further subject to those requirements and conditions set
forth by the city in the applicable permits, city specifications, city design
criteria, and agreements referenced in § 90.50.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.46  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder
is completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in
accordance with Minn. Rules 7819.1300.



   (B)   Site inspection. The permittee shall make the work-site
available to the city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection
at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the
work.



   (C)   Authority of Director.



      (1)   At the time of inspection, the Director may order the
immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life,
health, safety, or well-being of the public.



      (2)   The Director may issue an order to the permittee to
correct any work that does not conform to the terms of the permit or other
applicable standards, conditions, or code. If the work failure is a
“substantial breach” within the meaning of M.S. § 237.163, Subd. 4(c),
as it may be amended from time to time, the order shall state that failure to
correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit after a
specified period determined by the Director. The permittee shall present
proof to the Director that the violation has been corrected within the time
period set forth by the Director in the order. Such proof shall be provided
no later than the next business day following the day of completion. If such
proof has not been presented within the required time, the Director may
revoke the permit pursuant to § 90.49.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.47  WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   (A)   Emergency situations.



      (1)   Each registrant shall immediately notify the Director of
any event regarding its facilities that the registrant considers to be an
emergency. The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary
to respond to the emergency. Excavators' notification to Gopher State
One-Call regarding an emergency situation does not fulfill this requirement.
Within two business days after the occurrence of the emergency the registrant
shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and
fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into
compliance with this subchapter for the actions it took in response to the
emergency.



      (2)   If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a
registrant's facilities, the city will attempt to contact the local
representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the
emergency. In any event, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary
to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the
registrant whose facilities occasioned the emergency.



   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person
who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or
excavates a right-of-way, must subsequently obtain a permit, pay an
unauthorized work permit fee in an amount established from time to time by
the City Council, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any
damage to the right-of-way, and comply with all of the requirements of this
subchapter.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.48  SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.



   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or
ends sooner than the date given on the permit, the permittee shall notify the
city of the accurate information as soon as this information is known.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.49  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   (A)   Substantial breach.



      (1)   The city reserves its right to revoke any right-of-way
permit, without a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach of the terms
and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material
condition of the permit.



      (2)   A substantial breach by permittee shall include, but
shall not be limited to, the following:



         (a)   The violation of any material provision of the
right-of-way permit;



         (b)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material
provision of the right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to
perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;



         (c)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the
application for a right-of-way permit;



         (d)   The failure to complete the work in a timely
manner; unless a permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to
complete work is due to reasons beyond the permittee's control; or



         (e)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work
that does not conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to
§ 90.46(C)(2).



   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the
permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any
statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or any condition of the permit, the
city shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation.
The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation
of the permit. A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city to
place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy
the breach.



   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within a time established by the
Director following the permittee's receipt of notification of the breach, the
permittee shall provide the city with a plan to cure the breach, acceptable
to the city. The permittee's failure to submit a timely and acceptable plan,
or the permittee's failure to timely implement the approved plan, shall be
cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further, the permittee's
failure to contact the city, or the permittee's failure to submit an
acceptable plan, or the permittee's failure to reasonably implement the
approved plan, may result in probation for up to one full year.



   (D)   Cause for probation. The city may establish a list of
conditions of the permit, that if breached, will be grounds to place tire
permittee on probation. The city shall not enforce a probation program unless
and until it has established such conditions, which it may amend from time to
time.



   (E)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the
permittee shall also reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs,
including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred in connection with such revocation.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.50  MAPPING DATA.



   (A)   Information required. Each registrant and permittee shall
provide mapping information in a form required by the city in accordance with
Minn. Rules 7819.4000 and 7819.4100. Within 90 days following completion of
any work pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall provide the Director
accurate maps and drawings certifying the “as-built” location of all
equipment installed, owed, and maintained by the permittee. Such maps and
drawings shall include the horizontal and vertical location of all facilities
and equipment and shall be provided consistent with the city's electronic
mapping system, when practical or as a condition imposed by the Director.
Failure to provide maps and drawings pursuant to this division (A) shall be
grounds for revoking the permit holder's registration.



   (B)   Service laterals.



      (1)   All permits issued for the installation or repair of
service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minn. Rules
7560.0150, subp. 2, shall require the permittee's use of appropriate means of
establishing the horizontal locations of installed service laterals and the
service lateral vertical locations in those cases where the Director
reasonably required it.



      (2)   Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to the
Director evidence satisfactory to the Director of the installed service
lateral locations. Compliance with this division (B) and with applicable
Gopher State One-Call law and Minn. Rules governing service laterals
installed after December 31, 2005 shall be a condition of any city approval
necessary for:



         (a)   Payments to contractors working on a public
improvement project including those under M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended
from time to time; and



         (b)   City approval of performance under development
agreements, or other subdivision or site plan approval under M.S. Ch. 462, as
it may be amended from time to time. The Director shall reasonably determine
the appropriate method of providing such information to the city. Failure to
provide prompt and accurate information on the service laterals installed may
result in the revocation of the permit issued for the work or for future
permits to the offending permittee or its subcontractors.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.51  UNDERGROUNDING.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The purpose of this section is to promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of the public and is intended to foster:



         (a)   Safe travel over the right-of-way;



         (b)   Non-travel related safety around homes and
buildings where overhead feeds are connected; and



         (c)   Orderly development in the city. Location and
relocation, installation and reinstallation of facilities in the right-of-way
must be made in accordance with this division (A).



      (2)   This section intended to be enforced consistently with
state and federal law regulating right-of-way users, specifically including
but not limited to M.S. §§ 161.45, 222.37, 237.162, 237.163, 238.084,
216B.36, and 301B.01, and Minn. Rules 7819.3100, 7819.5000, and 7819.5100, as
they may be amended from time to time, and the Telecommunications Act of
1996,47 U.S.C. § 253, to the extent the rules do not limit authority
otherwise available to cities.



   (B)   Undergrounding of facilities. Facilities newly installed,
constructed, or otherwise placed in the public right-of-way or in other
public property held in common for public use must be located and maintained
underground pursuant to the terms and conditions of this subchapter and in
accordance with applicable construction standards, subject to the exceptions
below. Above-ground installation, construction, modification, or replacement
of meters, gauges, transformers, street lighting, pad mount switches,
capacitor banks, re-closers, and service connection pedestals shall be
allowed. The requirements of this division (B) shall apply equally outside of
the corporate limits of the city coincident with city jurisdiction of
platting, subdivision regulations, or comprehensive planning as may now or in
the future be allowed by law.



   (C)   Exceptions to undergrounding. The following exceptions to the
strict application of this section shall be allowed upon the conditions
stated.



      (1)   Transmission lines. Above-ground installation,
construction, or placement of those facilities commonly referred to as
“high voltage transmission lines” upon which a conductor's normal
operating voltage equals or exceeds 23,000 volts (phase to phase) shall be
allowed only by prior approval of the Council; provided, however, that 60
days prior to commencement of construction of such a project, the city shall
be furnished notice of the proposed project and, upon request, the
right-of-way user involved shall furnish all relevant information regarding
such project to the city. This provision shall not be construed as waiving
the requirements of any other ordinance or regulation of the city as the same
may apply to any such proposed project.



      (2)   Technical and economic feasibility. Above-ground
installation, construction, or placement of facilities shall be allowed in
residential, commercial, and industrial areas where the Council, following
consideration and recommendation by the Planning Commission, finds that:



         (a)   Underground placement would place an undue
financial burden upon the landowner, ratepayers, or right-of-way user or
would deprive the landowner of the preservation and enjoyment of substantial
property rights; or



         (b)   Underground placement is impractical or not
technically feasible due to topographical, sub-soil, or other existing
conditions which adversely affect underground facilities placement.



      (3)   Temporary service. Above-ground installation,
construction, or placement of temporary service lines shall only be allowed:



         (a)   During new construction of any project for a
period not to exceed 24 months;



         (b)   During an emergency in order to safeguard lives or
property within the city; and



         (c)   For a period of not more than seven months when
soil conditions make excavation impractical.



   (D)   Undergrounding of permanent replacement, relocated, or
reconstructed facilities.



      (a)   If the city finds that one or more of the purposes set
forth in division (A) above would be promoted, the city may require a
permanent replacement, relocation, or reconstruction of a facility of more
than 300 feet to be located, and maintained underground, with due regard for
seasonal working conditions. For purposes of this subchapter, reconstruction
means any substantial repair of or any improvement to existing facilities.



      (b)   Undergrounding may be required whether a replacement,
relocation, or reconstruction is initiated by the right-of-way user owning or
operating the facilities, or by the city in connection with:



         1.   The present or future use by the city or other
local government unit of the right-of-way or other public ground for a public
project;



         2.   The public health or safety; or



         3.   The safety and convenience of travel over the
right-of-way.



   (E)   Retirement of overhead facilities. The City Council may
determine whether it is in the public interest that all facilities within the
city, or facilities within certain districts designated by the city, be
permanently placed and maintained underground by a date certain or target
date, independently of undergrounding required pursuant to division (B) above
(new facilities) and division (D) above (replacement facilities). The
decision to underground must be preceded by a public hearing, after published
notice and written notice to the utilities affected (two weeks published: 30
days written). At the hearing, the Council must consider items in division
(G) below and make findings. Undergrounding may not take place until City
Council has, after hearing and notice, adopted a plan containing items in
division (H) below.



   (F)   Public hearings. A hearing must be open to the public and may
be continued from time to time. At each hearing any person interested must be
given an opportunity to be heard. The subject of the public hearings shall be
the issue of whether facilities in the right-of-way in the city, or located
within a certain district, shall all be located underground by a date
certain. Hearings are not necessary for the undergrounding required under
divisions (B) and (D) above.



   (G)   Public hearing issues.



      (1)   The issues to be addressed at the public hearings
include, but are not limited to:



         (a)   The costs and benefits to the public of requiring
the undergrounding of all facilities in the right-of-way;



         (b)   The feasibility and cost of undergrounding all
facilities by a date certain as determined by the city and the affected
utilities;



         (c)   The tariff requirements, procedure, and rate
design for recovery or intended recovery of incremental costs for
undergrounding by the utilities from ratepayers within the city; and



         (d)   Alternative financing options available if the
city deems it in the public interest to require undergrounding by a date
certain and deems it appropriate to participate in the cost otherwise borne
by the ratepayers.



      (2)   Upon completion of the hearing or hearings, the City
Council must make written findings on whether it is in the public interest to
establish a plan under which all facilities will be underground, either
city-wide or within districts designated by the city.



   (H)   Undergrounding plan.



      (1)   If the Council finds that it is in the public interest
to underground all or substantially all facilities in the public right-of-way
or in non-right-of-way public ground, the Council must establish a plan for
such undergrounding.



      (2)   The plan for undergrounding must include at least the
following elements:



         (a)   Timetable for the undergrounding;



         (b)   Designation of districts for the undergrounding
unless the undergrounding plan is city-wide;



         (c)   Exceptions to the undergrounding requirement and
procedure for establishing such exceptions;



         (d)   Procedures for the undergrounding process,
including, but not limited to, coordination with city projects and provisions
to ensure compliance with nondiscrimination requirements under the law;



         (e)   A financing plan for funding of the incremental
costs if the city determines that it will finance some of the undergrounding
costs, and a determination and verification of the claimed additional costs
to underground incurred by the utility; and



         (f)   Penalties or other remedies for failure to comply
with the undergrounding.



   (I)   Facilities location.



      (1)   (a)   In addition to complying with the requirements
of M.S. §§ 216D.01 through 216D.09, as they may be amended from to time
(“One-Call Excavation Notice System”), before the start date of any
right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has facilities located in the
area to be excavated shall mark the horizontal placement of all said
facilities.



         (b)   To the extent its records contain such
information, each registrant shall provide information regarding the
approximate vertical location of its facilities to excavators upon request.



         (c)   Nothing in this division (I) is meant to limit the
rights, duties, and obligations of facility owners or excavators as set forth
in M.S. §§ 216D.01 through 216D.09, as they may be amended from to time.
Any right-of-way user whose facility is less than 20 inches below a concrete
or asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with the excavation
contractor in an effort to establish and mark the exact horizontal and
vertical location of its facility and the best procedure for excavation.



      (2)   All facilities shall be placed in appropriate portions
of right-of-way so as to cause minimum conflict with other underground
facilities. When technically appropriate, all utilities shall be installed,
constructed, or placed within the same trench.



   (J)   Limitation of space. To protect the health, safety, and
welfare, or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use,
the city shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or
additional facilities within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the
city shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and
potential users of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by
considerations of the public interest, the public's needs for particular
utility service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with
respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the
right-of-way, and future city plans for public improvements and development
projects which have been determined to be in the public interest.



   (K)   Responsibility. All owners, platters, or developers are
responsible for complying with the requirements of this section, and prior to
final approval of any plat or development plan, shall submit to the Director
written instruments from the appropriate right-of-way users showing that all
necessary arrangements with said users for installation of such facilities
have been made.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.52  RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   A right-of-way user shall promptly and at its own expense, with due
regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently remove and relocate its
facilities in the right-of-way when it is necessary to prevent interference,
and not merely for the convenience of the city, in connection with:



   (A)   A present or future city use of the right-of-way for a public
project;



   (B)   The public health or safety; or



   (C)   The safety and convenience of travel over the right-of-way.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.53  INTERFERENCE BY OTHER FACILITIES.



   When the city does work in the right-of-way in its governmental
right-of-way management function and finds it necessary to maintain, support,
or move a registrant's facilities to carry out the work without damaging
registrant's facilities, the city shall notify the local representative as
early as is reasonably possible. The city costs associated therewith will be
billed to that registrant and must be paid within 30 days from the date of
billing. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any
facilities in the right-of-way which it or its facilities damages.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.54  RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION; RESERVATION OF RIGHT.



   If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains the facilities of a
registrant, the registrant's rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed
by Minn. Rules 7819.3200.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.55  INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.



   By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this
subchapter, a registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city
in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rules 7819.1250.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.56  ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE FACILITIES.



   (A)   Discontinued operations. A registrant who has determined to
discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the city must provide
information satisfactory to the city that the registrant's obligations for
its facilities in the right-of-way under this subchapter have been lawfully
assumed by another registrant.



   (B)   Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any
right-of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way if required in
conjunction with other right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.57  APPEAL.



   (A)   A right-of-way user that:



      (1)   Has been denied registration;



      (2)   Has been denied a permit;



      (3)   Has had permit revoked;



      (4)   Believes that the fees imposed are not in conformity
with M.S. § 237.163, subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to time; or



      (5)   Disputes a decision of the Director regarding the
mapping data required by § 90.50 may have the denial, revocation, decision,
or fee imposition reviewed, upon written request, go to the City
Administrator.



   (B)   The City Council shall act on a timely written request at its
next regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by the City Council affirming
the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and supported by
written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.58  RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.



   A permittee's or registrant's rights are subject to the regulatory and
police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary
to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or
provision of this chapter when the person performs an act thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
follows.



      (1)   Misdemeanor. Where the specific section, subdivision,
paragraph, or provision specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, the
person shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed
in a manner or under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger
any person or property, the person shall be punished as for a misdemeanor;
where the person stands convicted of violation of any provision of this
chapter, exclusive of violations relating to the standing or parking of an
unattended vehicle, within the immediate preceding 12-month period for the
third or subsequent time, the person shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.



      (2)   Petty misdemeanor. As to any violation not constituting
a misdemeanor under the provisions of division (A)(1) above, the person shall
be punished as for a petty misdemeanor.



   (B)   Each day that any person continues in violation of § 90.08
shall be a separate offense, and punishable as such.



(Ord. 971, passed 10-3-2017)



CHAPTER 91:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



   91.01   Parks defined



   91.02   Activity scheduled in parks



   91.03   Regulations



 



   91.99   Penalty



§ 91.01  PARKS DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARK or PARKS. A park, parkway, greenway, trail, playground, greenway,
athletic field, swimming pool, recreation center, or other area in the city,
owned, leased, or used, wholly or in part, by the city for recreational
purposes and for such uses that are normally associated with parks.



(2013 Code, § 14.01)  (Ord. 862, passed 12-27-2012)



§ 91.02  ACTIVITY SCHEDULED IN PARKS.



   The city parks are intended for the benefit of all. To facilitate
maximum, uniform and orderly usage of park facilities, the City Parks,
Recreation, and Natural Resources Department is delegated as the agency to
coordinate and schedule the use of park areas and facilities.



(2013 Code, § 14.02)  (Ord. 862, passed 12-27-2012)



§ 91.03  REGULATIONS.



   The following regulations shall apply to all city parks unless
otherwise specified.



   (A)   Speed laws. It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor
vehicle in any park at a speed in excess of 15 mph except an emergency
vehicle.



   (B)   Parking. It is unlawful for any person other than park
personnel to park any motor vehicle in any place in a public park except in
designated areas or to operate any motor vehicle in any place except on
established roads, driveways, or parking areas.



   (C)   Hours. It is unlawful for any person to be or remain in any
park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except those who, without
delay, are traveling through the parks on established walks, paths, or
streets, or are in activities that have been scheduled through the Parks,
Recreation, and Natural Resources Department. Overnight parking in any park
is prohibited without specific approval from the City Parks, Recreation, and
Natural Resources Department or the City Police Department.



   (D)   Camping. No person shall set up tents, shacks, or any other
temporary shelter, nor shall any person leave in any park after closing hours
any movable structure or special vehicle such as a house trailer, camp
trailer, camp wagon, or the like, without permission of the Parks,
Recreation, and Natural Resources Department.



   (E)   Building of fires. It is unlawful for any person to light or
make fires in any park except in places and in containers intended for such
purposes. This division (E) does not apply to city employees engaged in
cleaning, maintaining the areas, or special events.



   (F)   Firearms or bow and arrows. It is unlawful for any person or
persons to discharge any firearm in a park without first securing specific
approval from City Parks, Recreation, and Natural Resources Department and a
permit from the Chief of Police. This division (F) shall not apply to the use
of a bow and arrow in a range authorized by the Council.



   (G)   Littering. It is unlawful for any person to cast, deposit,
throw, lay, place, or scatter any lighted or unlighted cigars or cigarettes,
chewing gum, chewing gum wrappers, glass, bottles, cans, nails, wire,
crockery, or other sharp or cutting substances, or any refuse matter of any
kind anywhere, except in refuse containers provided for this purpose. Live
charcoal coals and ashes shall be deposited only in containers designated for
this purpose.



   (H)   Swimming and bathing. Swimming and bathing will be permitted
only in designated and posted areas.



   (I)   Dangerous games. It is unlawful for any person to play any
game dangerous to the welfare of other persons and property excepting in
areas provided for this purpose.



   (J)   Vandalism. It is unlawful for any person to write upon, skate
upon, mark, destroy, or otherwise deface in any way any property or thing
pertaining to or in said parks. It is also unlawful for any person to paste
or affix or inscribe any handbill or poster on any structure or property
within any park or on any road or roadway adjacent thereto, or to break, cut,
mutilate, injure, remove, or carry away any tree, plant, flower, shrub, rock,
soil, or any other park property except in the case of city personnel engaged
in maintenance and development thereof.



   (K)   Control of pets. Except as otherwise allowed in a
city-approved off leash dog park, no pets shall be allowed in any park except
when they are under control on a leash or confined. It is unlawful for any
person to ride a horse or other animal within a city park, or to disturb or
interfere with any wildlife. The person having control of the leashed pet
shall immediately remove any feces left by the pet. The person in control of
the pet must have in their possession equipment for picking up and removing
the feces.



   (L)   Sales; solicitation; advertising. It is unlawful for any
person or persons other than city personnel to solicit, sell, or offer any
article, product, or service in any park without a permit from City Parks,
Recreation, and Natural Resources Department.



   (M)   Tennis courts. It is unlawful for any person to ride bicycles,
scooters, skateboards, rollerblades/skates, or any other vehicle on the
tennis court or drive them thereon or use the courts for any other purpose
than playing tennis without specific permission from City Parks, Recreation
and Natural Resources Department.



   (N)   Ice skating rinks. Ice hockey will only be permitted on rinks
posted for hockey. No hockey sticks or pucks, sleds, or toboggans shall be
allowed on any other park rink. No vehicles of any kind excepting those used
by city personnel will be allowed on any skating area.



   (O)   Alcoholic beverages. It is unlawful for any person to serve,
possess, or consume liquor except beer or wine (included in this exception is
beer which contains in excess of 3.2% of alcohol by weight) in any area of a
city park except in a picnic, grandstand, or shelter area or where permission
has been specifically granted or licensed by the Council; to possess a beer
keg or serve or consume beer from a beer keg unless a special permit has been
obtained from the Parks, Recreation, and Natural Resources Department.



   (P)   Wildlife. It is unlawful for any person, except authorized
city personnel, to kill, hunt, trap, pursue, catch, or remove any wildlife,
other than fish, except as may be authorized through a permit.



   (Q)   Structures. It is unlawful for any person to construct or
place any type of structure including but not limited to, trampolines, deer
stands, ground blinds, playhouses, treehouses, temporary storage buildings,
motorcycle or bicycle launches, temporary shelters, tents, or other such
devices upon park land without a permit.



   (R)   Encroachments. It is unlawful for any person to encroach on
park property with such items as fences, gardens, lawn/yard waste, other
personal property, or to disturb the natural landscape, vegetation, or
structures on park property or otherwise use park property for private use.
All setbacks and other local zoning regulations are in effect and apply
against properties adjacent to city parks as they would be against property
adjacent to private property.



   (S)   Golf. It is unlawful for any person to drive, putt, or in any
other manner, play or practice golf in a city park.



   (T)   Parades and races. For parades and races, see § 130.47.



   (U)   Permits.



      (1)   A permit shall be obtained from the City Parks,
Recreation, and Natural Resources Department before participating in any
organized activity.



      (2)   Some examples are the following Insurance requirements
may apply.



         (a)   Carnivals;



         (b)   Community celebrations or events open to the
public;



         (c)   Parades;



         (d)   Amplified or live music;



         (e)   Large barbeques (i.e., pig roasts);



         (f)   Dunk tanks;



         (g)   Weddings;



         (h)   Inflatables;



         (i)   Car shows;



         (j)   Contests and exhibitions, including, among other
things, those that require exclusive use or charging admission; and



         (k)   Wildlife/animals.



      (3)   The proposed activity or use shall not be contrary to
the policies and guidelines for community use of parks and recreation rental
facilities as determined by the City Parks, Recreation, and Natural Resources
Department. This division (U) does not apply to city-run events.



   (V)   Motorized vehicles. It is unlawful for any person or persons
to operate a motor vehicle in any area other than a street, roadway, or
parking area; or operate any recreational motor vehicle in an area other than
an area designated by the city. This division (V) does not apply to city
employees engaged in cleaning or maintaining the areas.



(2013 Code, § 14.03)  (Ord. 73, passed 9-10-1981; Ord. 202, passed
7-1-1986; Ord. 862, passed 12-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or provision
of this chapter when that person performs an act thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a
misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.



(2013 Code, § 14.99)  (Ord. 73, passed 9-10-1981; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   GENERAL LICENSING, PERMIT, AND INSPECTION PROCEDURES



      111.   CONSTRUCTION LICENSING



      112.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



      113.   PAWNBROKERS, PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS, AND SECOND-HAND
DEALERS



      114.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



      115.   COMMERCIAL AMUSEMENTS



      116.   MASSAGE PARLORS



CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL LICENSING, PERMIT, AND INSPECTION PROCEDURES



Section




General Provisions




   110.001   Definitions



   110.002   Applications



   110.003   Action on application for license



   110.004   Carrying or posting



   110.005   License required



   110.006   Responsibility of licensee



   110.007   Conviction of crime; denial of license



   110.008   Conditional licenses



   110.009   Fixing license fees



   110.010   Insurance requirements



   110.011   Posting and distributing printed matter



   110.012   Scavengers



   110.013   Lodging tax




Taxicabs and Drivers




   110.025   Definitions



   110.026   Taxicab license required



   110.027   Application for taxicab license



   110.028   Reserved



   110.029   Issuance of taxicab licenses



   110.030   Bond of insurance



   110.031   Taxicab license fee



   110.032   Transferability



   110.033   Suspension, revocation, and administrative penalties of
taxicab license



   110.034   Taxicab driver’s license



   110.035   Vehicle inspection



   110.036   Taximeter required



   110.037   Rate schedule and cards



   110.038   Receipts



   110.039   Refusal to pay legal fees



   110.040   Receipt and discharge of passengers



   110.041   Number of passengers



   110.042   Refusal to carry passengers



   110.043   Manifests




Tobacco, Tobacco Products, and Tobacco-Related Devices




   110.055   Purpose



   110.056   Definitions and interpretations



   110.057   License   



   110.058   Basis for denial of license



   110.059   Prohibited sales



   110.060   Vending machines



   110.061   Self-service merchandising



   110.062   Responsibility



   110.063   Compliance checks and inspections



   110.064   Other illegal acts



   110.065   Violations



   110.066   Exceptions and defenses



   110.067   Amendment




Fairs, Carnivals, Circuses, Shows, and Similar Enterprises




   110.080   Definitions



   110.081   General license required



   110.082   Electrical permit required



   110.083   Inspection required



   110.084   Rules



   110.085   Cessation order



   110.086   Insurance



   110.087   Exemptions



   110.088   Waiver of inspection



   110.089   Violations




Bleachers and Reviewing Stands




   110.100   Definitions



   110.101   Inspection required



   110.102   Inspection; certificate and fee




Ski Lifts, Amusement Rides, And Amusement Attractions




   110.115   Definitions and interpretations



   110.116   License required



   110.117   Cessation order



   110.118   Violations




Horse and Carriage Livery Service




   110.130   Subchapter applicability



   110.131   Definition



   110.132   Permit required



   110.133   Vehicle operation



   110.134   Driver of vehicle



   110.135   Maintenance of animals



   110.136   Sanitation



   110.137   City streets



   110.138   Hours of operation



   110.139   Loading zones



   110.140   Rates



   110.141   Operation of certain vehicles prohibited in certain areas



   110.142   Unlawful act




Pet Store Licensing




   110.155   Purpose



   110.156   Pet store license required



   110.157   License application



   110.158   License fee



   110.159   License application execution, verification, and
consideration



   110.160   Persons and locations ineligible for a license



   110.161   Health and welfare regulations



   110.162   Sanctions for license violations



   110.163   License regulations



   110.164   Pet store license fee




Mobile Food Units




   110.185   Purpose



   110.186   Definition



   110.187   License applications



   110.188   Conditions of licensing



   110.189   Suspension or revocation of a license



   110.190   Penalty



 



   110.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 110.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICATION. A form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in and
completed by the applicant as a request for a license, furnished by the city,
and uniformly required as a prerequisite to the consideration of the issuance
of a license for a business.



   BOND. A corporate surety document in the form and with the provisions
acceptable and specifically approved by the City Attorney.



   BUSINESS. Any activity, occupation, sale of goods or services, or
transaction that is either licensed or regulated, or both licensed and
regulated, by the terms and conditions of this chapter.



   LICENSE. A document issued by the city to an applicant permitting the
applicant to carry on and transact a business.



   LICENSE FEE. The money paid to the city pursuant to an application and
prior to issuance of a license to transact and carry on a business.



   LICENSEE. An applicant who, pursuant to the licensee’s application,
holds a valid, current, unexpired, and unrevoked license from the city for
carrying on a business.



   SALE.SALE, SELL, and SOLD mean all forms of barter and all manner or
means of furnishing merchandise to persons.



(2013 Code, § 6.01)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 110.002  APPLICATIONS.



   All applications shall be made as follows.



   (A)   Form. All applications shall be made at the office of the City
Administrator upon forms that have been formulated by the city for such
purposes.



   (B)   Fee. All initial applications shall be accompanied by a
payment of a fee as prescribed by the most recent fee resolution to cover the
cost of investigation as herein provided.



   (C)   Contents. All such applications must be subscribed, sworn to,
and include, but not be limited to, the following:



      (1)   Applicant’s name and citizenship;



      (2)   Applicant’s present address and length of time the
applicant has lived at that address;



      (3)   Applicant’s occupation and length of time so engaged;



      (4)   Applicant’s addresses and occupations for the 3 years
next preceding the date of application;



      (5)   Names and addresses of applicant’s employers, if any,
for the 3 years next preceding the date of application;



      (6)   Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of
a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor, including violation of a
municipal ordinance but excluding traffic violations, and if so, the date and
place of conviction and the nature of the offense;



      (7)   Type of license and location of premises for which the
application is made;



      (8)   At least 4 character references if the applicant has not
resided in the city for 2 years next preceding the date of application; and



      (9)   Such other information as the Council shall deem
necessary considering the nature of the business for which the license
application is made.



   (D)   False statements. It is unlawful for any applicant to
intentionally make a false statement or omission upon any application form.
Any false statement in such application, or any willful omission to state any
information called for on such application form, shall, upon discovery of
such falsehood work an automatic refusal of license, or if already issued,
shall render any license or permit issued pursuant thereto, void, and of no
effect to protect the applicant from prosecution for violation of this
chapter, or any part hereof.



   (E)   Investigation. The City Administrator shall, upon receipt of
each application completed in accordance herewith, forthwith investigate the
truth of statements made therein and the moral character and business
reputation of each applicant for license to such extent as the City
Administrator deems necessary. For such investigation, the City Administrator
may enlist the aid of the Chief of Police. The Council shall not consider an
application before such investigation has been completed.



   (F)   Renewals. Applications for renewal licenses may be made in
such abbreviated form as the Council may by resolution adopt.



(2013 Code, § 6.02)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992;
Ord. 393, passed 12-15-1994)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.003  ACTION ON APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Granting. The Council may grant any application for the period
of the remainder of the then current calendar year or for the entire ensuing
license year. The City Clerk may grant an application for the licensing of an
individual who works in a business licensed as a pawnshop, precious metal
dealer, or second-hand goods dealer. All applications, including proposed
license periods, must be consistent with this chapter.



   (B)   Issuance.



      (1)   If an application is approved, the City Administrator
shall forthwith issue a license pursuant thereto in the form prescribed by
the Council upon proof of ownership, payment of the appropriate license fee,
and approval of the bond or insurance as to form and surety or carrier, if
required. All licenses shall be on a calendar-year basis beginning January 1
and ending December 31. Unless otherwise herein specified, license fees shall
be pro-rated on the basis of 1/12 for each calendar month, or part thereof
remaining in the then current license year.



      (2)   Licenses shall be valid only at 1 location and on the
premises therein described. In order to effectuate the change in license
year, the City Administrator is hereby authorized to credit the applicant for
any unearned portion of a license fee, or charge a pro-rated amount only. No
license shall be granted for operation on any premises upon which taxes,
assessments, or installments thereof, or any financial claims of the city are
owed by the applicant and are delinquent and unpaid.



   (C)   Transfer. A license shall be transferable between persons upon
consent of the Council and payment of the investigation fee. No license shall
be transferable to a different location without prior consent of the Council
and upon payment of the fee for a duplicate license. It is unlawful to make
any transfer in violation of this division (C).



   (D)   Termination. Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or
revocation.



   (E)   Refusal, suspension, and revocation. The Council may, for any
reasonable cause, refuse to grant any application, or revoke any license. No
license shall be granted to a person of questionable moral character or
business reputation. Before revocation or suspension of any license, the
Council shall give notice to the licensee and grant such licensee opportunity
to be heard. Notice to be given and the exact time of hearing shall be stated
in the resolution calling for such hearing.



   (F)   Duplicate license. Duplicates of all original licenses may be
issued by the City Administrator, without action by the Council, upon the
licensee’s affidavit that the original has been lost, and upon payment of a
fee of $2 for issuance of the duplicate. All duplicate licenses shall be
clearly marked “DUPLICATE”.



(2013 Code, § 6.03)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 79, passed 11-26-1981;
Ord. 444, passed 2-22-1996)



§ 110.004  CARRYING OR POSTING.



   All transient merchants, peddlers, and solicitors shall at all times
when so engaged, carry their license on their person. All other licensees
shall post their licenses in their place of business near the licensed
activity; provided, however, that in the case of machine or other device
licensing, the city may provide a sticker for the current license year which
shall be affixed to each machine or device requiring such sticker. All
licensees shall display their licenses upon demand by any officer or citizen.



(2013 Code, § 6.04)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)



§ 110.005  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any real property
owned or controlled by that person to be used, without a license, for any
business for which a license is required by this chapter.



(2013 Code, § 6.05)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.006  RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE.



   The conduct of agents and employees of a person to whom a license or
permit is issued shall be deemed the conduct of the licensee.



(2013 Code, § 6.06)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 110.007  CONVICTION OF CRIME; DENIAL OF LICENSE.



   A license may be denied to an applicant by the Council solely or in
part due to a prior conviction of a crime by an applicant only upon a finding
that such conviction directly relates to the occupation for which the license
is sought, and then only after considering evidence of rehabilitation and
such other evidence as may be presented, all in accordance with state
statutes; provided, however, that an applicant must show that the applicant
is presently fit to perform the occupation for which the license is sought.



(2013 Code, § 6.07)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 110.008  CONDITIONAL LICENSES.



   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Council may,
upon a finding of the necessity therefor, place such conditions and
restrictions upon a license as it, in its discretion, may deem reasonable and
justified.



(2013 Code, § 6.08)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)



§ 110.009  FIXING LICENSE FEES.



   Except as otherwise herein provided, all fees for licenses under this
chapter shall be fixed and determined by the Council, adopted by resolution,
and uniformly enforced. Such license fees may, from time to time, be amended
by the Council by resolution. A copy of the resolution setting forth
currently effective license fees shall be kept on file in the office of the
City Clerk, and open to inspection during regular business hours. For the
purpose of fixing such fees, the Council may subdivide and categorize
licenses under a specific license requirement; provided, that any such
subdivision or categorization shall be included in the resolution authorized
by this section.



(2013 Code, § 6.09)  (Ord. 79, passed 11-26-1981)



§ 110.010  INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   Whenever insurance is required by a section of this chapter, after
approval by the Council, but before the license shall issue, the applicant
shall file with the City Clerk a policy or certificate of public liability
insurance showing:



   (A)   The limits are at least as high as required;



   (B)   Coverage is effective for at least the license term approved;
and



   (C)   Such insurance will not be canceled or terminated without 30
days’ written notice served upon the City Clerk. Cancellation or
termination of such coverage shall be grounds for license revocation.



(2013 Code, § 6.10)  (Ord. 199, passed 7-10-1986)



§ 110.011  POSTING AND DISTRIBUTING PRINTED MATTER.



   (A)   On public property. It is unlawful for any person to post or
leave printed matter upon streets or other public property, including utility
poles.



   (B)   On motor vehicles. It is unlawful for any person to post,
attach, or leave upon, any motor vehicle not owned by that person, any
printed matter, without the permission of the owner or other person in
control of such property.



(2013 Code, § 6.20)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.012  SCAVENGERS.



   (A)   Scavenger defined. SCAVENGER means a person, partnership, or
corporation in the business of removing the contents or part of the contents
of any privy, sink, satellite, vault, septic tank, grease, and sand trap,
cesspool, or other similar facility.



   (B)   Regulations. It is unlawful for any person to follow or
practice the occupation of scavenger or act as a scavenger within the city
without strictly observing the following regulations.



      (1)   No discharge of waste from septic tanks or other similar
facilities listed above shall be made in the city unless such discharge is
made at a site previously approved by the Council, and the prescribed fee for
such dumping or discharge paid to the city. The fee will be set from time to
time by the Council. No discharge of any of the materials or substances
listed in division (A) above shall be made into the city sewer system
directly or indirectly at any time.



      (2)   No part of the contents of any such sanitary sewage
facility shall be transported into and deposited within the city, nor shall
the contents of any such facility be transported within or throughout the
city unless it is removed and transported by means of an air-tight apparatus,
pneumatic, or otherwise, so as to prevent the contents from being agitated or
exposed to open air in the process of removal or transportation.



      (3)   Any tank, vehicle, or other apparatus used in the
transporting of the contents from any such facility must be maintained and
operated in such a manner as to avoid the emission of offensive fumes or the
spilling or loss of any unsanitary offensive substance.



      (4)   It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit any
vehicle used for scavenger hauling to stand or remain at or near any public
building or any residence or apartment, upon any street, highway, or other
public place for any longer period of time than is actually required in the
loading, conveying and unloading of the contents thereof.



      (5)   Any person, partnership, or corporation violating any of
the provisions hereof shall pay for any damages to the city sewer system as a
result of the discharge of any of the materials above enumerated and for any
of the maintenance cost in removing or flushing those materials out of the
pipe and sewer system.



(2013 Code, § 6.43)  (Ord. 16, passed 1-25-1978; Ord. 88, passed
2-25-1982)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.013  LODGING TAX.



   (A)   Local lodging tax adopted.



      (1)   The Council hereby imposes a lodging tax of 3% on the
gross receipts obtained from the furnishing for consideration of lodging at a
hotel, motel, rooming house, tourist court, or resort, except where such
facilities are leased or rented for a continuous period of 30 days or more.



      (2)   Bed and breakfast inns are not subject to this tax.



   (B)   Report and payment of tax.



      (1)   Any person subject to the lodging tax imposed hereby
shall report the gross receipts hereinbefore referred to the city within 15
days of the end of the month when collected and said report shall be
accompanied by payment in full.



      (2)   If the report and payment of the tax is not made within
15 days as herein provided, an automatic fine of $100 is hereby imposed in
addition to the tax and which is to be paid when the tax is paid.



   (C)   Records preserved for inspection. Complete records of all such
gross receipts, collections, and remittances shall be preserved for a period
of 1 year and shall during said year be open to inspection and audit by the
city.



   (D)   Collection authorized. In addition to any other penalty, the
city may collect by legal action, any delinquent tax, plus 6% interest
thereon and the cost of collection, including reasonable attorney’s fees.



   (E)   Disposition of proceeds. Ninety-five percent of the gross
proceeds from the tax imposed hereby shall be used by the city to fund a
local convention or tourist bureau for the purpose of marketing and promoting
the city as a tourist or convention center and 5% shall be used for the
administration of this section.



(2013 Code, § 6.44)  (Ord. 212, passed 1-15-1987; Ord. 216, passed
4-23-1987; Ord. 269, passed 8-11-1989; Ord. 283, passed 8-17-1990; Ord. 349,
passed 12-15-1992; Ord. 370, passed 2-10-1994; Ord. 441, passed 12-28-1995)




TAXICABS AND DRIVERS




§ 110.025  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   RATE CARD. A card issued by the city for display in each taxicab which
contains the rates of fare then in force.



   TAXICAB. A motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying
passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of no more than 7 passengers,
and not operated on a fixed route. Also, it may include the carrying of small
parcels and packages.



   TAXIMETER. A meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which
measures mechanically the distance driven and the waiting time upon which the
fare is based.



(2013 Code, § 6.22)  (Ord. 147, passed 6-14-1984; Ord. 199, passed
7-10-1986; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 110.026  TAXICAB LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate or permit a taxicab
owned or controlled by that person to be operated as a vehicle for hire upon
the streets of the city without having first obtained a license from the
city, except as otherwise permitted under this subchapter.



   (B)   Any taxicab license to operate in another political
subdivision of this state may carry passengers to any place or point within
the city, but neither the owner nor operator of such vehicle shall be
permitted to solicit or pick up business within the city except:



      (1)   Where a return trip to the political subdivision in
which the taxicab is licensed has been previously arranged; or



      (2)   When a taxicab is called into the city by a fare that
wishes to be taken to a political subdivision in which the taxicab is
licensed. The Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport - Wold Chamberlain
Field - shall be deemed a political subdivision for the purposes of this
subchapter.



   (C)   There shall be a presumption that the owner or operator of any
taxicab not licensed in the city who carries or picks up passengers within
the city is operating in violation of this subchapter, and the burden shall
be upon the owner or operator of such taxicab to prove that the activities in
question are permitted under the exceptions provided in division (B) above.



(2013 Code, § 6.22)  (Ord. 147, passed 6-14-1984; Ord. 199, passed
7-10-1986; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.027  APPLICATION FOR TAXICAB LICENSE.



   Applications shall be filed with the City Clerk upon forms provided,
and said application shall furnish the following:



   (A)   The name, date of birth, and address of the applicant;



   (B)   The financial status of the applicant, including the amounts
of all unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the
transaction or acts giving rise to said judgment;



   (C)   The experience of the applicant in the transportation of
passengers;



   (D)   Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that
public convenience and necessity require the granting of a license;



   (E)   The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the
applicant, the location of proposed depots and terminals, the owner of said
vehicles, and the license number of each vehicle;



   (F)   The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the
vehicle or vehicles of the applicant;



   (G)   A statement signed by the applicant indicating the
applicant’s understanding that falsification of any item on the application
is sufficient reason upon which to base a denial of said license or
termination thereof; and



   (H)   Such further information as the Council may require.



(2013 Code, § 6.22)  (Ord. 147, passed 6-14-1984; Ord. 199, passed
7-10-1986; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 110.028  RESERVED.



§ 110.029  ISSUANCE OF TAXICAB LICENSES.



   (A)   If the Council finds that further taxicab service in the city
is desirable for the public convenience and necessity and that the applicant
is fit, willing, and able to perform such public transportation and to
conform to the provisions of this subchapter, the Council shall grant a
license stating the name and address of the applicant and the number of
vehicles authorized under said license; otherwise, the application shall be
denied.



   (B)   In making the above findings, the Council shall take into
consideration the number of taxicabs already in operation.



   (C)   The city shall issue a numbered identification tag which shall
be displayed upon the rear exterior of each licensed vehicle at all times
during the license period.



(2013 Code, § 6.22)  (Ord. 147, passed 6-14-1984; Ord. 199, passed
7-10-1986; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 110.030  BOND OF INSURANCE.



   (A)   (1)   No license shall be issued or continued in operation
unless there is in full force and effect a liability insurance policy for
each vehicle authorized in the amount of $100,000 for bodily injury to any 1
person, in the amount of $300,000 for injuries to more than 1 person which
are sustained in the same accident, and $50,000  for property damage
resulting from any 1 accident.



      (2)   Said insurance shall inure to the benefit of any person
who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property proximately
caused by the negligence of a holder, the holder’s servant, or agents.



      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the
insurance coverage need not extend for the exact term of the license if the
applicant or licensee also operates similar service in other cities.



   (B)   The Council may, in its discretion, allow the holder to file
in lieu of an insurance policy a bond or bonds issued by a surety company
authorized to do business in the state.



   (C)   If the applicant for a license under this subchapter had
qualified as a self-insurer under M.S. § 65B.48, as it may be amended from
time to time, and has filed with the City Clerk a certified copy or a
duplicate original of the self-insurance certificate issued by the State
Commissioner of Highways, then no policy of insurance or surety bond shall be
required to be filed with the city.



(2013 Code, § 6.22)  (Ord. 147, passed 6-14-1984; Ord. 199, passed
7-10-1986; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 110.031  TAXICAB LICENSE FEE.



   No license shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder
thereof has paid the annual license fee as prescribed by resolution.



(2013 Code, § 6.22)  (Ord. 147, passed 6-14-1984; Ord. 199, passed
7-10-1986; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 110.032  TRANSFERABILITY.



   (A)   No license may be transferred.



   (B)   Any sale, assignment, or mortgage of a taxicab shall be
reported to the City Clerk.



(2013 Code, § 6.22)  (Ord. 147, passed 6-14-1984; Ord. 199, passed
7-10-1986; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 110.033  SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, AND ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES OF TAXICAB
LICENSE.



   (A)   A license issued under the provisions of this subchapter may
be revoked or suspended by the Council in accordance with the procedures
outlined if the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this
subchapter; discontinued operations for more than 60 days; or has violated
any provisions of this code of ordinances or any law of the United States or
state, which violation reflects unfavorable on the fitness of the holder to
offer public transportation.



   (B)   (1)   Any taxicab licensee who violates any part of this
subchapter or whose taxicab driver violates any part of this subchapter, the
said taxicab licensee shall be penalized as follows:



         (a)   First incident: $200 fine, plus a 2-day license
suspension;



         (b)   Second incident within 36 months of the first
incident: $500 fine, plus a 5-day license suspension; and



         (c)   Third or subsequent incident within 36 months of
first incident: $1,000 fine, plus a 30- day license suspension or revocation.



      (2)   Any revoked license shall not be eligible for
reinstatement for at least 30 days after the effective date of the revocation.



   (C)   All multiple-day license suspensions shall run consecutively
beginning at 12:01 a.m. on the first day of the suspension period and ending
at midnight on the last day of the suspension period.



   (D)   No suspension or revocation shall be imposed by either the
City Council or the City Administrator until the licensee has been afforded
an opportunity for a hearing in accordance with § 110.003(E).



(2013 Code, § 6.22)  (Ord. 147, passed 6-14-1984; Ord. 199, passed
7-10-1986; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992; Ord. passed 812, 2-12-2009)



§ 110.034  TAXICAB DRIVER’S LICENSE.



   (A)   Taxicab driver’s license. It is unlawful for any person to
operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the city and it is also
unlawful for any person who owns or controls a taxicab to permit it to be so
driven unless the driver of said taxicab has a current and valid taxicab
driver’s license issued under the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   Application for driver’s license.



      (1)   Application for a taxicab driver’s license shall be
filed with the City Clerk on forms provided which shall contain the following:



         (a)   The names and addresses of 2 residents of the
state who have known the applicant for a period of not less than 2 years and
who will vouch for the sobriety, honesty, and general good character of the
applicant;



         (b)   The experience of the applicant in the
transportation of passengers and a listing of all previous employment in
transporting persons, if any;



         (c)   The educational background of the applicant;



         (d)   A history of employment for the past 10 years;



         (e)   Age and date and place of birth; and



         (f)   Home address.



      (2)   Each application shall include:



         (a)   A certificate from a physician licensed by the
state that, in the physician’s opinion, the applicant is not afflicted with
any disease or infirmity which might make the applicant an unsafe or
unsatisfactory driver; or



         (b)   A copy of a current D.O.T. medical card.



      (3)   At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay
the city the sum prescribed by resolution.



   (C)   State driver’s license required. The applicant must have a
valid state driver’s license. In no event shall a license be issued to a
person under 18 years of age. The state driver’s license shall reflect the
applicant’s current home address.



   (D)   Investigation of applicant. The Police Department shall
conduct an investigation of each applicant, and a report of such
investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant,
if any, shall be attached to the application for the consideration of the
City Clerk.



   (E)   Issuance of driver’s license. The issuing authority upon
consideration of the application and the reports attached thereto shall
approve or reject the application.



      (1)   If the application is rejected, the applicant may
request a personal appearance before the Council to offer evidence why the
application should be reconsidered.



      (2)   If the application is approved, the issuing authority
shall issue a license to the applicant which shall bear the name, address,
age, signature, and photograph of the applicant.



      (3)   Such license shall be in effect for the remainder of the
calendar year. A license for every calendar year thereafter shall be issued
upon payment of $25 unless the license for the preceding year has been
revoked.



   (F)   Grounds for denial of driver’s license.



      (1)   The issuing authority shall not issue a taxicab
driver’s license to anyone who has had their driving privileges suspended,
revoked, or canceled within 1 year of the date of application.



      (2)   The issuing authority, and the Council upon appeal, may
take the applicant’s driving record into account in approving the license;
and if it is found that the person is an habitually reckless or negligent
driver or an habitual violator of the traffic laws, the issuing authority or
Council may deny issuance of the license or renewal.



      (3)   Falsification of an application for a taxicab driver’s
license constitutes grounds for denial of the license or renewal.



      (4)   No license shall be issued to an applicant who has been
convicted of any crime or crimes directly related to the occupation of
taxicab driver, as defined by M.S. 364.03, subd. 2, as it may be amended from
time to time, and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient
rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of the occupation of
taxicab driver, as defined by M.S. § 364.03, subd. 3, as it may be amended
from time to time.



   (G)   Display of driver’s license. Every driver licensed under
this subchapter shall keep the city-issued license in full view of all
passengers while such driver is operating a taxicab.



   (H)   Suspension and revocation of driver’s license. The Council
may suspend any driver’s license issued under this subchapter in accordance
with the procedures outlined in this code of ordinances for the licensee’s
failure or refusal to comply with the provisions of this chapter or other
applicable state or federal law.



(2013 Code, § 6.22) (Ord. 147, passed 6-14-1984; Ord. 199, passed 7-10-1986;
Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992; Ord. 851, passed 12-29-2011)  Penalty, see §
110.999



§ 110.035  VEHICLE INSPECTION.



   Prior to use and operation of any vehicle under the provisions of this
subchapter, said vehicle shall be thoroughly examined and inspected by an
inspection service authorized by the Police Department. Subsequent
inspections will be required not less than once every 365 days. The intent of
such inspection is to ensure compliance with all applicable safety
requirements of the state and any rules established by this code of
ordinances or the Police Department.



(2013 Code, § 6.22)  (Ord. 147, passed 6-14-1984; Ord. 199, passed
7-10-1986; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992; Ord. 811, passed 12-24-2008)



§ 110.036  TAXIMETER REQUIRED.



   (A)   (1)   All taxicabs shall be equipped with taximeters which
are visible to passengers at all times.



      (2)   After sundown, the face of the taximeter shall be
illuminated. It shall be operated mechanically by a mechanism of standard
design and construction, driven either from the transmission, or from 1 of
the front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving mechanism. It
shall be sealed at all points and connections where manipulation would affect
correct reading and recording.



   (B)   (1)   Each taximeter shall have thereon a flag to denote
when the vehicle is employed or not employed. It shall be the duty of the
driver to throw the flag into a non-recording position at the termination of
each trip. Any inspector or other officer of the Police Department is hereby
authorized to inspect any meter with or without complaint of any person.



      (2)   Upon discovery of any inaccuracy therein, the person
operating said taxicab shall be notified to cease operation; and said taxicab
shall be kept off the highways until the taximeter is repaired and in the
required working condition.



(2013 Code, § 6.22)  (Ord. 147, passed 6-14-1984; Ord. 199, passed
7-10-1986; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 110.037  RATE SCHEDULE AND CARDS.



   (A)   Prior to issuance of a taxicab license, the applicant shall
submit the applicant’s rate schedule to the City Administrator. These rates
shall be uniform to all passengers. Any increases in the rates shall be filed
with the City Administrator.



   (B)   Every taxicab operated under this subchapter shall have a rate
card setting forth the authorized rates of fare which shall be displayed in
such a place as to be in view of all passengers.



(2013 Code, § 6.22)  (Ord. 147, passed 6-14-1984; Ord. 199, passed
7-10-1986; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992; Ord. 812, passed 2-12-2009)



§ 110.038  RECEIPTS.



   The driver of any taxicab shall, upon demand by the passenger, render a
receipt for the amount charged on which shall be the name of the owner, the
license or motor number, the amount of the meter reading or charges, and the
date of the transaction.



(2013 Code, § 6.22)  (Ord. 147, passed 6-14-1984; Ord. 199, passed
7-10-1986; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 110.039  REFUSAL TO PAY LEGAL FEES.



   It is unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any of
the vehicles mentioned in this subchapter after having hired the same, and it
is unlawful for any person to hire any vehicle herein defined with intent to
defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such service.



(2013 Code, § 6.22)  (Ord. 147, passed 6-14-1984; Ord. 199, passed
7-10-1986; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.040  RECEIPT AND DISCHARGE OF PASSENGERS.



   Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the
roadway, but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible
or in the absence of a sidewalk to the extreme right-hand side of the road
and there receive or discharge passengers. On 1-way streets, passengers may
be received or discharged at either the right or left-hand sidewalk or on the
side of the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk. In addition, persons may be
received or discharged on private property.



(2013 Code, § 6.22)  (Ord. 147, passed 6-14-1984; Ord. 199, passed
7-10-1986; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 110.041  NUMBER OF PASSENGERS.



   No more than 2 persons in addition to the driver shall be carried in
the front seat of any taxicab; and no more than a total number of 7
passengers, excluding the driver, shall be carried in any taxicab.



(2013 Code, § 6.22)  (Ord. 147, passed 6-14-1984; Ord. 199, passed
7-10-1986; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 110.042  REFUSAL TO CARRY PASSENGERS.



   No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person or
persons upon request, unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the
provisions of this subchapter to do so.



(2013 Code, § 6.22)  (Ord. 147, passed 6-14-1984; Ord. 199, passed
7-10-1986; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 110.043  MANIFESTS.



   Every driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which are recorded
all trips made each day showing the time and place of origin, the destination
of each trip, and the amount of fare. All completed manifests shall be
returned to the owner by the driver at the conclusion of the driver’s tour
of duty. All manifests shall be available to the City Clerk and the Police
Department. Every holder of a license shall retain and preserve all
drivers’ manifests in a safe place for at least the calendar year next
preceding the current calendar year.



(2013 Code, § 6.22)  (Ord. 147, passed 6-14-1984; Ord. 199, passed
7-10-1986; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)




TOBACCO, TOBACCO PRODUCTS, AND TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICES




§ 110.055  PURPOSE.



   (A)   (1)   The city recognizes that many persons under the age
of 18 years purchase or otherwise obtain, possess, and use tobacco, tobacco
products, and tobacco-related devices, and such sales, possession, and use
are violations of both state and federal laws.



      (2)   Studies have shown that most smokers begin smoking
before they have reached the age of 18 years and that those persons who reach
the age of 18 years without having started smoking are significantly less
likely to begin smoking.



      (3)   Smoking has been shown to be the cause of several
serious health problems that place a financial burden on all levels of
government.



   (B)   This subchapter is intended to regulate the sale, possession,
and use of tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices for the
purpose of enforcing and furthering existing laws; to protect minors against
the serious effects associated with the use of tobacco, tobacco products, and
tobacco-related devices; and to further the official public policy of the
state in regard to preventing young people from starting to smoke, as stated
in M.S. § 144.391, as it may be amended from time to time.



(2013 Code, § 6.23)  (Ord. 519, passed 7-2-1998; Ord. 841, passed
12-30-2010)



§ 110.056  DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system used by the city or any other
jurisdiction to investigate and ensure that those licensed to sell tobacco,
tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices are complying with the
requirements of this subchapter or any state or federal law or regulation.
COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall involve the use of minors as authorized by this
subchapter or state law. COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall also mean the use of minors
who attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related
devices for educational, research, and training purposes as authorized by
state or federal law.



   INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED. The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco
product wrapped individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and
tobacco products shall include, but not be limited to, single cigarette
packs, multi-packs, single bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and
single cans or other packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other
packaging containing more than a single pack or other container as described
in this definition shall not be considered INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED.



   LOOSIES. A single or individually packaged cigarette.



   MINOR. Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 18 years.



   MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any business operated out of a truck, van,
automobile, cart, or other vehicle or transportable shelter and not at a
fixed address, store front, or other permanent structure authorized for sales
transactions.



   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business in which tobacco, tobacco
products, and tobacco-related devices are available for sale to the general
public, including, but not be limited to, grocery stores, convenience stores,
gas stations, and restaurants.



   SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other
consideration.



   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Open displays of tobacco, tobacco products,
or tobacco- related devices in any manner in which any person may have access
to the tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices without the
assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee’s employee. The
assistance or intervention must entail the actual physical exchange of the
tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device between the customer and
the licensee or employee. SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING does not include vending
machines.



   TOBACCO or TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Cigarettes and any product containing,
made, or derived from tobacco that is intended for human consumption, whether
chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested
by any other means, or any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco
product; cigars; cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut,
ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish; plug
and twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts; refuse
scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and
forms of tobacco. The term TOBACCO excludes any tobacco product that has been
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco
cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical
purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose.



   TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICES. Cigarette papers or pipes for smoking.



   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric, or electronic, or other type
of device that dispenses tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related
devices upon the insertion of money, tokens, or other form of payment
directly into the machine and includes any such device equipped with
mechanical, electric, or electronic-locking devices.



(2013 Code, § 6.23)  (Ord. 519, passed 7-2-1998)



§ 110.057  LICENSE.



   No person may sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco-related devices without first having obtained a license to do so from
the city in compliance with this subchapter.



   (A)   Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco,
tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices shall be made on a form
provided by the city. The application shall contain the full name of the
applicant, the applicant’s residential and business addresses and telephone
numbers, the name of the business for which the license is sought, and any
additional information the city deems necessary. Upon receipt of a completed
application, the City Clerk shall forward the application to the City
Council. If the City Clerk determines that an application is incomplete, the
City Clerk shall return the application to the applicant with notice of the
information necessary to make the application complete.



   (B)   Action. The City Council may either approve or deny the
license, or it may defray action for such reasonable period of time as may be
necessary to complete any investigation of the application or the applicant.
If the City Council approves the license, the City Clerk shall issue the
license to the applicant. If the City Council denies the license, notice of
the denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the
applicant’s right to obtain judicial review of the City Council’s
decision.



   (C)   Term. Each license will be issued for a period of 1 calendar
year. If the application is made during the license year, a license may be
issued for the remainder of the licensed year on a pro rata basis. Any
unexpired fraction of a month shall be counted as a complete month. Every
license expires on December 31 of the license year.



   (D)   Revocation or suspension. Any license issued may be revoked or
suspended as provided for in this subchapter.



   (E)   Transfers. A license is valid only on the premises for which
the license was issued and only for the person to whom the license was
issued. No transfer of any license to another location or person shall be
valid without the prior approval of the City Council.



   (F)   Moveable place of business. No license may be issued to a
moveable place of business. Only fixed location businesses are eligible to be
licensed under this subchapter.



   (G)   Display. All licenses must be posted and displayed in plain
view of the general public on the licensed premises.



   (H)   Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this
subchapter shall be handled in the same manner as the original application.
The request for a renewal shall be made by the licensee at least 30 days but
no more than 60 days before the expiration of the current license. The
issuance of a license issued under this subchapter shall be considered a
privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant and shall not entitle
the licensee to an automatic renewal of the license.



   (I)   Fees. No license shall be issued under this subchapter until
the appropriate license fee has been paid in full.



   (J)   Instructional program.



      (1)   No person shall be issued a license or renewal license
to sell tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices unless an
applicant or license holder has an approved program for instructing all
employees regarding the legal requirements pertaining to the sale of tobacco,
tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices at the business premises for
which the license was issued. The instructional program shall include, but is
not limited to, reviewing the law on the sale of tobacco-related products and
the law regarding the requirement of purchasers to establish proof of age.



      (2)   No license shall be issued unless the applicant or
license holder signs a form attesting that each employee of the applicant or
license holder has received training and instruction on the sale of tobacco,
tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices and the date such training
occurred. The training shall include information that the sale of such
products to minors is illegal, explanation of what proof of age is legally
acceptable, and that a sale to a minor can subject the applicant or license
holder and their employees to criminal and civil liability.



   (K)   Sale by minors. No minor may furnish, sell, or attempt to sell
tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices unless written consent
has been obtained from the minor’s parents. Such written consent must
include a statement of the potential penalties that can be imposed under this
subchapter.



   (L)   Proof of age. Any sale of tobacco, tobacco products, and
tobacco-related devices shall not take place unless the licensee requires any
purchaser who appears to be under the age of 27 to establish proof of age by
1 of the methods established by state law for the purchase of alcoholic
beverages.



(2013 Code, § 6.23)  (Ord. 519, passed 7-2-1998; Ord. 527, passed
9-24-1998)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.058  BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it
may be revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the
license under this subchapter.



   (B)   The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or
renewal of a license under this subchapter:



      (1)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years;



      (2)   The applicant has been convicted within the past 5 years
of any violation of a federal, state, or local law, or other regulation
relating to tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices;



      (3)   The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco
products, and tobacco-related devices revoked within the 12 months preceding
the date of application;



      (4)   The applicant fails to provide any information required
on the application or provides false or misleading information;



      (5)   The applicant has outstanding fines, penalties, fees or
taxes owed to the city, City Public Utilities Commission, county, or state; or



      (6)   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or local
law or other regulation from holding a license.



(2013 Code, § 6.23)  (Ord. 519, passed 7-2-1998)



§ 110.059  PROHIBITED SALES.



   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for any person to furnish,
sell, or offer to sell tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices
as follows:



   (A)   To any minor;



   (B)   By means of a vending machine;



   (C)   By means of self-service merchandising;



   (D)   By means of loosies;



   (E)   Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, belladonna,
strychnos, cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic,
or controlled substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally
in tobacco or added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process; or



   (F)   By any other means, to any other person, or in any other
manner or form prohibited by federal, state, or local law, or other
regulation.



(2013 Code, § 6.23)  (Ord. 519, passed 7-2-1998)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.060  VENDING MACHINES.



   It shall be unlawful for a licensee to allow the sale of tobacco,
tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices by the means of a vending
machine.



(2013 Code, § 6.23)  (Ord. 519, passed 7-2-1998)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.061  SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING.



   It shall be unlawful for a licensee to allow the sale of tobacco,
tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices through self-service
merchandising. All tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices
shall either be stored behind a counter or other area not freely accessible
to customers without the intervention of a store employee. This subchapter
shall not apply to retail stores that derive at least 90% of their revenue
from tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices, and where the
retailer ensures that no person younger than 18 years of age is present, or
permitted to enter, at any time.



(2013 Code, § 6.23)  (Ord. 519, passed 7-2-1998; Ord. 542, passed
3-25-1999; Ord. 841, passed 12-30-2010)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.062  RESPONSIBILITY.



   All licensees shall be responsible for the actions of their employees
in regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related
devices on the licensed premises. The sale of any such item by an employee
shall be considered a sale by the license holder and shall subject the
license holder to the penalties set forth in this subchapter. Nothing in this
subchapter shall be construed as prohibiting the City Council from also
subjecting the employee to appropriate penalties under this code, state, or
federal law, or other applicable law or regulation.



(2013 Code, § 6.23)  (Ord. 519, passed 7-2-1998)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.063  COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the city
police or other authorized city official during regular business hours. From
time to time, but at least once per year, the city shall conduct compliance
checks by engaging minors over the age of 15 years to enter the licensed
premises to attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related
devices. Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks must have the
written consent of their parents or guardians and shall be supervised by city
designated law enforcement officers or other designated city personnel.
Minors used for compliance checks shall not be guilty of unlawful possession
of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices when such items are
obtained as a part of the compliance check.



   (B)   (1)   No minor engaged in a compliance check shall use or
attempt to use false identification to misrepresent the minor’s age.



      (2)   Minors engaged in a compliance check shall answer
truthfully all questions about the minor’s age asked by the licensee or the
licensee’s employee and shall produce any identification, if any exists,
for which minor is asked.



      (3)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit compliance
checks authorized by state or federal laws for educational, research, or
training purposes, or required for the enforcement of a particular state or
federal law.



(2013 Code, § 6.23)  (Ord. 519, passed 7-2-1998)



§ 110.064  OTHER ILLEGAL ACTS.



   Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of
this subchapter:



   (A)   Sales. For any person to sell or attempt to sell or furnish
any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco-related device to any minor;



   (B)   Possession. For any minor to have in minor’s possession any
tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco-related device, excluding any minor
lawfully involved in a compliance check;



   (C)   Use. For any minor to smoke, chew, sniff, or otherwise use or
ingest any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco-related device;



   (D)   Procurement. For any minor to purchase or attempt to purchase
or otherwise obtain any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco-related 
device; for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain any such item on
behalf of a minor; or for any person to coerce or attempt to coerce a minor
to purchase or otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco product, or
tobacco-related device in a manner contrary to law, excluding any minor
lawfully involved in a compliance check;



   (E)   Use of false identification. For any minor to attempt to
disguise minor’s true age by the use of a false form of identification,
whether the identification is that of another person or 1 on which the age of
the person has been modified or tampered with to represent an age older than
the actual age of the person; and



   (F)   Sampling. For any person to light or smoke tobacco or a
tobacco product in a licensed establishment for any purpose, including, but
not limited to, the purpose of allowing a customer or potential customer to
sample tobacco or a tobacco product, except for the sampling of an electronic
delivery device as defined in M.S. § 609.685, subd. 1, as it may be amended
from time to time.



(2013 Code, § 6.23)  (Ord. 519, passed 7-2-1998; Ord. 841, passed
12-30-2010; Ord. 890, passed 8-19-2014)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.065  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Notice. The city shall issue a notice of violation to any
licensee or individual suspected of violating any provision of this
subchapter. The notice of violation shall be served personally or by mail.
The notice shall contain the alleged violation and a statement concerning the
right to a hearing.



   (B)   Hearing. If a person accused of violating this subchapter so
requests, a hearing shall be scheduled before a hearing officer at a time and
place which shall be published and provided to the accused violator.



   (C)   Hearing Officer. The City Council shall serve as the Hearing
Officer in any hearing requested under this subchapter.



   (D)   Decision. Following the hearing, if the City Council
determines by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation of this
subchapter occurred, that decision, along with the City Council’s reasons
for finding a violation and the administrative penalty to be imposed under §
110.999(C), shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided
to the violator. If the City Council finds that no violation occurred, such
finding shall be recorded and a copy provided to the licensee.



   (E)   Judicial review. Any final decision by the City Council under
this subchapter may be reviewed in the manner and procedure authorized by
state law.



   (F)   Prosecution. Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the
city from seeking prosecution for any alleged violation.



(2013 Code, § 6.23)  (Ord. 519, passed 7-2-1998)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.066  EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent the providing of tobacco,
tobacco products, or tobacco- related devices to a minor as part of a
lawfully recognized religious, spiritual, or cultural ceremony. It shall be
an affirmative defense to a charge of violating this subchapter that the
licensee or an employee of the licensee relied in good faith on proof of age
in the manner required by state law for the purchase of alcoholic beverages.



(2013 Code, § 6.23)  (Ord. 519, passed 7-2-1998)



§ 110.067  AMENDMENT.



   The City Clerk shall make reasonable efforts to send the County
Community Health Services and all tobacco retailers 30 days’ mailed notice
of the city’s intention to consider a substantial amendment to this
subchapter.



(2013 Code, § 6.23)  (Ord. 519, passed 7-2-1998; Ord. 527, passed
9-24-1998; Ord. 542, passed 3-25-1999)




FAIRS, CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES, SHOWS, AND SIMILAR ENTERPRISES




§ 110.080  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AMUSEMENT DEVICES. Any equipment or piece of equipment, appliance, or
combination thereof designed or intended to entertain or amuse the public at
an event covered by this subchapter.



   AMUSEMENT RIDE. Any mechanized device or combination of devices which
carry passengers along the ground or over a fixed or restricted course for
the purpose of giving its passengers amusement, pleasure, thrills, or
excitement at an event covered by this subchapter.



   BUILDING OFFICIAL. A principal Building Official of the city who is
duly certified by the state.



   BOOTH. Any structure or enclosure located at an event covered by this
subchapter from which amusement and/or services, souvenirs, food, or other
commerce items are offered to the public or displayed.



   CARNIVAL-CIRCUS. A traveling commercial entertainment with sideshows,
rides, and games.



   FAIR. A festival where there is entertainment and things are exhibited
and sold.



   OPERATOR. A corporation, person, association of persons, or the agent
of the same who either owns or controls or has the duty to control the
operation of amusement device or ride, concession booth, or related
electrical equipment at all events covered by this subchapter, including an
agency of the state or any of its political subdivisions.



   RELATED ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT. Any electrical apparatus or wiring
combination thereof used at an event covered by this subchapter.



   SHOW. A presentation of entertainment, theatricals, concerts, displays,
and exhibitions.



(2013 Code, § 6.24)  (Ord. 85, passed 3-4-1982; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 110.081  GENERAL LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Generally. It is unlawful for any person to present or operate
within the city an event covered by this subchapter without first having
obtained a license therefor from the city and paying a fee therefor as set
from time to time by the Council by resolution.



   (B)   Condition of license. No license shall be issued until the
proper application has been completed, the fee or fees paid, and, where
applicable, insurance provided. A copy of all insurance policies or
certificates must be deposited with the city and must contain a provision
that the city will be notified in writing at least 10 days in advance of any
cancellation or change in such coverage.



(2013 Code, § 6.24)  (Ord. 85, passed 3-4-1982; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.082  ELECTRICAL PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Generally. No amusement device or ride, concession booth, or
any related electrical equipment shall be operated at any event covered
hereby in the city without an electric permit having been issued in addition
to the general license, permitting the operation of such device or equipment.



   (B)   Application. Prior to the operation of any device covered by
this division (B), the person required to obtain a permit shall apply to the
city for a permit on a form furnished by the city, which form shall contain
such information as the city may require.



(2013 Code, § 6.24)  (Ord. 85, passed 3-4-1982; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.083  INSPECTION REQUIRED.



   (A)   For the purpose of determining if an amusement ride, device,
concession booth, or any related electrical equipment covered by this
subchapter is in safe operating condition and will provide protection to the
public using the same, said equipment and ride shall be inspected by the city
before it is initially placed in operation.



   (B)   If, after inspection, an amusement device or ride, concession
booth, or related electrical equipment is found to comply with the rules
adopted hereby, the city shall upon payment of the fee (plus an inspection
fee) permit the operation of the device.



   (C)   Additions or alterations that would change the structure,
mechanism, classification, or capacity of said amusement ride, concession
booth, or related electrical equipment, shall not be permitted unless
approved in writing by the city.



(2013 Code, § 6.24)  (Ord. 85, passed 3-4-1982; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.084  RULES.



   (A)   The city may adopt and issue rules for the safe installation,
repair, maintenance, use, operation, and inspection of amusement devices,
amusement rides, concession booths, and related electrical equipment at all
enterprises covered hereby. Rules shall be adopted by resolution and shall be
based upon generally accepted engineering standards and shall be concerned
with, but not necessarily limited to, engineering force stresses, safety
devices, and preventive maintenance.



   (B)   Whenever such standards from manufacturers are available in
suitable form, they may be incorporated by reference. The rules shall provide
for the reporting of accidents and injuries incurred from or as the result of
the operation of amusement devices or rides, concession booths, or related
electrical equipment. These rules may be modified or repealed at any time by
resolution.



(2013 Code, § 6.24)  (Ord. 85, passed 3-4-1982; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 110.085  CESSATION ORDER.



   (A)   The Building Official may order in writing a temporary
cessation or operation of any amusement device or ride, concession booth, or
related electrical equipment covered herein if it has been determined after
inspection to be hazardous or unsafe.



   (B)   The operation of such amusement device, ride, concession
booth, or related electrical equipment shall not be resumed until the unsafe
or hazardous conditions have been corrected to the satisfaction of the city
and the cessation order lifted by written order.



(2013 Code, § 6.24)  (Ord. 85, passed 3-4-1982; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 110.086  INSURANCE.



   (A)   Generally. No person, firm, or corporation shall be issued a
license hereunder unless the applicant first obtains an insurance policy in
an amount not less than $300,000 for bodily injury to or death of 1 person in
any 1 accident, and, subject to the limit for 1 person, in the amount of not
less than $500,000 for bodily injury or death of 2 or more persons in any 1
accident; and in an amount of not less than $5,000 for injury to or
destruction of property of others in any 1 accident, insuring the operator
against liability for injury or death suffered by a person attending the
fair, carnival or amusement park.



   (B)   Products liability insurance. The applicant shall provide
products liability insurance in the amounts provided in division (A) above,
if any food or drink is served upon the premises.



   (C)   Notice of cancellation. All policies or insurance certificates
required hereunder and hereby must be deposited with the city and each such
policy or certificate shall contain a provision that the city will be
notified in writing at least 10 days in advance of any cancellation or change
in the coverage of the insured.



(2013 Code, § 6.24)  (Ord. 85, passed 3-4-1982; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 110.087  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following amusement devices, rides, or concession booths are exempt
from the provisions of this subchapter:



   (A)   Permanent amusement parks, permanent theme parks, or ski lifts;



   (B)   Non-mechanized playground equipment including, but not limited
to, swings, seesaws, stationary spring-mounted animal features,
rider-propelled merry-go-rounds, climbers, slides, trampolines, swinging
gates, and physical fitness devices except where an admission fee is charged
for usage or an admission fee is charged to areas where such equipment is
located;



   (C)   A concession booth, amusement device, or ride which is owned
and operated by a nonprofit, religious, educational, or charitable
institution, or association, if such booth, device, or ride is located within
a building subject to inspection by the State Fire Marshal or by any
political subdivision of the state under its building, fire, electrical, and
related public safety ordinances;



   (D)   The city may exempt amusement devices from the provisions of
this subchapter that have self-contained wiring installed by the
manufacturer, that are operated manually by the use of hands or feet, that
operate on less than 120 volts of electrical power, and that are fixtures
within or a part of a structure subject to the Building Code of this state or
any political subdivision of this state; and



   (E)   The city may exempt playground equipment owned, maintained,
and operated by any political subdivision of the state.



(2013 Code, § 6.24)  (Ord. 85, passed 3-4-1982; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 110.088  WAIVER OF INSPECTION.



   The city may waive the requirement that an amusement device, ride, or
any part thereof, be inspected before being operated in the city, if any
operator gives satisfactory proof to the city that the amusement device,
ride, or any part thereof has passed an inspection conducted by a public or
private agency whose inspection standards and requirements are at least equal
to those requirements and standards established by the city under the
provisions hereof, but the license fee shall be paid before the city may
waive this requirement.



(2013 Code, § 6.24)  (Ord. 85, passed 3-4-1982; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 110.089  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate an amusement device,
ride, concession booth, or related electrical equipment at any enterprise
covered hereby without first having obtained a permit from the city, or to
violate any provision hereof.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, impede, or
obstruct, in any manner, the city or any authorized representative of the
Inspection Department in the performance of duties under this subchapter. It
is unlawful for any person to bribe or attempt to bribe the Inspector or the
Inspector’s designee.



(2013 Code, § 6.24)  (Ord. 85, passed 3-4-1982; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 110.999




BLEACHERS AND REVIEWING STANDS




§ 110.100  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BLEACHERS. Seating facilities without backrests in which less than 3
square feet is assigned per person for computing the occupant load.



   REVIEWING STANDS. Elevated platforms accommodating not more than 50
persons. Seating facilities, if provided, are normally in the nature of loose
chairs. REVIEWING STANDS accommodating more than 50 persons shall be
regulated as grandstands.



(2013 Code, § 6.25)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)



§ 110.101  INSPECTION REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for bleachers or reviewing stands to be used or operated
unless they have been inspected and have a current inspection certificate
issued by the city attached to them.



(2013 Code, § 6.25)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978) Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.102  INSPECTION; CERTIFICATE AND FEE.



   (A)   Inspection generally. All bleachers or reviewing stands shall
be inspected annually by the city before May 1 of each year for permanent
facilities or before they are used or occupied for temporary reviewing stands
or bleachers.



   (B)   Inspection certificate.



      (1)   Each reviewing stand or bleacher shall have affixed to
it a current inspection certificate issued annually for permanent facilities
or after an inspection for temporary facilities issued by the City Building
Official.



      (2)   No inspection certificate shall be issued unless the
reviewing stand or bleacher meets all the appropriate standards set forth in
the Uniform Building Code.



   (C)   Inspection fee. There shall be a fee of $5 per seating section
charged for each inspection of reviewing stands or bleachers with a maximum
inspection fee of $50 for each facility.



(2013 Code, § 6.25)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)




SKI LIFTS, AMUSEMENT RIDES, AND AMUSEMENT ATTRACTIONS




§ 110.115  DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      AMUSEMENT ATTRACTION. Any building or structure around, over, or
through which people may move, walk, slide, or ride without the aid of any
moving device integral to the building or structure, whose principal purpose
is to provide amusement, pleasure, thrills, or excitement.



      AMUSEMENT PARK. A tract, structure, area, and equipment,
including electrical equipment, used principally as a location for supporting
amusement rides, amusement devices, and concession booths.



      AMUSEMENT RIDE. Any mechanized device or combination of devices
which carries passengers along, around, or over a fixed or restricted course
for the purpose of giving its passengers amusement.



      BUILDING OFFICIAL. A principal inspector responsible to the city.



      CONCESSION BOOTH. A structure or enclosure located at a fair or
carnival or amusement park from which amusement and/or services, souvenirs,
food, or other commerce items are offered to the public.



      INSPECTION ENGINEER. A state-registered engineer or engineers
retained by the operator for purposes of conducting such certifications as
are required herein.



      MAJOR ALTERATION. A change in the type or capacity of an
amusement ride or device or a change in the structure or mechanism that
materially affects its function or operation. This includes, but is not
limited to, changing its mode of transportation from non-wheeled to a truck
or flat-bed mount, and changing its mode of assembly or other operational
functions from manual to mechanical or hydraulic.



      MAJOR BREAKDOWN. A stoppage of operation from whatever cause
resulting in damage, failure, or breakage of a stress bearing part of a ride
or device.



      OPERATOR. A person who owns or controls or has the duty to
control the operation of a facility covered by this subchapter.



      RATED CAPACITY. A capacity established by the design engineer for
the normal loading and operation of a ride or device, or in absence thereof,
as established by the inspecting engineer after inspection and determination.



      RIDE OPERATOR. A person or persons causing a ride or amusement
device to go and stop or perform its entertaining function.



      SKI LIFT. Any mechanical device or combination of devices which
carries passengers over a fixed course for the purpose of transporting the
passengers to or from a place where some skiing may commence.



   (B)   Interpretations. Where local regulations are more restrictive
than codes, the more restrictive shall apply.



(2013 Code, § 6.26)  (Ord. 86, passed 3-4-1982; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 110.116  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person to operate a ski lift, ride, amusement
device, or concession booth at any facility covered by this subchapter in the
city which is not licensed.



   (A)   Application. On or before the January 1 of each year, any
person required to obtain a license by this subchapter shall apply to the
city for a license on a form furnished by the city which form shall contain
such information as the city may require. The city may waive the requirement
that an application for a license must be filed on or before January 1 of
each year if the applicant gives satisfactory proof to the city that the
applicant could not reasonably comply with the date requirement and if the
applicant promptly applied for a permit after the need for a permit is first
determined.



   (B)   Issuance of license. Licenses shall not be issued until a
valid certificate of occupancy has been issued for each amusement attraction,
amusement ride, or concession booth located on the premises licensed under
this subchapter, and all such licenses shall be in addition to any permit
fees, or state or local code requirements or local inspections otherwise
required by law.



      (1)   New construction of amusement rides manufactured in the
United States.



         (a)   The certificate of occupancy for amusement rides
manufactured in the United States and constructed on the facility licensed
under the terms of this subchapter shall be pursuant to an application form
provided by the city which will be accompanied by signed prints (each sheet)
by a state- registered engineer or architect for all aspects of said ride
which are not fabricated or supplied by the manufacturer.



         (b)   The application for said certificate of occupancy
will include a certification by said inspecting engineer that the plans
detailed for the ride in question have been drawn and/or reviewed by said
engineer or architect and to the best of the belief and knowledge of said
engineer or architect are in conformance with all existing applicable state
and local codes governing said ride. The city may authorize the construction
of said ride to be in stages as said applicable prints and certifications
shall be submitted.



         (c)   Upon the completion of the construction of said
ride and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for said ride,
an inspecting engineer or engineers shall provide written certification of
code compliance for such rides stating that the construction and direction of
said ride are in compliance with the print specifications as submitted to the
city and in compliance with all applicable state and local codes.



         (d)   In the event a reciprocal agreement does not exist
between the state and the state in which the manufacturer’s engineer is
registered, the operator shall supply plans signed by the manufacturer’s
engineer and a certificate from the manufacturer’s engineer stating that
the ride has been installed according to design and in conformance to this
division (B) prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The
certification will specify the maximum loading capacity of the ride in terms
of both people and weight.



      (2)   New construction of non-U.S. manufactured rides.



         (a)   The certificate of occupancy for amusement rides
not manufactured in the United States and constructed on the facility
licensed under the terms of this subchapter shall be pursuant to an
application on a form provided by the city which will be accompanied by
signed prints (each sheet) by a state-registered engineer or architect for
all aspects of said ride which are not fabricated or supplied by the
manufacturer.



         (b)   The city may authorize the construction of said
ride to be in stages as said applicable prints and certifications shall be
submitted. Upon installation of the ride and prior to issuance of an
occupancy permit, the operator shall provide to the city a statement signed
by a registered state engineer or architect and/or the ride manufacturer’s
engineer stating that the ride has been installed in accordance with the
manufacturer’s design and intent.



         (c)   The certification will specify the maximum loading
capacity of the ride in terms of both people and weight.



      (3)   Construction of used rides.



         (a)   The certificate of occupancy for amusement rides
manufactured in the United States and constructed on the facility licensed
under the terms of this subchapter shall be pursuant to an application on a
form provided by the city which will be accompanied by signed prints (each
sheet) by a state-registered engineer or architect for all aspects of said
ride which are not fabricated or supplied by the manufacturer. Prior to the
issuance of an occupancy permit, the operator shall provide to the city a
certification by a registered state engineer or architect and/or
manufacturer’s engineer that the ride has been installed in accordance with
the manufacturer’s design and intent and in conformance with all state and
local codes governing the same.



         (b)   The operator shall also provide a statement
certifying that all primary component parts of the ride have been tested and
passed said testing. The operator will further provide documentation as to
the maximum loading capacity for said ride and if such documentation is
unavailable, the operator shall perform necessary stress analysis in order to
specify and define the maximum loading capacity of said ride in terms of
people and weight. The certification will specify the maximum loading
capacity of the ride in terms of both people and weight.



      (4)   Alterations and reconstruction. A certificate of
occupancy shall be required prior to the operation of any rides which have
undergone major alteration or reconstruction after major breakdown, which
certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the operator provides the
city with a certification by a state registered engineer or architect or
manufacturer’s engineer that said alteration or reconstruction is in
accordance with the manufacturer’s design and intent and in accordance with
all applicable state and local codes.



      (5)   Preemption. The requirements of this division (B) do not
preempt the city’s right of entry or the obligations imposed under the
electrical, plumbing, mechanical, building code, or fire code requirements,
or the obligations to pay all applicable permit fees.



   (C)   Fees. Application and license fees shall be established by
resolution of the Council.



   (D)   Insurance. No operator shall be issued a license under this
subchapter unless the operator first obtains an insurance policy in an amount
to be established by the Council, but not less than $1,000,000 combined
single limit insuring the operator, the city, the city’s elected and
appointed officials, employees, and agents, against liability for any injury
or death of any nature occurring on said premises.



   (E)   Indemnity. The operator shall agree in writing to indemnify
and hold harmless the city, and the city’s elected and appointed officials,
(except registered engineers) employees, and agents against all claims,
causes of action, or litigation covered under this subchapter.



   (F)   Expiration. All licenses issued under this subchapter shall
expire on December 31 of the year issued.



   (G)   Certificate of occupancy. No license shall be issued until a
certificate of occupancy has been issued for all facilities covered by this
subchapter to be operated this license year. Prior to issuing a certificate
of occupancy, the Building Official will conduct an inspection of the
buildings for safety, and compliance with electrical, mechanical, plumbing,
building, and fire codes.



   (H)   Revocation; suspension. Licenses may be revoked, suspended, or
summarily suspended in accordance with state law for violation of this
subchapter.



(2013 Code, § 6.26)  (Ord. 86, passed 3-4-1982; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.117  CESSATION ORDER.



   The Building Official may order in writing a temporary cessation or
operation of any amusement device or ride, concession booth, or related
electrical equipment covered herein if it has been determined after
inspection to be hazardous or unsafe. The operation of such amusement device,
ride, concession booth, or related electrical equipment shall not be resumed
until the unsafe or hazardous conditions have been corrected to the
satisfaction of the city and the cessation order lifted by written order.



(2013 Code, § 6.26)  (Ord. 86, passed 3-4-1982; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 110.118  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any operator or ride operator to operate an
amusement ride, ski lift, or concession booth or related electrical equipment
at any facility covered in this subchapter without first having obtained a
license from the city, or to violate any provisions hereof.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, impede, or
obstruct in any manner the city or any authorized representative of the city
in the performance of their duties under this subchapter. It is unlawful for
any person to bribe or attempt to bribe the Building Official or the Building
Official’s designee.



(2013 Code, § 6.26)  (Ord. 86, passed 3-4-1982; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 110.999




HORSE AND CARRIAGE LIVERY SERVICE




§ 110.130  SUBCHAPTER APPLICABILITY.



   All persons operating a horse and carriage livery service within the
city limits shall comply with this subchapter and all other appropriate
subchapters of this code of ordinances.



(2013 Code, § 6.27)  (Ord. 214, passed 5-14-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)



§ 110.131  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HORSE AND CARRIAGE LIVERY SERVICE.A horse-drawn, 4-wheeled carriage for
hire, which shall be driven by the owner or the owner’s designated driver
for the recreational transportation of the public.



(2013 Code, § 6.27)  (Ord. 214, passed 5-14-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)



§ 110.132  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Permits for the operation of horse and carriage livery vehicles shall
be issued by the directive of the Council by the City Clerk, annually, and
shall expire on December 31 of each year. Each permit so issued shall only be
issued and/or renewed on the payment of an annual fee as prescribed by
resolution and upon proof of general liability insurance, in the minimum
amount of $300,000. Routes authorized to be traveled and preset tour routes
planned by owner shall accompany the permit. There may be attached such other
restrictions and limitations to the permit as is deemed appropriate for the
protection of public health and welfare.



(2013 Code, § 6.27)  (Ord. 214, passed 5-14-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)



§ 110.133  VEHICLE OPERATION.



   (A)   All vehicles shall be operated in a manner so as to assure the
safety of passengers and animals and in accordance with all appropriate
federal and state laws and provisions of this code of ordinances. The driver
of such vehicle shall hold a current State Class C driver’s license.



   (B)   Each vehicle authorized to be operated on the streets of this
city shall be kept in good mechanical and running condition. Each vehicle
shall display a 2-digit identification number conspicuously on the right side
of the carriage which shall be the same number assigned to the vehicle by
authorizing permit.



(2013 Code, § 6.27)  (Ord. 214, passed 5-14-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)



§ 110.134  DRIVER OF VEHICLE.



   The driver of such vehicle shall be at least 18 years of age and
possess normal good health, eyesight, and hearing.



(2013 Code, § 6.27)  (Ord. 214, passed 5-14-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)



§ 110.135  MAINTENANCE OF ANIMALS.



   (A)   Prior to being employed, each horse shall be inspected and
certified as fit for the type of workload anticipated. This inspection shall
be performed by a licensed veterinarian, and the certification shall be filed
with the City Clerk. Re-inspection and re-certification shall be performed as
needed, not to exceed 120 calendar day intervals.



   (B)   All records of such inspections and certifications shall be
maintained by the owner and available for review by the appropriate
authorities. Horses stabled within the city limits shall be exercised as
required to maintain health and fitness.



(2013 Code, § 6.27)  (Ord. 214, passed 5-14-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)



§ 110.136  SANITATION.



   Each horse employed under this subchapter while “on the street”
shall be diapered with an appropriate and sanitary contraption, designed
specifically for this purpose. In the event of a mishap, it shall be the
responsibility of the driver/owner to immediately remove or otherwise clean
the street, sidewalk, or property in the general area of the mishap.



(2013 Code, § 6.27)  (Ord. 214, passed 5-14-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)



§ 110.137  CITY STREETS.



   Any permits issued hereunder may be recalled if the Council determines
that the surface of the city streets traveled by the livery service is being
impaired by the horses’ hoofs.



(2013 Code, § 6.27)  (Ord. 214, passed 5-14-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)



§ 110.138  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No horse and carriage livery service shall be conducted after sunset
and before 8:00 a.m. No horse and carriage livery service shall be conducted
between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays. The horse,
carriage, and its driver must be “off the street” and absent from all
loading zones during these times.



(2013 Code, § 6.27)  (Ord. 214, passed 5-14-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.139  LOADING ZONES.



   The Council may designate and authorize specific locations on public
streets as horse and carriage loading zones. The owner may negotiate with
individual property owners for loading zones on private property which
information shall be filed with the City Clerk.



(2013 Code, § 6.27)  (Ord. 214, passed 5-14-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)



§ 110.140  RATES.



   The rate structure shall be posted on the carriage clearly and visible
to entering and seated passengers. Drivers shall clearly explain rates to
passengers before commencing ride.



(2013 Code, § 6.27)  (Ord. 214, passed 5-14-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)



§ 110.141  OPERATION OF CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS.



   No horse drawn carriage or any vehicle engaged commercially in carrying
or transporting passengers drawn by any type of animal or animals may travel
on any street or public thoroughfare in the city north of Tenth Avenue
extending and east of Marschall Road.



(2013 Code, § 6.27)  (Ord. 214, passed 5-14-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.142  UNLAWFUL ACT.



   It is unlawful for any person to fail to comply with this subchapter
and violation by the owner may also result in suspension of the permit.



(2013 Code, § 6.27)  (Ord. 214, passed 5-14-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 110.999




PET STORE LICENSING




§ 110.155  PURPOSE.



   The City Council finds that pet stores can present health, safety, and
sanitation problems if not properly and locally regulated. The City Council
therefore enacts the following licensing scheme governing pet stores.



(Ord. 873, passed 10-1-2013)



§ 110.156  PET STORE LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall own or operate a pet store that offers animals for sale
or adoption without first obtaining a license in compliance with this
subchapter.



(Ord. 873, passed 10-1-2013)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.157  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   The application for a license under this subchapter shall be made on a
form supplied by the City Clerk containing the following information:



   (A)   The full name, current address, home, and business phone of
the applicant;



   (B)   Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation,
partnership, or other form of organization;



   (C)   Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are
due and payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not
paid, the years and amounts that are unpaid;



   (D)   The location where the pet store will be operated;



   (E)   Such other information as the City Clerk deems necessary;



   (F)   Description of the operation including, but not limited to,
the type and number of animals, animal shelter, and restraints, and copies of
applicable rabies vaccination information; and



   (G)   Evidence of liability insurance amount of at least $ 1,000,000
per occurrence for bodily injury.



(Ord. 873, passed 10-1-2013)



§ 110.158  LICENSE FEE.



   The fee for a pet store license shall be set forth by a separate
ordinance. The license shall be effective as long as the licensee is in
compliance with the provisions within this subchapter.



(Ord. 873, passed 10-1-2013)



§ 110.159  LICENSE APPLICATION EXECUTION, VERIFICATION, AND CONSIDERATION.



   (A)   Execution. All applications for a license under this
subchapter shall be signed and sworn to. If the application is that of a
natural person, it shall be signed and sworn to by such person; if that of a
corporation, by an officer thereof; if that of a partnership, by 1 of the
general partners; and if that of an unincorporated association, by the
manager or managing officer thereof.



   (B)   Verification. All applications shall be subject to
verification and investigation of the facts set forth in the application. The
City Clerk is authorized to conduct any and all investigations to verify the
information on the application, including ordering a computerized criminal
history inquiry and/or a driver’s license history inquiry on the applicant.



   (C)   Consideration. Within a reasonable period after the completion
of the license verification process, the City Council shall accept or deny
the license application in accordance with this subchapter. If the
application is denied, the City Council shall notify the applicant of the
determination in writing.



(Ord. 873, passed 10-1-2013)



§ 110.160  PERSONS AND LOCATIONS INELIGIBLE FOR A LICENSE.



   (A)   Persons ineligible. No license under this subchapter shall be
issued to an applicant if such applicant:



      (1)   Is not 18 years of age or older on the date the license
application is submitted to the City Council;



      (2)   Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the
occupation licensed, including, but not limited to, cruelty to animals, as
prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to
time, and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and
present fitness to perform the duties of the licensed occupation as
prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time;



      (3)   Is not a citizen of the United States, a resident alien,
or does not have the legal authority to be employed in the United States;



      (4)   Is not of good moral character or repute;



      (5)   Has knowingly falsified or misrepresented information on
the license application;



      (6)   Owes taxes and assessments to the state, county, school
district, or city that are due and delinquent; or



      (7)   Is not the real party in interest of the business being
licensed.



   (B)   Locations ineligible. The following locations shall be
ineligible for a license under this subchapter.



      (1)   Taxes due on property. No license shall be granted or
renewed for operation on any property on which taxes, assessments, or other
financial claims of the state, county, school district, or city are past due,
delinquent, or unpaid. In the event a suit has been commenced under M.S. §§
278.01 through 278.13, as they may be amended from time to time, questioning
the amount or validity of taxes, the City Council may on application waive
strict compliance with this provision; no waiver may be granted, however, for
taxes or any portion thereof which remain unpaid for a period exceeding 1
year after becoming due.



      (2)   Improper zoning. No license shall be granted if the
property is not properly zoned.



      (3)   Space not suitable. No license shall be granted if the
property or building is not suitable for a pet store due to size,
configuration, location, design, or other site characteristics that is likely
to create a nuisance to adjoining property users or significantly impair the
ability of the licensee to comply with the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 873, passed 10-1-2013)



§ 110.161  HEALTH AND WELFARE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Diseased animals. The pet store licensee must not possess or
offer for sale, any animal afflicted with an infectious disease.



   (B)   Floor requirements. The floors of a pet store shall be
non-absorptive, monolithic construction and must be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition and in good repair. For large animals where it would be
detrimental to the animal’s health to stand for prolonged periods on hard
non-absorbent floors, alternate approved flooring, such as rugs that may be
removed and laundered, may be allowed.



   (C)   Walls and ceilings. Walls and ceilings of a pet store shall be
kept clean, sanitary, and in good repair.



   (D)   Confinement. All cages, pens, benches, boxes, tanks, or
receptacles in which animals are confined shall be easily cleanable, durable,
and constructed of non-corrosive material and maintained in good repair. Such
cages and pens shall also be properly sufficient and humane in size for the
confinement of such animals.



   (E)   Ventilation. All rooms in a pet store shall be mechanically
ventilated and meet all standards of the Uniform Mechanical Code. A negative
pressure must be maintained to prevent odors and organisms from entering the
adjacent businesses or departments. Provisions shall be made for pre-heated
replacement air.



   (F)   Delivery requirements. All delivery trucks transporting
animals to and from the pet store shall be kept clean and sanitary.



   (G)   Feedings of animals. All utensils used in the preparation of
food and the feeding of animals shall be kept clean, sanitary, and in good
repair; and the use of the utensils for such purpose which are badly worn,
rusted, or corroded, or in such condition that they cannot be clean and
sanitary is prohibited.



   (H)   Humane treatment of animals. Any animal in the pet store shall
be handled and treated in a humane manner by the owner, operator, and
employees of the pet store. All state laws governing cruelty to animals and
humane treatment of animals shall be adhered to and all operations must
enhance or maintain the health and welfare of all animals in the
establishment.



   (I)   Location of animals. Where the licensee keeps animals for sale
or display, all animals shall be kept entirely within an enclosed building
and no animals shall be kept or maintained outdoors. Exterior walking or
exercise areas shall be maintained free of wastes and other litter, and all
wastes should be removed and disposed of in an approved manner immediately.



   (J)   Infectious diseases. All animals subject to distemper and
infectious hepatitis must be inoculated prior to delivery to the pet store by
a licensed veterinarian, and the pet store owner or operator must maintain
valid proof of such inoculation. Primates must have a yearly tuberculin test.



   (K)   Size requirements. The pet store must include a room of
sufficient size to contain an approved sink with hot and cold running water
under pressure, for the purpose of storing janitorial supplies, and equipment
used to maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary manner.



   (L)   Disposal of wastes. All animal wastes must be disposed of in a
timely and sanitary manner. In no event shall there be an accumulation of
waste beyond 24 hours. In public areas during exhibition, all wastes must be
disposed of immediately or, at minimum, such waste to be stored in an
approved container with tight fitting lids and disposed of in an approved
sanitary manner at the end of the day.



(Ord. 873, passed 10-1-2013)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.162  SANCTIONS FOR LICENSE VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Suspension or revocation. The City Council may suspend or
revoke a license issued pursuant to this subchapter for a violation of:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained
in a license application or a renewal application;



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the
course of carrying on the licensed occupation or business;



      (3)   Any violation of this subchapter or state law;



      (4)   A licensee’s criminal conviction that is directly
related to the occupation or business licensed, including, but not limited
to, cruelty to animals, as defined by M.S. § 364.03, subd. 2, as it may be
amended from time to time; provided, that the licensee cannot show competent
evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform duties
of the licensed occupation or business as defined by M.S. § 364.03, subd. 3,
as it may be amended from time to time; and



      (5)   Conducting the licensed business or occupation in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or
to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the
community.



   (B)   Notice and hearing. A revocation or suspension by the City
Council shall be preceded by written notice to the licensee and a hearing.
The notice shall give at least 10 days’ notice of the time and place of the
hearing and shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee. The
notice shall be mailed by regular mail to the licensee at the most recent
address listed on the license application.



(Ord. 873, passed 10-1-2013)



§ 110.163  LICENSE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Posting of license. The license issued pursuant to this
subchapter shall be conspicuously displayed at the pet store.



   (B)   Insurance. No license shall be issued or continued in
operation unless there is in full force and effect a liability insurance
policy in the amount of at least $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury.



   (C)   Licensed premises. A license issued pursuant to this
subchapter is effective only for the compact and contiguous space specified
in the approved license application.



   (D)   Transfer of license prohibited.



      (1)   A license issued pursuant to this subchapter is for the
person and the persons named on the approved license application.



      (2)   No transfer of a license shall be permitted, from place
to place or from person to person, without complying with the requirements of
an original license application.



(Ord. 873, passed 10-1-2013)



§ 110.164  PET STORE LICENSE FEE.



   The pet store license fee shall be $100.



(Ord. 874, passed 10-1-2013)



MOBILE FOOD UNITS



§ 110.185  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter is intended to require an establishment preparing and
serving food from a self-contained readily moveable vehicle to obtain a
license from the city and to regulate the conditions from which the licensed
establishment operates within the city for the promotion of business within
the city and for the protection of customers and the general public.



(Ord. 905, passed 6-2-2015)



§ 110.186  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MOBILE FOOD UNIT. 



      (1)   A self-contained food service operation, located in a
readily movable motorized wheeled or towed vehicle that is readily movable
without disassembling and that is used to store, prepare, display or serve
food intended for individual portion service; or



      (2)   A mobile food unit as defined in M.S. § 157.15, subd.
9, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 905, passed 6-2-2015)



§ 110.187  LICENSE APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   License types. Each applicant must indicate whether it is
applying for a temporary license or annual license. A temporary license
allows mobile food unit operations in the city for up to 10 days total from
March 15 to November 15 of each calendar year. An annual license allows
mobile food unit operations in the city for 10 days or more from April 1 to
October 31 of each calendar year. A licensee will only be issued one
temporary license per calendar year, however nothing shall prohibit a
temporary licensee from applying for an annual license within the same
calendar year.



   (B)   License fees. There is no fee for a temporary license. There
is a fee for an annual license. The fee shall be established periodically by
resolution of the City Council.



   (C)   Mobile food unit. It is unlawful for any person to operate a
mobile food unit in the city without first obtaining a license from the city.
An application for a license shall be filed, along with all required fees,
with the City Clerk. The applicant must be the owner of the mobile food unit.
The application shall be made on a form supplied by the city and shall
contain the following information:



      (1)   A description of the nature of the business and the
goods to be sold and the license plate number and description for any vehicle
to be used in conjunction with the activity;



      (2)   The name of the owner and operator, if different than
the owner, of the mobile food unit and the name of all persons working for
the owner and operator of the mobile food unit;



      (3)   The applicant’s full legal name, other names the
applicant uses or is known by, date of birth and driver’s license number or
other legal identification with a photograph of the applicant;



      (4)   The permanent and any temporary home and business
address, phone numbers and email address of the applicant;



      (5)   The name, address and contact information for the
commissary with which the mobile food unit is affiliated, if applicable;



      (6)   Names and contact information of at least 2 references
who will substantiate the applicant’s good character and business
responsibility or other evidence of the good character and business
responsibility of the applicant;



      (7)   A statement regarding whether the applicant has ever
been convicted of a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor, including
violation of a municipal ordinance but excluding traffic violations, and if
so, the date and place of conviction and the nature of the offense;



      (8)   A certificate of insurance by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the state, evidencing the following forms of
insurance:



         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance, with a
limit of not less than $1,000,000 each occurrence. If such insurance contains
an annual aggregate limit, the annual aggregate limit shall be not less than
$2,000,000;



         (b)   Automobile liability insurance with a limit of not
less than $2,000,000 combined single limit. The insurance shall cover
liability arising out of any auto, including owned, hired, and non-owned
vehicles;



         (c)   Food products liability insurance, with a limit of
not less than $1,000,000 each occurrence;



         (d)   Public liability insurance, with a limit of not
less than $1,000,000 each occurrence;



         (e)   Property damage insurance, with a limit of not
less than $1,000,000 each occurrence;



         (f)   Workers compensation insurance (statutory limits)
or evidence of exemption from state law; and



         (g)   The city shall be endorsed as an additional
insured on the certificate of insurance and the umbrella/excess insurance if
the applicant intends to operate its mobile food unit on public property.



      (9)   The certificate of insurance shall state that the
insurance has been endorsed to require that the city be notified 30 days in
advance of cancellation of the policy or a material modification of a
coverage term;



      (10)   Written consent of each private property owner from
which mobile food unit sales will be conducted;



      (11)   If applying only for a temporary license, the applicant
must provide the exact dates and locations for its up to 7 days of mobile
food unit operations;



      (12)   A copy  of each related license or permit issued by
Scott County and the state required to operate a mobile food unit; and



      (13)   A copy of the applicant’s state sales tax ID number.



(Ord. 905, passed 6-2-2015; Ord. 928, passed 3-2-2016)



§ 110.188  CONDITIONS OF LICENSING.



   (A)   Locations. A mobile food unit may only operate in the
locations set forth in this division (A). A mobile food unit may operate in a
private commercial or industrial parking lot and on private residential
property, with the written consent of the private property owner. When
operations occur on private residential property, mobile food unit sales may
only be for catering purposes (such as a private graduation party or wedding)
and not open for sales to the general public. A mobile food unit may only
operate along a public or private street when the street is closed to all
non-emergency vehicles. A mobile food unit may only operate in a city park or
on city property with the prior written approval by the city; additional
permits may be required for such operations.



   (B)   Performance standards. A mobile food unit licensee is subject
to the following performance standards:



      (1)   A mobile food unit with an annual license may not
operate on the same property more than 21 days from April 1 to October 31
(M.S. § 157.15, subd. 9, as it may be amended from time to time).



      (2)   No mobile food unit sales between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.



      (3)   A mobile food unit must dispose of its gray water daily.
Gray water may not be drained into city storm water drains.



      (4)   An out of service mobile food unit may be stored only in
an area zoned B1, I1, or I2, and where outside storage is allowed by
conditional use permit.



      (5)   The mobile food unit may have a maximum bumper to bumper
length of no more than 30 feet.



      (6)   A mobile food unit is not required to obtain a sign
permit from the city. However, no additional signage is permitted beyond that
which is on the mobile food unit unless it meets the following requirements:



         (a)   One single sandwich board style sign is permitted
per mobile food unit;



         (b)   The maximum sign size is 8 square feet;



         (c)   The sign must be placed on the ground and within
10 feet of the mobile food unit;



         (d)   The sign must not be placed within the public
right-of-way except with the express written permission of the city; and



         (e)   The sign cannot project from the mobile food unit
or be mounted to the roof of the mobile food unit.



      (7)   A mobile food unit with a Type I cooking hood shall have
said hood cleaned at least annually as required by the applicable regulations.



      (8)   A mobile food unit with a fire suppression system under
the cooking hood shall have the system tested and tagged in accordance with
applicable codes.



      (9)   A mobile food unit must have at least 1, 2A:20BC fire
extinguisher in the mobile food unit. If  deep frying occurs in the mobile
food unit, then the mobile food unit must have at least 1 Class K fire
extinguisher in the mobile food unit. Each fire extinguisher must display an
inspection tag dated within the past 12 months.



      (10)   A licensee must comply with all laws, ordinances,
regulations, parking zones and posted signs.



      (11)   A mobile food unit must provide an independent power
supply that is screened from public view.



      (12)   Propane tanks must be attached or secured to the mobile
food unit and must be adequately ventilated.



   (C)   License. A mobile food unit license is non-transferable. Proof
of license shall be displayed at all times in the mobile food unit. Mobile
food unit operations may not occur in January, February, March, November and
December. A mobile food unit license is an annual license.



   (D)   Practices prohibited. It is unlawful for any person engaged in
the business of a mobile food unit operation to do the following:



      (1)   Call attention to that licensee’s business by crying
out, blowing a horn, ringing a bell or by any loud or unusual noise, or by
use of any amplifying device;



      (2)   Fail to display proof of license and produce valid
identification when requested;



      (3)   Remain on the property of another when asked to leave;



      (4)   Claim endorsements by the city based on license; or



      (5)   Conduct business in any manner as to create a threat to
the health, safety and welfare a specific individual or the general public.



(Ord. 905, passed 6-2-2015) Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.189  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A LICENSE.



   A license issued pursuant to this section may be suspended by a city
official if the licensee has violated § 110.188, or is otherwise conducting
business in such a manner as to constitute a breach of peace, fraudulent
conduct, or any other conduct that is prohibited by local, state or federal
laws or regulations. Falsification of information required for a license is
also grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of a license. The license
shall be automatically revoked if the licensee does not file an appeal
pursuant to this section. When taking action on any license issued under this
subchapter, the city official shall provide the licensee with verbal or
written notice of the violation. The notice shall inform the licensee of its
right to be heard before the City Council. The notice shall also inform the
licensee that the license shall be automatically revoked if no appeal is
filed within 21 days of the date of the notice by the city official. Verbal
notice shall be confirmed within 5 days by a mailed written notice to the
licensee. The City Council shall not conduct a hearing on a suspension or
revocation unless a request is made by the licensee in writing. If a request
for a hearing is made, the City Council shall conduct the hearing at the next
available City Council meeting. No City Council resolution or other notice
calling for a hearing shall be required.



(Ord. 905, passed 6-2-2015)



§ 110.190  PENALTY.



   Upon conviction, a person’s first violation of any provision in this
subchaper constitutes a petty misdemeanor.  A conviction for a subsequent
violation constitutes a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 928, passed 3-2-2016)



§ 110.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or
provision of this chapter when the person performs an act thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
follows.



      (1)   Misdemeanor. Where the specific section, subdivision,
paragraph, or provision specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, the
person shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.



      (2)   Petty misdemeanor. As to any violations not constituting
a misdemeanor under the provisions of division (A)(1) above, the person shall
be punished as for a petty misdemeanor.



(2013 Code, § 6.99)



   (B)   The penalty for a first or second incident shall be imposed
and administered by the City Administrator upon an admission by the licensee
that the licensee violated any part of §§ 110.025 through 110.043. The
penalties for a third or subsequent incident may only be imposed by the City
Council.



(2013 Code, § 6.22)



   (C)   (1)   Licensees.



         (a)   Any licensee who furnishes, sells, or attempts to
sell tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices to a minor or
whose employee furnishes, sells, or attempts to sell tobacco, tobacco
products, and tobacco-related devices to a minor shall be penalized as
follows:



            1.   First incident: $500 fine, plus 1-day license
suspension; provided; however, that the day license suspension will be
suspended for 1 year on the condition that both the licensee and his or her
employees have no further incidents of furnishing, selling or attempting to
sell tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices to a minor;



            2.   Second incident within 36 months of first
incident: $750 fine, plus 5-day license suspension; and



            3.   Third or subsequent incident within 36 months
of first incident: $1,000 fine, plus 30-day license suspension or revocation.



         (b)   The penalty for a first or second incident may be
imposed and administered by the City Administrator if the licensee waives the
hearing authorized by § 110.065 and the licensee admits the violation. The
penalties for a third or subsequent incident may only be imposed by the City
Council. No suspension or penalty may take effect until the licensee has
received notice of the alleged violation and an opportunity for a hearing as
provided in § 110.065.



         (c)   Any revoked license shall not be eligible for
reinstatement for at least 12 months.



      (2)   Other individuals. Any individual who sells tobacco,
tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices to a minor shall be charged an
administrative penalty of $50, subject to the right to a hearing before the
City Council as provided in § 110.065. Nothing in this division (C) shall
prohibit the city or other jurisdiction from seeking criminal prosecution for
any alleged violation of this division (C) by any individual other than a
licensee or employee of a licensee.



      (3)   Criminal penalties.



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(f)
below, it shall be a misdemeanor for anyone to sell tobacco, tobacco
products, and tobacco-related devices to a minor. Whoever violates this
division (C)(3) a subsequent time within 5 years of a previous conviction
under this division (C)(3) shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor.



         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(f)
below, it shall be a misdemeanor for anyone to furnish tobacco, tobacco
products, and tobacco-related devices to a minor.



         (c)   It shall be a petty misdemeanor for a minor to
smoke, chew, sniff, or otherwise use or ingest tobacco, tobacco products, and
tobacco-related devices.



         (d)   It shall be a petty misdemeanor for a minor to
have in minor’s possession tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related
devices. This provision does not apply to a minor who is an employee of a
license holder while stocking tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related
devices or to a minor lawfully involved in a compliance check.



         (e)   It shall be a petty misdemeanor for a minor to
purchase, or attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, and
tobacco-related devices, or for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain
such items on behalf of a minor. This provision does not apply to a minor who
purchases or attempts to purchase tobacco-related products while under the
direct supervision of a responsible adult for training, education, research,
or enforcement purposes.



         (f)   It shall be a petty misdemeanor for a minor to
sell, furnish, or give away any tobacco, tobacco products, and
tobacco-related devices.



         (g)   It shall be a misdemeanor for a minor to attempt
to disguise minor’s true age by the use of a false form of identification,
whether the identification is that of any other person or one on which the
age of the minor has been modified or tampered with to represent an age older
than the actual age of the minor.



      (4)   Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in
which a violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.



(2013 Code, § 6.23)



   (D)   Each day that a person violates any of the provisions of §§
110.080 through 110.089 shall constitute a separate offense hereunder.



(2013 Code, § 6.24)



   (E)   Each day that a person violates any of the provisions of §§
110.115 through 110.118 shall constitute a separate offense hereunder.



(2013 Code, § 6.26)



   (F)   A violation of this §§ 110.155 through 110.063 shall be a
misdemeanor under state law.



   (G)   In addition to or in lieu of any administrative or civil
penalty for §§ 110.185 through 110.189, a licensee may be criminally
charged for a violation of local, state or federal laws or regulations.



(Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 85, passed 3-4-1982; Ord. 86, passed 3-4-1982;
Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992; Ord. 352, passed 1-7-1993; Ord. 519, passed
7-2-1998; Ord. 633, passed 7-18-2002; Ord. 812, passed 2-12-2009; Ord. 831,
passed 3-11-2010; Ord. 841, passed 12-30-2010; Ord. 873, passed 10-1-2013;
Ord. 905, passed 6-2-2015)



CHAPTER 111: CONSTRUCTION LICENSING



Section



   111.01   Building Code; application, permits, fees, and the like



   111.02   Building permits



   111.03   Foreign matter in streets



   111.04   Permit fees



   111.05   Inspections



   111.06   Certificate of occupancy



   111.07   Special requirements for moving buildings



   111.08   Vacant dwellings or building; nuisance condition



   111.09   Swimming pools



   111.10   Electrical permits and inspections



   111.11   Plumbing Code



   111.12   Dangerous buildings



   111.13   Housing Code



   111.14   Alarm systems



   111.15   Fire warning systems in residential occupancies



   111.16   Mobile home park regulations



   111.17   Manufactured home park closings



   111.18   Residential rental property registration



 



   111.99   Penalty



§ 111.01  BUILDING CODE; APPLICATION, PERMITS, FEES, AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   Application, administration, and enforcement. The application,
administration, and enforcement of this chapter shall be in accordance with
State Building Code. The Code shall be enforced within the extraterritorial
limits permitted by M.S. § 326B.121, as it may be amended from time to time,
when so established by this section. The code enforcement agency of this
municipality is called the Inspection Division of the Community Development
Department of the city. This Code shall be enforced by the State Certified
Building Official designated by this municipality to administer the Code
(M.S. § 326B.133, as it may be amended from time to time).



   (B)   Permits and fees. The issuance of permits and the collection
of fees shall be as authorized in M.S. § 326B.121, as it may be amended from
time to time. Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this Code in
accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the municipality in (i.e.,
section number from this code of ordinances, ordinance number, and the like).
In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for
work governed by this Code in accordance with M.S. §  326B.148, as it may
be amended from time to time.



   (C)   Building Codes.



      (1)   The State Building Code, as adopted by the Commissioner
of Administration pursuant to M.S. §§ 326B.101 to 326B.16, as they may be
amended from time to time, including all of the amendments, rules, and
regulations established, adopted, and published from time to time by the
Department of Labor and Industry Construction Codes and Licensing is hereby
adopted by reference with the exception of the optional chapters, unless
specifically adopted in this section.



      (2)   The State Building Code is hereby incorporated in this
section as if fully set out herein:



         (a)   2015 Minnesota State Building Code (MSBC);



         (b)   Minn. Rules Ch. 1300, Administration of the State
Building Code;



         (c)   Minn. Rules Ch. 1301, Building Official
Certification;



         (d)   Minn. Rules Ch. 1302, State Building Code
Construction Approvals;



         (e)   Minn. Rules Ch. 1303, State Provisions;



         (f)   Minn. Rules Ch. 1305, Adoption of the 2012
International Building Code;



         (g)   Minn. Rules Ch. 1306, Special Fire Protection
Systems (subp. 2. existing and new buildings);



         (h)   Minn. Rules Ch. 1307, Elevators and Related
Devices;



         (i)   Minn. Rules Ch. 1309, Adoption of the 2012
International Residential Code;



         (j)   Minn. Rules Ch. 1311, Adoption of the 2012
Guidelines for the Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings;



         (k)   Minn. Rules Ch. 1315, Adoption of the 2014
National Electrical Code;



         (l)   Minn. Rules Ch. 1322, Adoption of the Residential
Energy Code;



         (m)   Minn. Rules Ch. 1323, Adoption of the Commercial
Energy Code;



         (n)   Minn. Rules Ch. 1325, Solar Energy Systems;



         (o)   Minn. Rules Ch. 1335, Floodproofing Regulations;



         (p)   Minn. Rules Ch. 1341, State Accessibility Code;



         (q)   Minn. Rules Ch. 1346, Adoption of the 2012
International Mechanical/Fuel Gas Code;



         (r)   Minn. Rules Ch. 1350 Manufactured Homes;



         (s)   Minn. Rules Ch. 1360, Pre-Fabricated Structures;



         (t)   Minn. Rules Ch. 1361, Industrialized/Modular
Buildings;



         (u)   Minn. Rules Ch. 1370, Storm Shelters (Manufactured
Home Parks);



         (v)   Minn. Rules Ch. 4715, State Plumbing Code;



         (w)   Minn. Rules Ch. 1322, 1323, 7670,7672, 7674, 7676
and 7678, State Energy Code;



         (x)   This municipality may adopt by reference any or
all of the following optional chapters of Minn. Rules Ch. 1306, Special Fire
Protection System; and Minn. Rules Ch. 1335, Floodproofing regulations, Minn.
Rules Ch. 1335.0600 to 1335.1200; and



(2013 Code, § 4.01) (Ord. 676, passed 8-14-2003; Ord. 800, passed 7-31-2008)



§ 111.02  BUILDING PERMITS.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any
building or structure, or any part or portion thereof, including, but not
limited to, the plumbing, electrical, ventilating, heating or air
conditioning systems, water wells, and on-site disposal systems therein, or
remove or displace any soil, ground, or earth preparatory to any action, or
cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate building permit
for each such building or structure from the Building Official.



      (2)   It is also unlawful for any firm, person, or corporation
to erect, enlarge, improve, construct, repair, replace, or move a fence in
all zoning districts of the city except agricultural within the corporate
limits of the city without first obtaining a permit, with the exception of
garden fences. Notwithstanding any provision of this section and in addition
thereto, it is unlawful for any person to remove or displace any soil,
ground, gravel, or earth without first obtaining a permit from the proper
city officials.



   (B)   Fence construction requirements.



      (1)   All fences, with the exception of garden fences shall
require a fence permit. No permit is required for repair to, or replacement
of, an existing fence if the portion of the fence that is being repaired, or
replaced is less than 20% of the fence’s overall length and there is no
change in the fence’s height, material, or location. For purposes of this
section, a FENCE shall be defined as any permanent partition, structure, or
gate erected as a dividing marker, barrier, or enclosure encircling either
wholly or any portion of any area. A GARDEN FENCE shall be defined as a fence
that is no more than 3 feet in height, that may be easily removed and that is
used to protect gardens from animals. Residential fences greater than 6-1/2
feet in height, or commercial and industrial fences greater than 8 feet in
height shall also require a conditional use permit (CUP).



      (2)   All fences erected in the city may be constructed
adjacent to the property lines; provided, that they do not encroach into any
easement area held by the city, any conservation easement area held by the
city, or any sight triangle as defined by this code of ordinances, except if
permission is otherwise granted or allowed by the city as part of the
permitting process pursuant to § 90.16. If a fence on the rear property line
abuts a public alley there must be a 3 feet setback.



      (3)   All fences shall be constructed of materials that are
not deemed hazardous by the Building Official; of materials that are
consistent with building materials standards set forth in Ch. 151, with the
finished side of the materials facing adjacent properties or the public
rights-of-way; and of materials that are low maintenance or easily maintained.



      (4)   Chain link fencing interwoven with slats, whether for
screening purposes or for other applications, shall be prohibited.



      (5)   (a)   Fences 6 feet and under shall be permitted
anywhere on the lot except in the front yard setback or within any city
easement areas or sight triangles except if permission is otherwise granted
or allowed by the city as part of the permitting process. In the case of a
double frontage lot, fences 6 feet in height, and under shall be permitted
within the setback on a street frontage from which access is not obtained.



         (b)   Fences up to 3 feet in height shall be allowed in
the front yard setback, so long as they are not within any city easement
areas or sight triangles.



      (6)    Fences in excess of the above heights shall require a
conditional use permit. City-owned recreation facilities shall be exempt from
the conditional use permit requirement.



      (7)   All fences, with the exception of garden fences, shall
not be located within a city easement or sight triangle except if permission
is otherwise granted or allowed by the city as part of the permitting
process. Garden fences may be located within a city easement area, but shall
not obstruct drainage or impede the flow of surface water from or in the
easement area. If a garden fence is located within an easement area, city
staff may require it to be removed at the owner’s expense at any time.



      (8)   Payment of a fence permit fee, as set forth in the
city’s most recent fee ordinance, is required before a permit is issued.



   (C)   Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a denial of a fence permit or
removal of a garden fence by city staff may appeal such decision to the Board
of Adjustment and Appeals. An appeal must be brought within 30 days of the
date of the decision. After consideration of such appeal, the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals may make such findings and issue such orders as it
deems appropriate.



   (D)   Demolition permit review of locally significant historic
properties.



      (1)   A building/demolition permit application for a building
or structure that has been designated by the City’s Historic Preservation
Advisory Commission (HPAC) as a locally significant historic property must be
referred to the HPAC for review. The application must include detailed plans,
including a site plan and building elevations, and any other related
information deemed necessary by the Building Official to evaluate the request.



      (2)   The HPAC may provide the applicant with comments and
suggestions concerning the proposed demolition of the building or structure;
including, but not limited to, suggesting incorporating the existing building
into a development proposed for the property; rehabilitating or renovating
the building; relocating the building; salvaging significant artifacts and
materials from the building prior to demolition; and documenting the building
for historical reference prior to demolition.



      (3)   No building/demolition permit shall be issued by the
Building Official for demolition of any locally significant historic property
until the HPAC has provided its comments on the application. If within 45
days from the filing of a complete application, the HPAC has not commented on
the application, the Building Official may issue the building/demolition
permit if all other requirements for issuance have been met.



      (4)   If the Building Official determines that an emergency
situation or natural disaster requires immediate repair to protect the safety
of a building or structure or its inhabitants, the Building Official may
issue the permit without prior HPAC action.



      (5)   In addition to any other remedies that might be
available to the city, the Building Official or the Zoning Administrator may
issue a stop work order or commence a civil injunctive action to stop,
prevent, or abate a violation of this division (D) and may also impose
additional fees as set forth in the Building Code or in the city’s fee
schedule.



(2013 Code, § 4.03)  (Ord. 67, passed 6-18-1981; Ord. 75, passed
11-12-1981; Ord. 115, passed 3-2-1983; Ord. 129, passed 8-11-1983; Ord. 221,
passed 6-30-1987; Ord. 361, passed 8-19-1993; Ord. 403, passed 3-2-1995; Ord.
550, passed 6-10-1999; Ord. 571, passed 6-27-2000; Ord. 591, passed 3-1-2001;
Ord. 780, passed 6-14-2007; Ord. 786, passed 11-21-2007; Ord. 796, passed
5-29-2008; Ord. 804, passed 8-28-2008; Ord. 820, passed 5-14-2009; Ord. 855,
passed 5-17-2012)



§ 111.03  FOREIGN MATTER IN STREETS.



   (A)   General prohibition. No person shall drive or move a vehicle
which carries into or deposits in any public street, alley, or other public
place, foreign matter of any kind, including, but not limited to, mud, dirt,
sticky substances, or litter. A person who violates this provision shall
immediately remove the foreign matter, and upon failure to do so may be
prosecuted.



   (B)   Construction sites. Any person, firm, or corporation to whom a
grading permit, building permit, street cut permit, or utility permit has
been issued shall remove at least once each working day any foreign matter
carried into or deposited in any public place by any vehicle entering or
leaving the construction site.



(2013 Code, § 4.04)  (Ord. 362, passed 9-30-1993)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.04  PERMIT FEES.



   Fees for building permits, fence permits, and inspection shall be
adopted by resolution of the Council and may be amended from time to time in
the same manner; provided, that a schedule of such fees, together with the
effective date or dates thereof, shall be kept on file in the office of the
Building Official, available for distribution upon request therefor, and
uniformly enforced as the same become effective. If such fees are based upon
a determination of value or size of the project, a determination thereof
shall be made by the Building Official. Such fee schedule shall provide for a
separate plumbing, heating, or electrical permit and inspection fee where the
work to be done is so confined.



(2013 Code, § 4.05)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 780, passed 6-14-2007)



§ 111.05  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   All construction or work for which a permit is required shall
be subject to inspection by the Building Official and certain types of
construction shall have continuous inspection by special inspectors.



   (B)   The following rules concerning surveys shall be followed.



      (1)   Survey.



         (a)   No building permit shall be issued for any
building on an outlot.



         (b)   For all other lots, no building permit shall be
issued for any building unless a survey of the lot upon which the building is
to be erected is submitted and is prepared and attested to by a registered
surveyor and provides the following information:



            1.   Scale of drawing;



            2.   Lot and block number;



            3.   Dimensions of lot and north arrow;



            4.   Dimensions of front, rear, and side yards;



            5.   Location of all existing buildings on the lot;



            6.   Location of proposed building or construction
(may be drawn by the developer and not certified by the surveyor);



            7.   Location of stakes at the lot corners;



            8.   The side yard and setback dimensions of
buildings located on adjacent lots;



            9.   The location of all recorded easements, both
public and private;



            10.   Grade elevations at the following points:



               a.   Each lot corner (both existing and
proposed);



               b.   Crown of street at each lot line
extended;



               c.   Top of curb at each lot line extended;
NOTE: If no curb exists, blue tops to be established;



               d.   Proposed lawn and driveway elevations
at all sides of building; and



               e.   Elevations of the top of foundation and
garage floor. NOTE: Such elevations may be based upon an assumed datum.



            11.   The proposed disposal of drainage and
surface waters indicating direction of surface water drainage by arrows.



      (2)   Location. The location of the proposed building on the
lot shall be required to be drawn and attested to by a registered engineer if
unusual circumstances deem it appropriate to ensure the location of the
building on the lot.



      (3)   Waiver. The survey required in division (B)(1) above may
be waived by the City Engineer if all of the following conditions are met:



         (a)   If the lot is not in a recorded subdivision;



         (b)   If the lot is in excess of 2-1/2 acres;



         (c)   If the building will be no less than 30 feet from
any property line;



         (d)   If the lot has a minimum of 150 feet of frontage,
(if a corner lot, the distance of the shortest side must be greater than 150
feet); and



         (e)   If the property is not zoned for commercial or
industrial uses.



      (4)   Plot plan. If all of the conditions set forth in
division (B)(3) above are met, the developer must provide a plot plan which
includes as accurately as possible as much of the information required in
division (B)(1) above, as practicable. The plot plan does not have to be
certified by a registered surveyor.



      (5)   Commencement of framing. Prior to commencement of
framing, or at the time of final foundation inspection, the building permit
holder shall submit to the Building Official or the Building Official’s
assigns written verification by a registered land surveyor that the
foundation elevation matches the approved foundation elevation within
acceptable tolerances that have been determined by the Building Official or
the Building Official’s assigns.



(2013 Code, § 4.06)  (Ord. 67, passed 6-18-1981; Ord. 730, passed 5-12-2005)



§ 111.06  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Use or occupancy. It is unlawful to use or occupy a building
or structure in Groups A to I, inclusive, or change the existing occupancy
classification of a building or structure or portion thereof, unless and
until the Building Official has issued a certificate of occupancy consistent
with such proposed use or occupancy.



   (B)   Change in use. Changes in the character or use of a building
shall not be made except as specified in the SBC.



   (C)   Certification of final grades and topsoil. Prior to the
issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for a structure, the permit
holder shall submit to the Building Official or the Building Official’s
assigns written verification by a registered land surveyor that the final (or
as-built) grades for the site are consistent with the approved grading plan.
The permit holder shall also submit written verification that the subject
site contains the amount of topsoil required under Ch. 151, or other
provisions of this code of ordinances. Written verification of topsoil does
not need to be by a registered surveyor.



   (D)   Certificate issued. After final inspection, when and if it is
found that the building or structure complies with the provisions of the SBC,
the Building Official shall issue a certificate of occupancy which shall
contain the following:



      (1)   The building permit number;



      (2)   The address of the building;



      (3)   The name and address of the owner;



      (4)   The description of that portion of the building for
which the certificate is issued;



      (5)   A statement that the described portion of the building
complies with the requirements of the SBC for group of occupancy in which the
proposed occupancy is classified; and



      (6)   The name of the Building Official.



   (E)   Temporary certificate. A temporary certificate of occupancy
may be issued by the Building Official for the use of a portion or portions
of a building or structure prior to the completion of the entire building or
structure. For residential structures, the following minimum conditions must
be met:



      (1)   Enclosed. Dwelling to be fully enclosed, sided, and
weather-tight;



      (2)   Electrical. Electrical work to be completed in area
occupied with all switch and receptacle plates on and main service panel
completed with cover on;



      (3)   Sanitary facilities. Sanitary facilities to be completed
to a point where there is a kitchen sink and a full bathroom with water
closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower in operating condition with hot water
necessary for their operation;



      (4)   Light and ventilation. Area to be occupied will be
provided with necessary light and ventilation. Sleeping areas shall have
proper escape windows and an approved smoke detector;



      (5)   Heating. Heating system to be completed if dwelling is
occupied during cold weather;



      (6)   Final inspection. Final inspection to be called for
within 1 year;



      (7)   Fee. The fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy
shall be included in the resolution of the Council adopted in accordance with
§ 111.04. If the final inspection is not called for within 6 months of
issuance of the temporary certificate of occupancy, an additional permit fee
equal to 25% of the original fee shall be charged;



      (8)   Correction list. The temporary certificate of occupancy
shall be accompanied by a correction list, specifying a date or dates for
completion of all items;



      (9)   Escrow. The party seeking a temporary certificate of
occupancy shall provide funds for an escrow account covering the cost of all
correction items. Funds may be disbursed from the escrow account as items are
completed, upon the written approval of the Building Official. Upon
completion of all items and issuance of a certificate of occupancy, any
remaining funds in the escrow account shall be returned to the party
providing the escrow. In the event the items on the correction list are not
completed by the specified completion date or dates, the escrow account shall
be forfeited. Any person proving occupancy of the property may thereafter
arrange to have the correction items completed and paid for from the escrow
funds, until the escrow account is depleted;



      (10)   Posting. The certificate of occupancy shall be posted
in a conspicuous place on the premises and shall not be removed except by the
Building Official; and



      (11)   Violations.



         (a)   It is unlawful to occupy a building or allow
occupancy of a building prior to the issuance of a current certificate of
occupancy.



         (b)   It is unlawful to occupy a building or allow
occupancy of a building after the completion date specified in the correction
list provided with a temporary certificate of occupancy.



         (c)   It is unlawful to fail to complete all items on
the correction list provided with a temporary certificate of occupancy.



(2013 Code, § 4.07)  (Ord. 225, passed 8-28-1987; Ord. 276, passed
12-1-1989; Ord. 325, passed 1-9-1992; Ord. 730, passed 5-12-2005)  Penalty,
see § 111.99



§ 111.07  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MOVING BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Scope. This section, and any other applicable provision of
this code of ordinances, applies whether the building or other structure
proposed to be moved starts from a point of origin within or without the
city, and has as its destination a point within or without the city, or
whether the movement is merely through the city with both a point of origin
and destination without the city; provided, that this section shall not apply
if movement is not over a public street or other public property, and
provided further, that this section shall not apply to moving any building 14
feet in width, or less.



   (B)   Application. In addition to the other required information to
be furnished in the application for a building permit, the applicant shall
provide the approximate size and weight of the structure or building proposed
to be moved, together with the places from and to which it is proposed to
move the same, and proposed route to be followed, proposed dates, and time of
moving, and the name and address of the proposed mover.



   (C)   Permit. The permit shall state date or dates of moving, hours,
routing, movement, and parking. Permits shall be issued only for moving
buildings by building movers licensed by the state.



   (D)   Fees and charges for moving buildings. In addition to all
other fees and charges payable for permits to move buildings, the applicant
shall pay to the city in advance and prior to issuance of a permit, all
estimated labor and material costs to be incurred by the city, including, but
not limited to, police, utility changes, and street repairs. Any costs not
included in the original estimate shall be paid by the permit holder after
the work has been completed.



   (E)   Unlawful act.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any permittee under this section to
fail to strictly comply with the terms of the permit.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to move a building without
a permit required by the terms of this section.



(2013 Code, § 4.08)  (Ord. 67, passed 6-18-1981)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.08  VACANT DWELLINGS OR BUILDING; NUISANCE CONDITION.



   (A)   Policy. It is the policy of the city to promote the
rehabilitation of vacant and unoccupied buildings, and to assure a prompt
process for the demolition of hazardous buildings through a procedure fixing
appropriate responsibility in accordance with due process requirements. This
policy is undertaken pursuant to M.S.§ 463.26, as it may be amended from
time to time, which gives cities authority to enact and enforce ordinances
related to hazardous buildings.



   (B)   Findings.



      (1)   The City Council finds and declares that buildings that
remain vacant for any appreciable period of time become:



         (a)   An attractive nuisance to children;



         (b)   A harborage for rodents;



         (c)   An invitation to derelicts, vagrants, and
criminals as a temporary abode;



         (d)   An increased fire hazard;



         (e)   The unkempt grounds surrounding such property
invites the dumping of garbage thereon;



         (f)   Such buildings are allowed to become dilapidated
since such buildings are often economically obsolete;



         (g)   Owners of such buildings are unwilling to expend
the necessary funds to raze or repair buildings; and



         (h)   Such buildings contribute to the growth of blight
within the city, depress market values of surrounding properties to the
detriment of the various taxing districts, and require additional
governmental services.



      (2)   For the reasons stated above, the adequate protection of
public health, safety, and welfare, therefor requires the establishment and
enforcement of the means by which such nuisance conditions may be abated.



   (C)   Securing vacant buildings.



      (1)   The Building Official may order a vacant building
secured, and shall cause notice of order to be served upon the owner of the
premises in the following circumstances:



         (a)   If any building becomes vacant or unoccupied;



         (b)   Is deemed hazardous due to the fact that the
building has not been secured, and is open to trespass; and



         (c)   The building could be made safe by securing the
building.



      (2)   Such notice may be served personally or by mail. Service
by mail is complete upon mailing of a copy of the order to the owner at the
last known address. If the owner fails to comply with the order within 10
days after the order is served, the Building Official shall cause the
building to be boarded up or otherwise properly secured.



      (3)   (a)   The Building Official, Police Chief, or Fire
Chief may waive all requirements herein, and cause a vacant building to be
immediately boarded or otherwise secured when any 1 of them shall determine
that an emergency exists with respect to the health or safety of persons in
the community that requires the immediate boarding or securing of a vacant
building.



         (b)   An emergency may be declared; provided, that:



            1.   The conditions showing the existence of an
emergency are documented in writing by the Building Official, Police Chief,
Fire Chief, or their designees; and



            2.   Notice be mailed immediately by the
department invoking this section to the address of the owner and taxpayer,
and, if recorded on the assessors rolls, the address of the mortgage holder,
of the date of boarding or otherwise securing and the reasons therefor.



      (4)   (a)   After a vacant building has been boarded or
otherwise secured under this section, should the owner fail to maintain the
building in a secured condition until such time as the building has been
repaired and reoccupied, the Building Official, Police Chief, or Fire Chief
shall resecure any openings into the building whenever it again becomes open
to trespass, without further notice to the owner.



         (b)   All costs, including an administrative fee,
incurred by the city for boarding or otherwise securing a building under this
section, shall be assessed.



         (c)   OWNER, for purposes of this section, shall mean
the person who is listed as the owner by the records of the County Assessor.



   (D)   “Nuisance condition” defined; waiver of waiting period.



      (1)   A building within the city shall be deemed a NUISANCE
CONDITION if:



         (a)   It is vacant and unoccupied for the purpose for
which it was erected, and for which purpose a certificate of occupancy may
have been issued, and the building has remained substantially in such
condition for a period of at least 6 months;



         (b)   Evidence clearly demonstrates that the values of
neighborhood properties have diminished as a result of deterioration of the
subject building; or



         (c)   Evidence, clearly demonstrates that the cost of
rehabilitation is not justified when compared to the post-rehabilitation
resale value of the building.



      (2)   When it is determined by the Building Official, Police
Chief, or Fire Chief or their designees that a building constitutes an
immediate hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare, and after City
Council approval, the 60-day waiting period set out in this section may be
waived and the other procedures as set out in this section may be implemented
immediately.



      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, accessory
buildings such as garages, barns, and other similar structures, not intended
to be used for human habitation, shall be deemed to constitute a nuisance
condition when such building is structurally unsound in the opinion of the
Building Official.



   (E)   Abatement of nuisance condition. Upon completion of the
procedures set forth in this section, and approval by the City Council,
buildings determined to be a nuisance condition may be rehabilitated or razed.



      (1)   Before any action is taken to abate a nuisance
condition, except as provided in division (C)  above relating to securing
vacant buildings, the Building Official shall examine the building to
ascertain whether the nuisance condition should be ordered for rehabilitation
or demolition.



      (2)   Before making its order, the Building Official shall
consider the following:



         (a)   The need for neighborhood housing;



         (b)   The historic value of the building;



         (c)   The impact on the neighborhood and the ability of
the neighborhood to attract future residents;



         (d)   The capacity of the neighborhood to use the
property;



         (e)   The comprehensive plan and zoning classifications
for the property use;



         (f)   The market potential of the property;



         (g)   The estimated cost of rehabilitation;



         (h)   The severity and history of neglect;



         (i)   The availability to the owner of funds for
rehabilitation; and



         (j)   The structural condition of the building.



      (3)   If the owner contests the order of the Building Official
to demolish a structure deemed to be a nuisance condition, the owner shall
provide to the Department a statement itemizing the cost to rehabilitate the
building in order to demonstrate the feasibility of rehabilitation.



      (4)   Before the execution of any order to demolish or
rehabilitate a building under this section, the Building Official shall give
notice of hearing at the last known address to the owner and other persons
shown to have an interest in the building deemed to create a nuisance
condition. Proper notice shall be sufficiently given when mailed by a
certified mail return receipt requested, postage pre-paid, addressed to the
owner to whom the building is registered with the Building Official or, if
not registered, to the owner or other persons shown to have an interest in
the property as ascertained by the files and records of the Register of Deeds
or Registrar of Titles in and for Scott County. Such notice shall also be
given to such persons that the Building Official has actual knowledge of
having an interest in the said property. In addition, such notice of hearing
before the City Council shall contain the Building Official’s
determination, recommendation, and the date, time, and place of the hearing.
In addition, notice of the hearing shall be sent to all property owners
within 350 feet of the subject property.



      (5)   At the hearing, the Building Official shall present an
oral summary of the background and reasons for its recommendations. A report,
including any pertinent documents and photos shall be filed as part of the
record.



   (F)   Alternatives to demolition. The City Council may consider as
alternatives to demolition:



      (1)   Ordering the owner of any such nuisance condition to
rehabilitate the building and specifying the time within which such
rehabilitation shall occur. If rehabilitation is the alternative required by
the City Council, the owner shall present a plan for rehabilitation to the
Building Official which shall contain a commitment of funds to accomplish the
plan. If the plan required herein is not received by the Building Official
within the time ordered by the City Council, the city shall proceed to
demolish the building;



      (2)   After the hearing, the City Council shall order
demolition or rehabilitation of the building, the Building Official shall
prepare findings and an order based upon the evidence and record of the
hearing. After Council approval of the order, a copy of the order shall be
mailed to the last known address of the owner; and



      (3)   If the owner of the subject property fails to abide by
the decision and order of the City Council, the Building Official shall
immediately notify the Council, which may order immediate demolition, or
otherwise amend its order.



   (G)   Collection of costs.



      (1)   The Building Official shall notify the owner of the
costs incurred in razing or rehabilitating the building, and the owner shall
be responsible for the payment of the same, together with an administrative
fee of 15% of the cost, within 30 days of such notification.



      (2)   Upon default, payment after the said 30 days, the cost
of razing or rehabilitating the building and the administrative fee shall be
levied and collected as a special assessment against the property, with
interest at the rate of 8% per annum on the unpaid balance thereof.



(2013 Code, § 4.09) (Ord. 590, passed 2-1-2001)



§ 111.09  SWIMMING POOLS.



   (A)   Definition. A SWIMMING POOL is any outdoor enclosure located
at a private residence:



      (1)   Designed, intended, or used for the containment of
water, whether constructed below ground level or above ground level;



      (2)   Having a surface area of 100 square feet or more and a
depth of 18 inches or more; and



      (3)   Which is designed, intended, or used for swimming,
wading, or other recreational use by the owner or tenant of the property upon
which the pool is constructed, or by their family or invited guests without
payment of a fee.



   (B)   Permit required.



      (1)   All pool installations require a building permit; and



      (2)   The application for a permit must include the following:



         (a)   Complete plans and specifications for the
construction of the pool;



         (b)   A site plan showing the distance of the proposed
swimming pool from the property lines; existing structures on the lot,
including the house, garage, and fences; trees; overhead and underground
wiring; utility easements; any on-site sewer system; and other significant
features;



         (c)   The proposed location of pumps, motors, electrical
power source, if any, flushing and drainage outlets, and other operational
features; and



         (d)   Location and specifications of protective fencing.



   (C)   Fencing.



      (1)   Height. Pools are to have fencing with a minimum height
of 4 feet and a maximum distance between the ground and bottom of the fence
of 3 inches.



      (2)   Gate. Any gate must be self-closing and self-locking.
The latch shall be no less than 4 feet above the ground level and shall be so
constructed and placed as to be inaccessible to small children. All gates
shall be locked when the pool is not in use or is unattended by an adult who
knows how to swim.



      (3)   Materials. Durable wood, masonry, or coated
non-corrosive metal, or a combination thereof, are acceptable materials for
construction of a fence. The fence must be so constructed that it is not
climbable by small children. The fence may not block the view of the pool
from the house.



      (4)   Installation. The fence shall be completely installed
before filling the pool.



      (5)   Above-ground pools. The walls of an above-ground pool
may serve as the fence, if 4 feet above ground level; however, any access to
a permanent ladder or stairs must be fenced.



   (D)   Construction requirements.



      (1)   Hazard. Private swimming pools shall be constructed so
as to avoid hazard or damage to the occupants of the subject property or the
occupants of adjacent property.



      (2)   Minimum requirements.



         (a)   No pool shall be located closer to any underground
or overhead utility line than allowed by the National Electrical Code and
other applicable codes.



         (b)   No pool may be located within any public or
private utility easement, ingress or egress easement, drainage way, wetland,
or other location in which it will represent a threat to the natural
environment.



         (c)   In areas zoned or used for residential purposes,
pools, pool decks, filtration equipment, and other pool items are prohibited
in the front yard and in the side-yard setback. Pools shall not be located
within 10 feet of any property line or any principal structure.



   (E)   Miscellaneous requirements.



      (1)   Conduct. The conduct of persons and the operation of
pools is the responsibility of the owner or the tenant thereof, and such
conduct of persons and operation of the pool shall be done in such a manner
so as to avoid any nuisance or breach of peace.



      (2)   Drainage. All back flushing water or pool drainage water
shall be directed onto the property of the owner or onto approved drainage
ways. Drainage onto public streets or other public drainage ways requires a
permit from the Director of Public Works.



      (3)   Lighting. Any outdoor lighting of the pool may not spill
or shine upon adjacent properties. For all underground pool lights and above
ground plug-in motors, compliance with the Electrical Code is required.



      (4)   Filling. The filling of pools from fire hydrants or
other public facilities is prohibited without prior approval of the Director
of City Public Utilities.



      (5)   Equipment. U.S. Coast Guard-approved equipment such as
life jackets, life preservers, and a shepherd’s crook, is required at the
pool site.



(2013 Code, § 4.10)  (Ord. 361, passed 8-19-1993)



§ 111.10  ELECTRICAL PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Applications of the provisions of this section.



      (1)   The provisions of this section shall apply to all
installations of electrical conductors, fittings, devices, fixtures
hereinafter referred to as electrical equipment, within or on public and
private buildings and premises, with the following general exceptions. The
provisions of this section do not apply to the installations in mines, ships,
railway cars, aircraft, automotive equipment, or the installations or
equipment employed by a railway, electric, or communication utility in the
exercise of its functions as a utility, except as otherwise provided in this
section.



      (2)   As used in this section, REASONABLY SAFE TO PERSONS AND
PROPERTY as applied to electrical installations and electrical equipment,
means safe to use in the service for which the installation or equipment is
intended without unnecessary hazard to life, limb, or property.



      (3)   For purposes of interpretation of the provisions of this
section, the most recently published edition of the National Electrical Code,
as and when adopted by the State Board of Electricity, shall be prima facie
evidence of the definitions, interpretations, and scope of words and terms
used in this section.



   (B)   Electrical Inspector; qualifications and appointment.



      (1)   Position created. There is hereby created the position
of Electrical Inspector for the city. This position may be filled by a
full-time or part-time city employee or by contractual agreement with a
private person or company. The person chosen to fill the office of Electrical
Inspector or to perform the duties as agreed in contract with the city shall
be of good moral character, shall be possessed of such executive ability as
is requisite for the performance of the duties, and shall have a thorough
knowledge of the standard materials and methods used in the installation of
electrical equipment; shall be well versed in approved methods of
construction for safety to persons and property; the statutes of the state of
the state relating to electrical work, and any orders, rules, and regulations
issued by authority thereof; and the National Electrical Code as approved by
the American Standards Association; shall have experience as an Electrical
Inspector or 5 years experience in the installation of electrical equipment,
or be a graduate mechanical or electrical engineer with 2 years of practical
electrical experience and hold a valid State Journeyman’s Electricians
License.



      (2)   Appointment of Inspector. Qualified Electrical
Inspectors and any assistants required shall be appointed by the Council or
an agreement entered into with a qualified Electrical Inspector to perform
the duties set forth by this section. Any assistant shall meet the same
general requirements as the Electrical Inspector.



      (3)   Salary of Inspector. The salary of the Electrical
Inspector shall be established by the Council. Before entering upon the
discharge of the inspection duties, the Electrical Inspector shall be bonded
in the sum of $1,000 to the city.



      (4)   Duties of the Electrical Inspector. It shall be the duty
of the Electrical Inspector to enforce the provisions of this section. The
Electrical Inspector shall, upon application, grant permits for the
installation or alteration of electrical equipment, and shall make
inspections of electrical installations, all as provided in this section. The
Electrical Inspector shall keep complete records of all permits issued,
inspections and reinspections made and other official work performed in
accordance with the provisions of this section. The Electrical Inspector also
shall keep on file a list of inspected electrical equipment issued by or for
Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., which list shall be accessible for public
reference during regular office hours.



      (5)   Prohibitions. It is unlawful for the Inspector or any
assistant to engage in the sale, installation, or maintenance of electrical
equipment, directly or indirectly, and they shall have no financial interest
in any concern engaged in such business.



      (6)   Authority of Electrical Inspector. The Inspector or the
Inspector’s assistants shall have the right during reasonable hours, to
enter any building or premises in the discharge of all official duties, or
for the purpose of making any inspection, reinspection, or test of electrical
equipment contained therein or its installation. When any electrical
equipment is found by the Inspector to be dangerous to persons or property
because it is defective or defectively installed, the person, firm, or
corporation responsible for the electrical equipment shall be notified in
writing and shall make any changes or repairs required in the judgment of the
Inspector to place such equipment in safe condition and if such work is not
completed within 15 days or any longer period that may be specified by the
Inspector in said notice, the Inspector shall have the authority to
disconnect or order discontinuance of electrical service to said electrical
equipment. In cases of emergency where necessary for safety to persons and
property, or where electrical equipment may interfere with the work of the
Fire Department, the Inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or
cause disconnection immediately of any electrical equipment.



   (C)   Standards for electrical equipment installation.



      (1)   All installations of electrical equipment shall be
reasonably safe to persons and property and in conformity with the provisions
of this section and the applicable statutes of the state and all orders,
rules, and regulations issued by the authority thereof.



      (2)   Conformity of installations of electrical equipment with
applicable regulations set forth in the current National Electrical Code,
National Electrical Safety Code, or electrical provisions of other safety
codes which have been approved by the American Standards Association, shall
be prima facie evidence that such installations are reasonably safe to
persons and property, together with such additions and exceptions contained
herein. Noncompliance with the provisions of this section shall be prima
facie evidence that the installation is not reasonably safe to persons and
property.



      (3)   The Electrical Inspector may, with approval of the
Council, authorize installations of special wiring methods other than herein
provided for.



      (4)   Buildings or structures moved from without to within and
within the limits of the city shall conform to all of the requirements of
this Code for new buildings or structures.



      (5)   Existing buildings or structures hereafter changed in
use shall conform in all respects to the requirements of this Code for the
new use.



   (D)   Wiring methods. The State Building Code, National Electric
Code, and National Electric Safety Code applies.



   (E)   Connections to installations.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
make connections from a supply of electric to any electrical equipment for
the installation of which a permit is required or which has been disconnected
or ordered to be disconnected by the Electrical Inspector.



      (2)   The public or private utility providing services shall
disconnect the same upon a written order from the Electrical Inspector, if
the Inspector considers any electrical installation unsafe to life and
property or installed contrary to this Code.



   (F)   Permits and inspections.



      (1)   An electrical permit is required for each installation,
alteration, or addition of electrical work for light, heat, and power within
the limits of the city.



      (2)   No permit shall be required for electrical installations
of equipment owned, leased, operated, or maintained by a public service
corporation which is used by said corporation in the performance of its
function as a utility, except that such electrical installation shall conform
to the minimum standards of the National Electric Safety Code.



      (3)   Ownership of any transmission or distribution lines or
appurtenances thereto, including, but not limited to, transformers, shall not
be transferred by a public service corporation to any person, firm, or
corporation, except another franchised public service corporation dealing in
electric energy for distribution and sale, without a permit first having been
issued therefor by the city. Such permit shall be issued only after the
facilities to be transferred have been inspected and approved as provided in
this section and upon payment of an inspection fee as set forth in this
division (F).



      (4)   Before any permit is granted for the installation or
alteration of electrical equipment, the person, firm, or corporation making
application for such permit shall pay the city a fee in such amount as
specified below and furnish proof of a valid state contractor’s certificate.



      (5)   Application for such permit, describing the electrical
work to be done, shall be made on a city certificate of affidavit, in
writing, to the city, by the person, firm, or corporation so registered to do
such work. The application shall be accompanied by such plans,
specifications, and schedules as may be necessary to determine whether the
electrical installation as described, will be in conformity with all the
legal requirements. The fees for electrical inspection as set forth in this
division (F)  shall accompany such application. If the applicant has
complied with all of the provisions of this section, a permit for such
electrical installation shall be issued.



      (6)   All electrical installations which involve the
concealment of wiring or equipment shall have a “rough-in” inspection
prior to concealment, wherein the Inspector shall be duly notified in
advance, excluding Saturday, Sunday, and holidays.



      (7)   Inspection fees shall be established by the Council by
resolution.



      (8)   When any electrical equipment is to be hidden from view
by the permanent placement of parts of the building, the person, firm, or
corporation installing the equipment shall notify the Electrical Inspector
and such equipment shall not be concealed until it has been inspected and
approved by the Electrical Inspector or until 36 hours, exclusive of
Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, shall have elapsed from the time of such
notification.



      (9)   At regular intervals the Electrical Inspector shall
visit all premises where work may be done under monthly, semi-annual, or
annual permits and shall inspect all electrical equipment installed under
such a permit since the day of the last previous inspection, and shall issue
a certificate of approval for such work as is found to be in conformity with
the provisions of this section, after the fee required has been paid.



      (10)   If upon inspection, the installation is not found to be
fully in conformity with the provisions of this section, the Electrical
Inspector shall at once forward to the person, firm, or corporation making
the installation, a written notice stating the defects which have been found
to exist.



      (11)   Should any persons, co-partnership or corporation begin
work of any kind such as hereinbefore set forth, or for which a permit from
the Electrical Inspector is required by provisions of this code of
ordinances, without having secured the necessary permit therefor from the
Inspector of Buildings either previous to or during the day of the
commencement of any such work, or on the next succeeding day where such work
is commenced on a Saturday or on a Sunday or a holiday, the permit applicant
shall, when subsequently securing such permit, be required to pay double the
fees hereinbefore provided for such permit, and shall be subject to all penal
provisions of this section. Holders of a contractor’s license shall not
obtain permits for electric work unless the work is supervised by them and is
performed by workers employed by them or their firm.



      (12)   Additional fees and/or fee shortages must be received
by the city within 14 days of written notice. If additional fees and/or fee
shortages are not received within 14 days of notice, permits for electrical
installations will not be accepted by the city until such time as the
additional fees and/or fee shortages are received. Additional fees and/or fee
shortages that are not received within 14 days of notice are subject to a 10%
per day penalty.



   (G)   Liability for damages. This section shall not be construed to
affect the responsibility or liability for any party owning, operating,
controlling, or installing any electrical equipment for damages to persons or
property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the city be held as assuming
any such liability by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized
herein or the certificate of approval issued as herein provided or by reason
of the approval or disapproval of any equipment authorized herein.



(2013 Code, § 4.19)  (Ord. 43, passed 7-3-1980; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.11  PLUMBING CODE.



   The following portions of the State Plumbing Code, 1 copy of which is
on file in the office of the City Clerk, are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at
length herein:



   (A)   Appendix C - Guide for Sizing the Water Supply System; and



   (B)   Appendix D - Sizing the Building Water Supply System.



(2013 Code, § 4.26)  (Ord. 309, passed 5-24-1991)



§ 111.12  DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.



   The Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is hereby adopted
by reference and incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully as
if set out at length herein. One copy of this Code is on file in the office
of the City Clerk.



(2013 Code, § 4.27)  (Ord. 309, passed 5-24-1991; Ord. 392, passed
12-15-1994; Ord. 408, passed 3-16-1995)



§ 111.13  HOUSING CODE.



   The State Building Code, established pursuant to M.S. §§ 326B.101 to
326B.16, as they may be amended from time to time, allows the municipality to
adopt by reference and enforce certain optional chapters of the most current
edition of the State Building Code. The following optional provisions
identified in the most current edition of the State Building Code are hereby
adopted and incorporated as part of the building code for this municipality:
Ch. 1306, subp. 2. Existing and New Buildings.



(2013 Code, § 4.40)  (Ord. 261, passed 1-31-1989; Ord. 326, passed
1-9-1992; Ord. 391, passed 12-15-1994; Ord. 408, passed 3-16-1995; Ord. 800,
passed 7-31-2008)



§ 111.14  ALARM SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Scope and purpose. This section provides regulation,
establishes users’ fees, and establishes a system of administration for
alarm systems. The purpose of this section is to protect the public safety
services of the city from misuse of public safety alarms, and to provide for
the maximum possible service to public safety alarm users.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ALARM SYSTEM. Includes any alarm installation designed to be used
for the prevention or detection of burglary, robbery, or fire on the premises
which contains the alarm installation. Automobile alarm devices shall not be
considered an alarm system under the terms of this chapter.



      ALARM USER. The person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or organization of any kind in control of any building,
structure, or facility wherein an alarm system is maintained.



      FALSE ALARM. An alarm system eliciting a response by public
safety personnel when a situation requiring a response does not, in fact,
exist, and which is caused by the activation of the alarm system through
malfunction, improper installation, or the inadvertence of the owner or
lessee of the alarm system or of owner or lessee’s employees or agents.
FALSE ALARMS do not include alarms caused by climatic conditions such as
tornadoes, thunderstorms, utility line mishaps, violent conditions of nature,
or any other conditions which are clearly beyond the control of the alarm
manufacturer, installer, or owner.



      PUBLIC SAFETY COMMUNICATION CENTER. The city’s facility used to
receive emergency requests for service and general information from public to
be dispatched to respective public safety units.



      PUBLIC SAFETY PERSONNEL. Duly authorized city employees or
employee.



   (C)   User fees.



      (1)   An alarm system which causes more than 2 false alarms to
the city in a single calendar year and which has received notice of such
violations will cause the alarm user to be charged a user fee, as specified
in the city’s fee schedule, per false alarm in excess of 2 false alarms in
a calendar year for false police notifications and a user fee as specified in
the city’s fee schedule, per false alarm in excess of 2 false alarms in a
calendar year for false fire notifications.



      (2)   Any alarm user which is required by the city to pay a
user fee as the result of a false alarm may make a written appeal of the
false alarm charge to the Chief of Police and/or Fire Chief within 10 days of
notice by the city of the false alarm charge. Following review and
determination by the Chief of Police and/or Fire Chief, such decision may be
appealed to the City Administrator who will have the authority to make a
final determination as to whether the appellant is to be charged with a false
alarm.



      (3)   Payment of user fees provided for under this section
must be paid to the City Clerk within 30 days from the date of notice by the
city to the alarm user. Failure to pay the fee within 30 days’ notice will
cause the alarm user to be considered delinquent and subject to a penalty of
10% of the fee.



      (4)   All delinquent charges for user fees computed as
provided in division (C)(3) above may either be collected by the city in a
civil action or may be forwarded to the City Clerk who shall prepare an
assessment roll each year of the delinquent amounts against the respective
properties serviced, which assessment roll shall be delivered to the City
Council for adoption on or before October 10 of each year.



   (D)   Alarm report. When an alarm user has incurred 5 alarms or more
within 1 calendar year, the user must submit a written report to the Chief of
Police and/or Fire Chief within 10 days after being charged with the fifth
false alarm, describing actions taken or to be taken to discover and
eliminate the cause of the false alarms.



   (E)   Administrative rules.



      (1)   The Chief of Police and Fire Chief shall promulgate such
rules as may be necessary for the implementation of this chapter and the
administration thereof.



      (2)   The Chief of Police and Fire Chief may develop and
maintain statistics for the purpose of ongoing alarm system evaluations.



(2013 Code, § 4.41)  (Ord. 558, passed 9-30-1999; Ord. 618, passed
2-28-2002; Ord. 773, passed 12-14-2006)



§ 111.15  FIRE WARNING SYSTEMS IN RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCIES.



   (A)   Fire warning system required. Every hotel, motel, and dwelling
unit, including single- dwellings, mobile homes, and every rooming house
shall be provided with approved smoke detectors as hereinafter set out.



   (B)   Type of warning device. Warning devices required by this
section shall be activated by smoke and shall conform to the requirements of
the State Building Code and the State Fire Code and any subsequent revisions.



   (C)   Installation requirements.



      (1)   Detectors shall be installed in sleeping areas and rooms;



      (2)   All detectors shall be installed on the ceiling and
shall be mounted not less than 6 inches from a wall. When detectors cannot be
installed on the ceiling they may be installed on a wall and shall be mounted
at least 12 inches down from the ceiling;



      (3)   Detectors shall be installed in every room in the path
of the means of egress from the sleeping area to the door leading from the
guestroom or suite; and



      (4)   Detectors shall be installed in each story within the
guestroom, dwelling unit, or suite, including basements. For guestrooms,
dwelling units, or suites with split-levels and without an intervening door
between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall
suffice for the adjacent lower level; provided, that the lower level is less
than 1 full story below the upper level.



   (D)   Power source and interconnection. Power source and
interconnection shall be in accordance with the State Building Code and the
State Fire Code and any subsequent revisions.



   (E)   Inspection and failure to comply. All premises required to be
provided with fire warning systems as required by this Code shall be open to
inspection by duly designated officers of the city at any and all reasonable
times.



   (F)   Failure to comply. It is unlawful for any person to fail to
comply with the provisions of this section and fail to keep the warning
devices above described fully operational at all times. Each day of failure
to comply with this section constitutes a separate offense. The provisions of
this division (F) are not intended to be an exclusive remedy. The city may,
at its option, proceed in a civil action to restrain the continued occupancy
of any hotel, motel, dwelling unit, rooming house, or other structure in
which sleeping rooms are occupied by tenants, until the provisions of this
section are fully complied with.



(2013 Code, § 4.50)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 666, passed
5-29-2003)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.16  MOBILE HOME PARK REGULATIONS.



   (A)   General requirements.



      (1)   Excellence of design, development, and maintenance is
the desired objective;



      (2)   Approved mobile home parks shall contain at least 50
fully developed mobile home sites;



      (3)   All mobile home courts shall have at least 10% of land
areas developed for recreational use (tennis courts, children’s play
equipment, swimming pool, golf greens, and the like) developed and maintained
at the owners/operator’s expense;



      (4)   All land areas shall be properly maintained, adequately
drained, free from dust, clean, and free from refuse, garbage, rubbish, or
debris;



      (5)   The requirements of a conditional use permit shall
prevail over any and all other requirements, standards, or conditions;



      (6)   A conditional or special use permit for a mobile home
park shall be reviewed once a year and revoked if development and maintenance
is not in full compliance thereof;



      (7)   A compact hedge, fence, or landscaped area shall be
installed around each mobile home park and be maintained in first class
condition at all times as approved;



      (8)   Advertising shall be limited to 1 name plate not to
exceed 25 square feet, with lighting, height, and location as approved by the
city and have a 15 feet setback from the front lot line;



      (9)   The operator of every mobile home park shall maintain a
registry in the operator’s office showing:



         (a)   The name and address of each permanent resident;
and



         (b)   The make, type, and license number of each mobile
home and automobile.



      (10)   A map of the mobile home park shall be displayed at the
entrance to the park and be illuminated during all hours of darkness;



      (11)   The corners of each mobile home site shall be clearly
marked;



      (12)   The mobile home park grounds shall be lighted as
approved by the city from sunset to sunrise;



      (13)   All utility installation to site and individual mobile
home sites shall be as approved by the city;



      (14)   All utilities shall be underground; there shall be no
overhead wires or supporting poles except those essential for street or other
lighting purposes. Utility mains shall not be under mobile homes;



      (15)   The proposed method of garbage, waste, and trash
disposal must be as approved by the city;



      (16)   Fire hydrants should be located within 300 feet of any
unit;



      (17)   Dogs and animals shall not be permitted to run at large
within the mobile home park, nor brought into public buildings, or in or on
playgrounds;



      (18)   No public address or loud speaker system shall be
permitted;



      (19)   All mobile home parks must have an area or areas set
aside for general storage, which must contain 96 square feet per unit and be
enclosed by a security fence of chain link with redwood slats;



      (20)   Each mobile home park shall provide off-street parking
for 2 cars at each mobile home lot, with a minimum parking space of 440
square feet;



      (21)   Roadways (public or private):



         (a)   Shall be paved as approved by the city;



         (b)   All roads shall have a concrete (mountable, roil
type) curb and gutter;



         (c)   Right-of-ways shall be no less than 60 feet in
width;



         (d)   Access drives off roads to all parking spaces and
mobile home sites shall be paved;



         (e)   All streets shall be developed as approved by the
city;



         (f)   Street trees as approved shall be planted at
intervals of 1 per mobile home unit; and



         (g)   Access to mobile home parks shall be as approved
by the city.



      (22)   No commercial sales shall be carried on, on the
premises. The term MOBILE HOME PARK shall not include mobile home sales lots
on which unoccupied mobile homes are parked for purposes of inspection and
sales;



      (23)   The Planning Commission may require additional
information as it deems necessary to ensure the health, welfare, and safety
of the tenants, developer, and court;



      (24)   Any lawful nonconforming use of land existing at the
effective date of this section shall be governed by the provisions of the
nonconforming use provision of this section. Entrance fee - maximum $25 - NO
REFUND ON ENTRY FEE;



      (25)   A concrete slab or patio shall be constructed on the
ground beside each mobile home parking space. This slab shall be not less
than 160 square feet and 4 inches thick; and



      (26)   Location and size of all streets abutting the mobile
home park and all driveways from such streets to the mobile home park shall
be passable to emergency vehicles at all times.



   (B)   Site requirements.



      (1)   Each mobile home site shall contain at least 5,000
square feet of land area for the exclusive use of the occupant:



         (a)   Width: No less than 50 feet; and



         (b)   Depth: No less than 100 feet.



      (2)   The area occupied by a mobile home shall not exceed 50%
of the total area of a mobile site; land may be occupied by a mobile home, a
vehicle, a building, a cabana, a ramada, a carport, an awning, storage closet
or cupboard, or any structure; unoccupied land shall be landscaped;
non-mobile home sites shall be landscaped in accordance with approved plans.



      (3)   The yards shall be landscaped except for necessary
driveway and sidewalk needs.



      (4)   Each mobile home site shall have the following features:



         (a)   Frontage on an approved roadway;



         (b)   Each site shall be properly landscaped with at
least 1 tree, grass, and the like (with consideration of weather conditions);



         (c)   No mobile home shall be parked closer than 5 feet
to the side lot lines nor closer than 15 feet to the front lot line, or
within 15 feet of the rear lot line;



         (d)   There shall be an open space of at least 25 feet
between the sides of the adjacent mobile home;



         (e)   Automobiles shall not be parked nearer than 5 feet
to any side lot line; and



         (f)   Mobile home sites with frontage to public streets
shall conform to all setback and other requirements of the zoning district in
which said site is located.



      (5)   The source of fuel for cooking, heating, or other
purposes at each mobile home site should be connected to city or public
utilities when available and where possible. All mobile homes must be
connected to the public water and sanitary sewer systems. Plans for disposal
of surface storm water must be approved by the city.



      (6)   No mobile home, off-street parking space, or building
shall be located within 20 feet of the exterior boundary of any mobile home
park.



   (C)   Structure requirements.



      (1)   Every structure shall be developed and maintained in a
safe, approved, and substantial manner. The exterior of such structures shall
be kept in good repair.



      (2)   Mobile homes shall be prohibited that:



         (a)   Do not conform to the requirements of the State
Vehicle Code;



         (b)   Are in an unsanitary condition or having an
exterior in bad repair; and



         (c)   Are structurally unsound and do not protect the
inhabitants against all elements.



      (3)   No obstruction shall be permitted that impedes the
inspection of plumbing, electrical facilities, and related mobile home
equipment. The area beneath a mobile home shall been enclosed except that
such enclosure must be openable for inspection.



      (4)   It is unlawful for any person to erect, place,
construct, reconstruct, relocate, alter, maintain, use, or occupy a cabana or
structure in a mobile home park without the written consent of the owner or
operator of the mobile home park.



   (D)   Permit requirements.



      (1)   Five copies of a plot plan drawn to scale and showing:



         (a)   Location and size of mobile home park;



         (b)   Location and size of all mobile homesites storage
areas, recreation areas, laundry drying areas, roadways, parking sites, and
all setback dimensions (parking spaces, exact mobile home sites, and the
like);



         (c)   Detailed landscaping plans and specifications with
time limited based on occupancy;



         (d)   Location and width of sidewalks;



         (e)   Plans for sanitary sewage disposal, surface
drainage, water systems, electrical service, and gas service;



         (f)   Road construction plans and specifications;



         (g)   Plans for any and all structures; and



         (h)   Such other information as required or implied by
these mobile home park standards or requested by public officials.



      (2)   Name and address of developer;



      (3)   Description of the method of disposing of garbage and
refuse;



      (4)   Detailed description of maintenance procedures and
ground supervision; and



      (5)   Description of construction plans (i.e., time involved,
cost estimates, stage development, if any, and so on).



   (E)   Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person to violate the
provisions of this section. The imposition of 1 penalty for any violation of
this section shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue but the
owner of the premises where the violation occurred shall be required to ready
the condition which constitutes a violation within a reasonable time; and
unless a longer period of time is allowed for correction of the condition,
each 10 days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a
separate violation.



(2013 Code, § 4.60)  (Ord. 336, passed 3-15-1972; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.17  MANUFACTURED HOME PARK CLOSINGS.



   (A)   Purpose. In view of the peculiar nature and problems presented
by the closure or conversion of manufactured home parks, the City Council
finds that the public health, safety, and general welfare will be promoted by
requiring compensation to displaced residents of such parks. The purpose of
this section is to require park owners and purchasers of manufactured home
parks to pay displaced residents reasonable relocation costs and additional
compensation to displaced residents and, where possible, to provide tax
increment funds by the city to assist the park owner or purchaser in the
payment of these costs, pursuant to the authority granted under M.S. §
327C.095, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CLOSURE STATEMENT. A statement prepared by the park owner clearly
stating the park is closing, addressing the availability, location, and
potential costs of adequate replacement housing within a 25-mile radius of
the park that is closing and the probable relocation costs of the
manufactured homes located in the park.



      DISPLACED RESIDENT. A resident of an owner-occupied manufactured
home who rents a lot in a manufactured home park, including collectively the
members of the resident’s household, as of the date the park owner submits
a closure statement to the City’s Planning Commission.



      LOT. An area within a manufactured home park, designed, or used
for the accommodation of a manufactured home.



      MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, not affixed to or part of real
estate, transportable in 1 or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is
8 body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when
erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes
the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical system contained in
it.



      MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. Any site, lot, field, or tract of land
upon which 2 or more occupied manufactured homes are located, whether free of
charge or for compensation, and includes any building, structure, tent,
vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of
the MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. This definition does not include facilities which
are open only during 3 or fewer seasons of the year.



      PARK OWNER. The owner of a manufactured home park and any person
acting on behalf of the owner in the operation or management of a park.



      PERSON. An individual, corporation, firm partnership,
incorporated, or unincorporated association or any other legal or commercial
entity.



   (C)   Notice of closing. If a manufactured home park is to be
closed, converted in whole or part to another use or terminated as a use of
the property, the park owner shall, at least 9 months prior to the closure,
conversion to another use or termination of use, provide a copy of a closure
statement to a resident of each manufactured home and to the City’s
Planning Commission.



   (D)   Tax increment financing.



      (1)   At any time prior to or after delivery of the notice of
closing to the Planning Commission, but prior to the public hearing set forth
in division (F) below, the park owner or prospective purchaser of the park
may make application to the city for the use of tax increment financing to
finance the cost of relocating and purchasing the displaced manufactured
homes, any incidental costs associated therewith, and any other development
expense that the city deems appropriate or eligible for such financing.



      (2)   The city in its sole and unlimited discretion may
determine whether tax increment financing should be used for such purposes.
If the city determines that tax increment financing should not be used for
such purposes, the park owner can elect to rescind its notice of closure and
resume operation of the manufactured home park, provided, however, that
notice of any such rescission shall be given to park residents no later than
90 days after the notice of closure has been given.



   (E)   Notice of public hearing. The Planning Commission shall submit
the closure statement to the City Council and request the City Council to
schedule a public hearing. The city shall mail a notice at least 10 days
prior to the public hearing to a resident of each manufactured home in the
park stating the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. The park owner
shall provide the city with a list of the names and addresses of at least 1
resident of each manufactured home in the park at the time the closure
statement is submitted to the Planning Commission.



   (F)   Public hearing. A public hearing shall be held before the City
Council within 90 days after receipt of the notice of closing for the purpose
of reviewing the closure statement and evaluating the impact that the park
closing may have on displaced residents and the park owner.



   (G)   Payment of relocation costs.



      (1)   (a)   After service of the closure statement by the
park owner and completion of the public hearing and upon submittal by the
displaced resident of a contract or other verification of relocation expense,
the park owner shall pay to the displaced resident the reasonable cost of
relocating the manufactured home to another manufactured home park located
within a 25-mile radius of the park that is being closed, converted to
another use, or ceasing operation. Relocation costs must be paid not less
than 90 days prior to the closing of the park or its conversion to another
use.



         (b)   Reasonable relocation costs shall include:



            1.   The actual expenses incurred in moving the
displaced resident’s manufactured home and personal property, including the
reasonable cost of dissembling, moving, and reassembling any attached
appurtenances, such as porches, decks, skirting, and awnings, which were not
acquired after notice of closure or conversion of the park, and utility
“hook-up” charges;



            2.   The cost of insurance for the replacement
value of the property being moved; and



            3.   The cost of reasonable repairs or
modifications that are required in order to physically move the manufactured
home from its existing lot to the replacement lot, including repairs or
modifications necessary to qualify the home for occupancy in another
manufactured home park.



      (2)   Relocation costs shall not include payments paid on
behalf of a displaced resident by the park owner or purchaser or by the owner
of any manufactured home park to which the displaced resident voluntarily
moves.



      (3)   The total amount of relocation payments paid to a
displaced resident shall not exceed the estimated market value of the home as
determined in division (H)(1) below.



   (H)   Payment of additional compensation.



      (1)   (a)   If a resident cannot or chooses not to relocate
the manufactured home within a 25-mile radius of the park that is being
closed due to a structural or age limitation of the manufactured home or the
lack of any available lot space within the 25-mile radius, then in lieu of
the above relocation payment, a displaced resident is entitled to tender the
title to the manufactured home and be paid an amount equal to the estimated
market value of the manufactured home as determined by an independent
appraiser knowledgeable in the valuation of manufactured homes and giving due
consideration to the value and condition of the home. The city shall select
the appraiser and the park purchaser shall pay for the cost of the appraisal.



         (b)   The purchaser or park owner shall pay such
compensation upon transfer of title to the home. Such compensation shall be
paid to the displaced resident no later than 90 days prior to the closing of
the park or its conversion to another use, and the park owner shall receive
title and possession of the manufactured home upon payment of such
compensation.



      (2)   If a displaced resident cannot or chooses not to
relocate the manufactured home within a 25-mile radius of the park that is
being closed due to a structural or age limitation of the manufactured home,
and the resident elects not to tender title to the manufactured home, the
resident is entitled to relocation costs equal to an average of relocation
costs paid to other residents in the park. Payment of the average relocation
costs shall be made as follows: 50% within 10 days of application for the
funds; and 50% upon the removal of the manufactured home and any structures
and debris from the manufactured home park. Payment for double-wide
manufactured homes shall be in an amount equal to twice the average
relocation costs paid to owners of single-wide manufactured homes.



   (I)   Cap on payments.



      (1)   If tax increment financing is used to assist in the
payment of the relocation costs and other compensation required by this
section, the park owner and purchaser of the park shall be required to pay
relocation costs and other compensation that do not exceed 20% of the
purchase price of the park or the assessed value of the park, whichever is
greater.



      (2)   (a)   If tax increment financing is not used or if
such financing is not sufficient to pay the full amount required to be paid
to all displaced residents, the total relocation costs and other compensation
to be paid to all displaced residents by the park owner and purchaser of the
park and by the city shall not exceed the following percent of the purchase
price of the park or the assessed market value of the park, whichever is
greater.



 

Park Owner
 
City Portion (If Needed)
 
Purchase Price/Assessed Value



35%

 

10%

 

0 - $299,999




$90,000 + 7.5%

 

10%

 

$300,000 - $599,999




$90,000 + 7.5%

 

5%

 

$600,000 - $699,999




20%

 

0%

 

Over $700,000




 



         (b)   The city’s portion shall be paid only if the
amount required to be paid by the park owner is insufficient to pay all
displaced residents the total amount required by divisions (G) and (H) above.
If the total amount due to displaced residents exceeds the above percentages,
payments to displaced residents will be made on a pro rata basis.



      (3)   The purchase price of the park includes all
consideration received by the park owner including, but not limited to, cash,
buyer’s forgiveness of seller’s indebtedness, liens, mortgages, or other
encumbrances paid by buyer on seller’s behalf, or special assessments paid
or assessed by buyer. Upon request by the city, the park owner and purchaser
shall provide the city with a complete itemization and documentation of the
sale prior to the public hearing.



      (4)   Nothing in this section is intended to prevent the city
or the park owner from obtaining economic assistance in addition to tax
increment financing from any governmental entity to assist in the payment of
amounts due to displaced residents.



   (J)   Verification of costs. The displaced resident must submit a
contract or other verified cost estimate for relocating the manufactured home
to the park owner for approval as a condition to the park owner’s liability
to pay relocation expenses. If the park owner refuses to pay the contract or
other verified costs estimate, the park owner shall arrange for relocating
the manufactured home and pay the relocation costs identified in division (G)
above.



   (K)   Applicability. This section applies only to the closing of
manufactured home parks that are existing in the city as of the effective
date of this section.



(2013 Code, § 4.61)  (Ord. 543, passed 4-1-1999)



§ 111.18  RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The purpose of this section is to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare of the community at large, and the residents of
residential rental properties in the city. The purpose of this section is
also to ensure that rental housing in the city is decent, safe, and sanitary,
and is so operated and maintained as not to become a nuisance to the
neighborhood or an influence that fosters blight and deterioration, or does
not create a disincentive to reinvest in the community.



      (2)   The operation of residential rental properties is a
business enterprise that entails certain responsibilities. Owners and
operators are responsible for taking such reasonable steps as are necessary
to ensure that the residents of the city who occupy such rental properties
may pursue the quiet enjoyment of the normal activities of life in their
surroundings that are: safe, secure, and sanitary; free from noise,
nuisances, or annoyances; and free from conditions that endanger the health
or safety of persons; and the security of property.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      APARTMENT BUILDING. A multi-family building containing dwelling
units in a stacked configuration, having common walls and floors/ceilings.



      APPLICANT. The natural person completing the registration form
prescribed by this section.



      DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing a living space delineated
by partitions of any kind for 1 or more persons.



      MULTIPLE-RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. A building with any dwelling
joined to another dwelling at 1 or more sides by a party wall or walls,
including apartments, townhomes, twinhomes, duplexes, or quadhomes.



      RENTAL MANAGER. Any natural person who has been delegated by the
residential rental property owner in charge, care, or control of a
residential rental property, and is able to respond in person to issues
related to the residential rental property.



      RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY. Any building, or 1 or more portions
thereof, occupied or intended to be occupied for residential purposes by a
residential tenant.



      RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY OWNER. Any person or entity owning
residential rental property within the city.



      RESIDENTIAL TENANT. A person who does not own, but occupies a
dwelling for residential purposes, for payment of a fee or other compensation
to the owner, under a lease or contract, whether written or verbal.



   (C)   Applicability and scope. This section applies to any dwelling,
and any dwelling unit therein, that is a residential rental property,
including garages, storage buildings, and appurtenances. This section does
not apply to State Department of Health-licensed rest homes, convalescent
care facilities, group homes, and nursing homes; hotels, motels; and
owner-occupied units.



   (D)   Rental manager required.



      (1)   Each residential rental property owner shall appoint a
rental manager upon whom the city may lawfully serve notices pertaining to
the administration of this or any other section of this code of ordinances or
state or federal law, service of which shall be as effective as if made upon
such residential rental property owner.



      (2)   A residential rental property owner may serve as the
rental manager, if all requirements of a rental manager prescribed within
this section are met by the residential rental property owner.



   (E)   Registration.



      (1)   All residential rental properties shall be registered
with the city by either the residential rental property owner or rental
manager.  Registration of each residential rental property shall be made on
a separate form provided by the city and shall include the following
information:



         (a)   The name, address, and telephone number of the
residential rental property owner and rental manager;



         (b)   The name, address, and telephone number of the
natural person completing the registration form;



         (c)   The address of the residential rental property. In
the case of an apartment building, the applicant shall provide the address
and name for the building, as well as the number of dwelling units contained
therein; and



         (d)   Verification that either the residential rental
property owner or rental manager conducts a criminal background check on each
and every residential tenant;



         (e)   Verification that a written lease exists for the
residential rental property and each unit dwelling thereon; and



         (f)   Verification that a written lease addendum
commonly known as a “drug free/crime free lease addendum” exists for each
and every written lease entered into after the effective date of this section.



      (2)   Upon receipt of a fully completed registration form, the
city shall issue to the registrant a certificate of registration as proof of
the registration. Certificates of registration shall be non-transferable and
state the following: the date of issuance; the address of the residential
rental property and the name, if an apartment building, of the residential
rental property owner; the name(s) of the rental manager(s); and the number
of dwelling units located within the residential rental property. Within 30
days of a transfer of ownership, change in rental manager, change in the
number of rental units, or change in dwelling occupancy from owner occupancy
to rental tenant occupancy, the residential rental property owner or rental
manager shall complete and submit a registration form for each and every
residential rental property affected by the transfer or change.



      (3)   A residential rental property owner owning residential
rental property at the time of the adoption of this section shall have 180
days after its effective date to comply with the registration provisions
contained therein.



   (F)   Registration fee.  There is no fee for registration.



   (G)   Minnesota Crime Free Multi-Housing Program.



      (1)   The city has established a rental owner educational
program consistent with the Minnesota Crime Free Multi-Housing Program. The
educational program includes information such as: applicant screening, rental
agreements, identification of illegal activity, eviction process, the roles
of working with the police, crime prevention, code enforcement and public
health, licensing and inspections, and active property management. All
residential rental property owners or rental managers must attend phase one
of the Crime Free Multi-Housing Program within one year after the issuance of
a certificate of registration. Either the property owner or manager must hold
a phase one certification at all times. Phase one training will be conducted
on a regular basis. Program attendees will be required to pay a participation
fee in an amount determined to cover the direct cost of the program.



      (2)   The city will recognize proof of phase one
certifications from other entities.



      (3)   An owner or property manager operating a single-family
home or property with 3 or fewer units need only complete phase one of the
Crime Free Multi-Housing Program. Owners or property managers with 4 or more
units are required to complete all 3 phases of the Crime Free Multi-Housing
Program.



      (4)   A residential rental property owner whose only rental
dwelling is a single-family dwelling homesteaded by a relative is exempted
from the program.



      (5)   All residential rental property leases entered into
after the effective date of this section shall contain the written lease
addendum commonly known as the “Drug Free/Crime Free Lease Addendum.”



(Ord. 870, passed 6-4-2013)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Every person violates a section, subdivision,
paragraph, or provision of this chapter when the person performs an act
thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is
thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or performs an act prohibited or
declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure is prohibited or declared
unlawful by a Code adopted by reference by this chapter, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in
specific provisions hereof.



      (2)   A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor (M.S. §
326B.121, as it may be amended from time to time).



(2013 Code, § 4.99)



   (B)   (1)   Any provision of § 111.17 may be enforced by
injunction or other appropriate civil remedy,



      (2)   The city shall not issue a building permit in
conjunction with reuse of manufactured home park property unless the park
owner has paid reasonable relocation costs and the purchaser of the park has
purchased those manufactured homes tendered for sale not less than 30 days
after the closing of the park or its conversion to another use. The park
owner shall not have any liability for the payment of any claims made after
such date.



(2013 Code, § 4.61)



   (C)   (1)   It is a misdemeanor for any person to provide false
information on the prescribed registration form per § 111.18.



      (2)   It is a misdemeanor for any person or entity to operate
or cause to be operated any property as a residential rental property without
first registering with the city as set forth in § 111.18.



      (3)   It is a misdemeanor for any residential rental property
owner or rental manager to fail to attend phase one of the Minnesota Crime
Free Multi-Housing Program training within 1 year after the issuance of a
certificate of registration. It is also a misdemeanor for any residential
property owners or managers of 4 or more units to fail to complete all 3
phases of the Crime Free Multi-Housing Program within 1 year after issuance
of a certificate of registration.



      (4)   It is a misdemeanor for a residential property owner or
rental manager to rent residential property without first conducting a
background check and then entering into a written lease that contains the
written lease addendum commonly known as the “Drug Free/Crime Free Lease
Addendum.”



(Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992; Ord. 543, passed
4-1-1999; Ord. 800, passed 7-31-2008; Ord. 870, passed 6-4-2013)



CHAPTER 112:  PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



Section



   112.01   Purpose



   112.02   Definitions



   112.03   License required



   112.04   Registration required for solicitors



   112.05   Conditions of licensing



   112.06   Licensing and registration exemptions



   112.07   Suspension or revocation of a license



   112.08   Posting of placard prohibiting peddlers



   112.09   Effective date



   112.10   Transient merchant license fees



 



   112.99   Penalty



§ 112.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is not intended to interfere with legitimate business
activities of peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants as the same are
herein defined, whether same be local or interstate. These provisions are
intended only to, as nearly as possible, ferret out the illegitimate or
confidence operators and to regulate and control all those who would use
their unique presence on property within the city, for purposes of
harassment, nuisance, theft, or other unlawful activities.



(2013 Code, § 6.21)  (Ord. 886, passed 7-17-2014)



§ 112.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PEDDLER. Any person who goes door to door, street to street, or place
to place, to offer or display for sale, and delivering immediately upon sale,
goods, wares, merchandise, or services transported with that person.



   SOLICITOR. Any person who, for solely commercial sales purposes, goes
door to door, street to street, or place to place, to obtain or attempt to
obtain orders for goods, wares, merchandise, or services as shown or
described by sample, catalog, or some other form, for which delivery or
performance will occur at a later time.



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person, who engages in, or transacts any
temporary and transient business in the city, selling goods, wares, or
merchandise; and, who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, hires,
leases, occupies, or uses a building, structure, vacant, or occupied lot, or
railroad car for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, and
merchandise. The term TRANSIENT MERCHANT does not include a seller or
exhibitor in a firearms collector show involving 2 or more sellers or
exhibitors.



(2013 Code, § 6.21)  (Ord. 886, passed 7-17-2014)



§ 112.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler or
transient merchant in the city without first obtaining a license therefor
from the city. A license must be applied for at least 10 days prior to the
date when the activity to be carried on is to commence. The applicant shall
completely fill out an application for a license as prepared by the city and
pay the applicable license fee.



(2013 Code, § 6.21)  (Ord. 886, passed 7-17-2014)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.04  REGISTRATION REQUIRED FOR SOLICITORS.



   It is unlawful for any person to engage in business as a solicitor
without first registering with the city. Each person conducting soliciting
activities must completely fill out a registration form as prepared by the
city.



(Ord. 886, passed 7-17-2014)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.05  CONDITIONS OF LICENSING.



   (A)   Separate licenses and registration. Each individual engaged as
a peddler or person accompanying a licensee at work must secure a separate
license. Each individual engaged as a solicitor or person accompanying a
solicitor at work must separately register with the city. Licenses and
registration are non-transferable. Proof of license or registration shall be
displayed at all times.



   (B)   Practices prohibited. It is unlawful for any person engaged in
business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant to do the following:



      (1)   Conduct business before 8:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.;



      (2)   Call attention to that person’s business by crying
out, blowing a horn, ringing a bell, or by any loud or unusual noise, or by
use of any amplifying device;



      (3)   Fail to display proof of license or registration, and
produce valid identification when requested;



      (4)   Remain on the property of another when asked to leave;



      (5)   Claim endorsement by the city based on license or
registration: and



      (5)   Conduct business in any manner as to create a threat to
the health, safety, and welfare a specific individual or the general public.



(2013 Code, § 6.21)  (Ord. 886, passed 7-17-2014)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.06  LICENSING AND REGISTRATION EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   This chapter does not apply to the following:



      (1)   Door to door, street to street, or place to place
advocacy or dissemination of religious, political, social, or ideological
beliefs. If the advocacy or dissemination of the person’s beliefs is merely
incidental to a commercial activity, a person is not exempt from licensing or
registration requirements:



      (2)   Solicitation of orders for future door to door delivery
of newspapers, or to any person who may sell or peddle the products of the
farm or garden occupied and cultivated by such person;



      (3)   This chapter shall not apply to persons licensed for the
sale of milk, cream, dairy products, and bakery products; and



      (4)   This chapter shall not apply to persons making
deliveries of food and dairy products to the customers on his or her
established delivery route.



   (B)   These exemptions shall not excuse a person from complying with
any other applicable provision of city ordinances.



(2013 Code, § 6.21)  (Ord. 886, passed 7-17-2014)



§ 112.07  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A LICENSE.



   (A)   Any license issued or registration obtained under and pursuant
to this chapter may be suspended by a police officer if the licensee or
registrant has violated § 112.06, or is otherwise conducting business in
such a manner as to constitute a breach of peace, fraudulent conduct, or any
other conduct that is prohibited by local, state, or federal laws or
regulations. Falsification of information required for a license or
registration is also grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation of a
license, or suspension or revocation of registration.



   (B)   The license or registration shall be automatically revoked if
the licensee or registrant does not file an appeal pursuant to this chapter.
When taking action on any license issued or registration under this chapter,
the police officer shall provide the licensee or registrant with verbal or
written notice of the alleged violation. The notice shall inform the licensee
or registrant of their right to be heard before the City Council. The notice
shall also inform the licensee or registrant that the license or registration
shall be automatically revoked if no appeal is filed within 21 days of the
date of the notice by the police officer. Verbal notice shall be confirmed
within 5 days by a mailed written notice to the licensee or registrant. The
City Council shall not conduct a hearing on the suspension unless a request
is made by the licensee or registrant in writing. If a request for a hearing
is made, the City Council shall conduct the hearing at the next available
City Council session. No City Council resolution or other notice calling for
a hearing shall be required.



   (C)   A licensee or registrant may also be criminally charged for
violation of § 130.39, disorderly conduct, or violation of other local,
state, or federal laws or regulations.



(2013 Code, § 6.21)  (Ord. 886, passed 7-17-2014)



§ 112.08  POSTING OF PLACARD PROHIBITING PEDDLERS.



   (A)   Any city resident or business wishing to exclude peddlers and
solicitors from premises occupied by the business or resident may place upon
or near the usual entrance to such premises a printed placard or sign bearing
the following notice: “Peddlers and Solicitors Prohibited”; or some
comparable statement. Such placard shall be at least 3-1/2 inches long and
3-1/2 inches wide and the printing thereon shall be at least 1/2 inch in
height. No peddler or solicitor shall enter in or upon any premises, or
attempt to enter in or upon any premises, where such a placard or sign is
placed and maintained.



   (B)   Violation of this chapter on shall result in the city
temporarily suspending the license or registration pursuant to § 112.07 or
initiating revocation proceedings.



(2013 Code, § 6.21)  (Ord. 756, passed 5-11-2006; Ord. 886, passed
7-17-2014)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.09  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   Sections 112.01 through 112.09 become effective from and after its
passage and publication.



(Ord. 886, passed 7-17-2014)



§ 112.10  TRANSIENT MERCHANT LICENSE FEES.



   Transient  merchant license fees for the city shall be as follows:



 

Background
 
$50


One year
 
$160


Six month
 
$105


Weekly
 
$50



 



(Ord. 889, passed 6-26-2014)



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or provision
of this chapter when the person performs an act thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows.



   (A)   Misdemeanor. Where the specific section, subdivision,
paragraph, or provision specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, the
person shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.



   (B)   Petty misdemeanor. As to any violations not constituting a
misdemeanor under the provisions of division (A) above, the person shall be
punished as for a petty misdemeanor.



(2013 Code, § 6.99)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992;
Ord. 352, passed 1-7-1993)



CHAPTER 113:  PAWNBROKERS, PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS, AND SECOND-HAND DEALERS



Section



   113.01   Purpose



   113.02   Definitions



   113.03   License required



   113.04   Application



   113.05   Licensing requirements



   113.06   Restrictions and regulations



   113.07   Identification of seller or pledger



   113.08   Record-keeping



   113.09   Holding period



   113.10   Receipt



   113.11   Suspension or revocation of license



 



   113.99   Penalty



§ 113.01  PURPOSE.



   The City Council finds that pawnbrokers, precious metal dealers, and
second-hand dealers can provide an opportunity for the commission and
concealment of crimes, because such businesses have the ability to receive
and transfer stolen property easily and quickly. The City Council also finds
that consumer protection regulation is warranted in transactions involving
pawnbrokers, precious metal dealers, and second-hand dealers. The purpose of
this chapter therefor is to prevent pawnbroking, precious metal, and
second-hand businesses from being used as facilities for commission of crimes
and to assure that such businesses comply with basic consumer protection
standards, thereby protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens of the city.



(2013 Code, § 6.28)  (Ord. 376, passed 4-28-1994; Ord. 385, passed
9-6-1994; Ord. 397, passed 1-12-1995)



§ 113.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ITEM CONTAINING PRECIOUS METAL. An item made in whole or in part of
metal and containing more than 1% by weight of silver, gold, or platinum.



   PAWNBROKER. A person engaged in whole or in part in the business of
lending money on the security of tangible personal property actually
delivered into the person’s possession, or in the business of purchasing
tangible personal property to be left with the person on the condition that
it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a
fixed period of time. No bank, savings and loan association, or credit union
shall be deemed a PAWNBROKER for purposes of this chapter.



   PAWNSHOP. Any business establishment operated by a pawnbroker.



   PRECIOUS METAL DEALER.



      (1)   Any person engaging in the business of buying coins or
second-hand items containing precious metal, including, but not limited to,
jewelry, watches, eating utensils, candlesticks, and religious and decorative
objects, as specified in M.S. § 325F.731, as it may be amended from time to
time.



      (2)   Persons conducting the following transactions shall not
be deemed to be PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS:



         (a)   Transactions at occasional garage sales, rummage
sales, estate sales, or farm auctions, except that precious metal dealers
must comply with the requirements of M.S. §§ 325F.734 to 325F.742, as they
may be amended from to time, for these transactions;



         (b)   Transactions regulated by M.S. Ch. 80A, as it may
be amended from time to time;



         (c)   Transactions regulated by the Federal Commodity
Futures Commission Act, being 7 U.S.C. 1 et seq.;



         (d)   Transactions involving the purchase of precious
metal grindings, filings, slag, sweeps, scraps, or dust from an industrial
manufacturer, dental lab, dentist, or agent thereof;



         (e)   Transactions involving the purchase of
photographic film, such as lithographic and X-ray film, or silver residue or
flake recovered in lithographic and X-ray film processing;



         (f)   Transactions involving coins, bullion, or ingots;



         (g)   Transactions in which the second-hand item
containing precious metal is exchanged for a new item containing precious
metal and the value of the new item exceeds the value of the second-hand
item, except that a person who is a precious metal dealer by engaging in a
transaction which is not exempted by this chapter must comply with the
requirements of M.S. §§ 325F.734 to 325F.742, as they may be amended from
time to time;



         (h)   Transactions between precious metal dealers if
both dealers are licensed under M.S. § 325F.733, as it may be amended from
time to time, or if the seller’s business is located outside of the state
and the item is shipped from outside the state to a dealer licensed under
M.S. § 325F.733, as it may be amended from time to time; and



         (i)   Transactions in which the buyer of the second-hand
item containing precious metal is engaged primarily in the business of buying
and selling antiques, and the items are resold in an unaltered condition
except for repair, and the items are resold at retail, and the buyer paid
less than $2,500 for second-hand items containing precious metals purchased
within any period of 12 consecutive months.    



   PRECIOUS METALS. Silver, gold, and platinum.



   SECOND-HAND DEALER.



      (1)   A person engaged in the business of buying previously
used, rented, owned, or leased goods of any kind, including, but not limited
to, coins, gold, silver, jewelry, metals, guns, and wrecked or dismantled
motor vehicles or motor vehicles intended to be wrecked or dismantled.



      (2)   Persons conducting the following transactions shall not
be deemed to be SECOND-HAND DEALERS:



         (a)   Transactions where all the following are present:



            1.   The sale is held on property occupied as a
dwelling by the seller, or owned, rented, or leased by a charitable
organization;



            2.   The items offered for sale are owned by the
occupant;



            3.   No sale exceeds a period of 72 consecutive
hours;



            4.   No more than 4 sales are held in any 12-month
period; and



            5.   None of the items offered for sale was
purchased for resale or received on consignment for the purpose of resale.



         (b)   Sales of goods at an auction held by an auctioneer;



         (c)   Transactions involving goods taken as partial or
full payment for new goods, where such business is incidental to and not the
primary business of the person;



         (d)   Transactions by a business specializing in the
sale of antiques and other goods more than 20 years old, where any other
transactions are incidental to the antique business;



         (e)   The sale and exchange of used books, where the
business gives only credit and not cash for used books it acquires from
customers;



         (f)   Purchases and sales of military goods, where all
purchases are directly from offices of the U.S. government or military
surplus wholesalers. Military clothing also may be purchased from current and
former military personnel;



         (g)   Bulk sales of property from a merchant,
manufacturer, or wholesaler having an established place of business, or goods
sold at open sale from bankrupt stock;



         (h)   Sale of goods at an exhibition, providing the
exhibition does not last longer than 10 days in any 12-month period;



         (i)   Sales of automobiles by a licensed automobile
dealer;



         (j)   Sales made by the Sheriff or other public
officials in the discharge of their official duties;



         (k)   Sales made by assignees or receivers appointed by
the state or a court to make sales for the benefit of creditors; and



         (l)   Sales by a charitable organization of donated
items.



(2013 Code, § 6.28)  (Ord. 376, passed 4-28-1994; Ord. 385, passed
9-6-1994; Ord. 397, passed 1-12-1995) Ord. 454, passed 6-4-1996; Ord. 460,
passed 7-8-1996)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate as a pawnbroker, precious metal dealer, or
second-hand dealer, operate a pawnshop, or work in the pawnbroker’s,
precious metal dealer’s, or second-hand dealer’s business without a
license therefor from the city.



(2013 Code, § 6.28)  (Ord. 376, passed 4-28-1994; Ord. 385, passed
9-6-1994; Ord. 397, passed 1-12-1995)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.04  APPLICATION.



   All applications for a license shall comply with the requirements of §
110.002, and also contain the following information:



   (A)   Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker, precious
metal dealer, or second-hand goods dealer license from any other governmental
unit;



   (B)   Whether the applicant is licensed under either M.S. §
471.924, as it may be amended from time to time, or M.S. §§ 325F.731
through 325F.744, as they may be amended from time to time; and



   (C)   Whether the applicant has previously been denied a pawnbroker,
precious metal dealer, or second-hand goods dealer license from any
governmental unit.



(2013 Code, § 6.28)  (Ord. 376, passed 4-28-1994; Ord. 385, passed
9-6-1994; Ord. 397, passed 1-12-1995)



§ 113.05  LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Liquor license. No license shall be issued to an applicant who
holds a liquor license under § 114.14.



   (B)   Gambling.



      (1)   No license shall be issued to an applicant who keeps,
possesses, or operates, or permits the keeping, possession, or operation on
the licensed premises of dice, slot machines, roulette wheels, punch-boards,
blackjack tables, or pinball machines which return coins or slugs, chips, or
tokens of any kind, which are redeemable in merchandise or cash.



      (2)   No gambling equipment authorized under M.S. §§ 349.11
through 349.60, as they may be amended from time to time, may be kept or
operated, and no raffles may be conducted on the licensed premises and/or
adjoining rooms. The purchase of lottery tickets may take place on the
licensed premises as authorized by the director of the lottery pursuant to
M.S. Ch. 349A, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (C)   Minors. No license shall be issued to an applicant who is a
minor at the time the application is filed.



   (D)   Delinquent taxes. No license shall be issued for an operation
on any property on which taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of any
governmental entity are due, delinquent, or unpaid. In the event a suit has
been commenced under M.S. § 278.01 through 278.03, as they may be amended
from time to time, questioning the amount or validity of taxes, the City
Council may on application waive strict compliance with this provision; no
waiver may be granted, however, for taxes or any portion thereof which remain
unpaid for a period exceeding 1 year after becoming due.



   (E)   Number of pawnshop licenses issued. No more than 1 pawnbroker
license shall be issued for each 15,000 population within the city as
calculated by the most recent decennial census or City Council estimate of
population in non-census years.



   (F)   Distance between pawnshops. No pawnbroker licensed under this
chapter shall be located within 1-1/2 miles, as measured in a straight line
from property line to property line, of another licensed pawnbroker
establishment.



(2013 Code, § 6.28)  (Ord. 376, passed 4-28-1994; Ord. 385, passed
9-6-1994; Ord. 397, passed 1-12-1995; Ord. 848, passed 7-14-2011)  Penalty,
see § 113.99



§ 113.06  RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Hours of operation. Hours of operation shall be limited to
between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.



   (B)   Inspection. The licensee shall, at all times, allow the Police
Department to enter any portion of the building or property where the
licensee’s business is located or where goods are stored, for the purpose
of inspecting building or property, for inspecting the items therein for the
purpose of locating items suspected or alleged to have been stolen or
otherwise improperly disposed of, and for the purpose of checking for
violations of this chapter.



   (C)   Minors. No licensee shall purchase or receive personal
property of any nature on deposit or pledge from any person under the age of
18 years.



   (D)   Incompetents. No licensee shall purchase or receive personal
property of any kind from a person who is or appears to be of unsound mind,
incompetent, or under the influence of alcohol or drugs.



   (E)   Prohibited items. No licensee shall accept any item of
property which contains an altered or obliterated serial number, nor any item
of property whose serial number has been removed.



   (F)   Licensed vehicles. No licensee shall accept any vehicle
licensed or subject to licensing by the state, unless the vehicle is licensed
and operable. The licensee must be shown the title, and the pledger or seller
must be named as owner on that title. The title must be clearly visible on
the videotape required in this chapter.



   (G)   Checks. All purchases and pawns by a licensee over $60 shall
be made by check. No licensee shall purchase or pawn items for more than $60
with cash.



   (H)   Interest. The rate or interest charged on pawned items shall
be posted in a clearly visible location in the licensee’s building.



   (I)   Property of another. No person may pawn, pledge, sell, leave,
or deposit any article of property not their own; nor shall any person offer
or attempt to pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or deposit the property of another,
whether with permission or without, nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell,
leave, or deposit any article of property in which another has a security
interest.



(2013 Code, § 6.28) (Ord. 376, passed 4-28-1994; Ord. 385, passed 9-6-1994;
Ord. 397, passed 1-12-1995; Ord. 454, passed 6-4-1996; Ord. 460, passed
7-18-1996; Ord. 845, passed 5-12-2011)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.07  IDENTIFICATION OF SELLER OR PLEDGER.



   The safety of the public is compromised when stolen property is easily
pawned or sold to pawnbrokers, precious metal dealers, or second-hand
dealers. Due to the nature of the business of pawnbrokers, precious metal
dealers, and second-hand dealers, and the attraction pawnshops, precious
metal businesses, and second-hand businesses have to the criminally disposed,
special regulation of the transactions is necessary.



   (A)   A licensee shall not accept items of property unless the
seller or pledger provides to the licensee 1 of the following forms of
identification. No other form of identification shall be accepted



      (1)   A valid state driver’s license;



      (2)   A state identification card issued by the Department of
Public Safety; or



      (3)   A photo identification issued by the state of residency
of the person from whom the item was received.



   (B)   A pawnbroker or second-hand goods dealer shall run a videotape
during all hours of operation. Tapes shall be retained a minimum of 30 days.
The quality of the videotape shall be sufficient to clearly identify the
seller or pledger, and to clearly identify the goods involved in the
transaction. Each tape shall automatically record the date and time of each
transaction. Videotape recordings shall be provided to the Police Department
upon request.



(2013 Code, § 6.28)  (Ord. 376, passed 4-28-1994; Ord. 385, passed
9-6-1994; Ord. 397, passed 1-12-1995)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.08  RECORD-KEEPING.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      BILLABLE TRANSACTION. Every reportable transaction except
renewals, redemptions, or extensions of existing pawns on items previously
reported and continuously in the licensee’s possession.



      REPORTABLE TRANSACTIONS. The receipt of any item of property,
whether sold or pawned, except:



         (a)   The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used
merchandise from a merchant, manufacturer, or wholesaler having an
established permanent place of business, and the retail sale of said
merchandise; and



         (b)   Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise
originally received by pawn or purchase, and for which all applicable hold
and redemption periods have expired.



   (B)   Required information. At the time of any reportable
transaction other than renewals, extensions, or redemptions, every licensee
must immediately record in English the following information in a
computerized record approved by the Police Department or its designee:



      (1)   A complete and accurate description of each item
including, but not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial
number, model number, brand name, or other identifying mark on such an item;



      (2)   The purchase price, amount of money loaned upon, or
pledged therefor;



      (3)   The maturity date of the transaction;



      (4)   The amount due, including monthly and annual interest
rates and all pawn fees and charges;



      (5)   Date, time, and place the item of property was received
by the licensee, and the unique alpha and/or numeric transaction identifier
that distinguishes it from all other transactions in the licensee’s records;



      (6)   Full name, residence address, residence telephone
number, date of birth, and accurate description of the person from whom the
item of the property was received, including: sex, height, weight, race,
color of eyes, and color of hair;



      (7)   The identification number and state of issue from any of
the following forms of identification of the seller or pledgor:



         (a)   Current valid state driver’s license;



         (b)   Current valid state identification card; or



         (c)   Current valid photo identification card issued by
another state or a province of Canada.



      (8)   The signature of the person identified in the
transaction; and



      (9)   Any other information reasonably required by the Police
Department.



   (C)   Required fees. Every licensee shall pay a billable transaction
license fee for each billable transaction handled by the licensee. The amount
of the fee shall be set by resolution of the Council in an amount that
reflects the cost of processing billable transactions. Billable transaction
license fees shall be billed monthly and are due and payable within 30 days.



   (D)   Modem reporting.



      (1)   Licensees must submit every reportable transaction to
the Police Department daily by transferring it from their computer to the
Police Department via modem. All required records must be transmitted
completely and accurately after the close of business each day in accordance
with standards and procedures established by the Police Department using
procedures that address security concerns and technological requirements of
the licensees and the Police Department.



      (2)   If a licensee is unable to successfully transfer the
required reports by modem, the licensee must have on the premises and
available for inspection by the Police Department printed copies of all
reportable transactions that have not been reported by modem.



(2013 Code, § 6.28)  (Ord. 376, passed 4-28-1994; Ord. 385, passed
9-6-1994; Ord. 397, passed 1-12-1995; Ord. 517, passed 5-7-1998)  Penalty,
see § 113.99



§ 113.09  HOLDING PERIOD.



   (A)   Whenever the Police Department notifies the licensee not to
sell an item, the item shall not be sold or removed from the licensed
premises for a period of 60 days, or until authorized to be released by the
Police Department, whichever comes first.



   (B)   The Police Department may remove items believed to be stolen
from the licensee’s business and hold them in the Police Department
property room until it is determined whether they are stolen or not. Under
M.S. § 609.523, as it may be amended from time to time, the Police
Department may return stolen property to the owner, with no recompense to the
licensee. Upon criminal conviction, restitution may be sought for losses
experienced by a licensee. Each licensee is responsible for establishing
procedures to avoid receiving stolen property.



   (C)   Any item pawned to a licensee shall not be sold or otherwise
transferred for 60 days after the date of the sale or pawn.



   (D)   Any item sold to a licensee, for which a weekly report to the
police is required under § 113.08(B), shall not be sold or otherwise
transferred for 30 days after the date of the sale or pawn.



   (E)   Each pledger shall be given a deadline for redeeming pawned
property, after which date the licensee may sell the item. This date shall be
a day on which the licensee is open for regular business.



(2013 Code, § 6.28)  (Ord. 376, passed 4-28-1994; Ord. 385, passed
9-6-1994; Ord. 397, passed 1-12-1995; Ord. 454, passed 6-4-1996; Ord. 460,
passed 7-18-1996)



§ 113.10  RECEIPT.



   (A)   The licensee shall provide a receipt to the seller or pledger
of any item of property received, which shall include the following
information:



      (1)   The name, address, and phone number of the licensee’s
business;



      (2)   The date on which the item was received by the licensee;



      (3)   A description of the item received and amount paid to
the pledger or seller in exchange for the item pawned or sold;



      (4)   The signature of the licensee and seller or pledger;



      (5)   The deadline by which the item must be redeemed by the
pledger without date, risk that the item will be sold, and the amount of
money necessary to redeem the pawned item on that receipt;



      (6)   The amount of interest charged on pawned items; and



      (7)   The name and address of the seller or pledger.



   (B)   The licensee shall provide a receipt to any purchaser of any
item of property for which more than $20 is paid, which shall include the
following information:



      (1)   The name, address, and phone number of the licensee’s
business;



      (2)   The date on which the item was sold to the purchaser;



      (3)   A description of the item and amount paid to the
licensee in exchange for the item;



      (4)   The signature of the licensee and purchaser; and



      (5)   The name, address, home telephone number, and work
telephone number of the purchaser.



   (C)    A legible copy of each receipt shall be retained by the
licensee for at least 4 years. The licensee shall make these records
available during regular business hours and at any other reasonable times for
inspection by the city.



(2013 Code, § 6.28)  (Ord. 376, passed 4-28-1994; Ord. 385, passed
9-6-1994; Ord. 397, passed 1-12-1995; Ord. 454, passed 6-4-1996; Ord. 460,
passed 7-18-1996)



§ 113.11  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The City Council may suspend or revoke a license upon a
finding of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any state
statute regulating pawnbrokers, precious metal dealers, or second-hand
dealers. Any conviction by the pawnbroker, precious metal dealer, or
second-hand dealer for theft, receiving stolen property, or any other crime
or violation involving stolen property shall result in the immediate
suspension pending a hearing on revocation of any license issued hereunder.



   (B)   Except in the case of a suspension pending a hearing on
revocation, a revocation or suspension by the City Council shall be preceded
by written notice to the licensee and a public hearing. The written notice
shall give at least 10 days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing
and shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee. The City
Council may, without notice, suspend any license pending a hearing on
revocation for a period not exceeding 30 days. The notice may be served upon
the licensee by U.S. mail addressed to the most recent address of the
business in the license application.



(2013 Code, § 6.28)  (Ord. 376, passed 4-28-1994; Ord. 385, passed
9-6-1994; Ord. 397, passed 1-12-1995)



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor.



(2013 Code, § 6.28)  (Ord. 376, passed 4-28-1994; Ord. 385, passed
9-6-1994; Ord. 397, passed 1-12-1995)



CHAPTER 114:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



   Chapter




3.2% Malt Liquor and Wine Licensing and Regulation





   114.01   Definitions





   114.02   Applications and licenses; procedure and administration





   114.03   Conditional licenses





   114.04   Conviction of crime; denial of license





   114.05   Required approvals and review





   114.06   Fixing license fees





   114.07   Insurance requirements





   114.08   Minors; unlawful acts





   114.09   Financial responsibilities of licensees





   114.10   Alcoholic beverages in certain buildings and grounds





   114.11   Consumption and possession on public streets, property, and
the like





   114.12   3.2% malt liquor licence required; fees for temporary
license, and the like





   114.13   Unlawful acts





   114.14   Liquor license required





   114.15   Liquor license restrictions, regulations, and unlawful acts





   114.16   Sunday sales





   114.17   Sports or convention facilities license





   114.18   Temporary liquor license





   114.19   On-sale wine license





   114.20   Consumption and display of liquor





   114.21   Consumption and display of 1-day license





   114.22   Clubs





   114.23   Nudity or obscenity prohibited





Brewer Taproom License





   114.35   Brewer taproom license





   114.36   Small brewer license





   114.37   Effective date










   114.99   Penalty




3.2% MALT LIQUOR AND WINE LICENSING AND REGULATION



§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Any beverage containing more than 1/2 of 1% alcohol
by volume, including, but not limited to, 3.2% malt liquor, wine, and liquor
as defined in this section.



   APPLICANT. Any person making an application for a license under this
chapter.



   APPLICATION. A form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in and
completed by the applicant as a request for a license, furnished by the city
and uniformly required as a prerequisite to the consideration of the issuance
of a license for a business.



   3.2 PERCENT MALT LIQUOR. Malt liquor containing not less than 1/2 of 1%
alcohol by volume nor more than 3.2% alcohol by weight. (This definition
includes so-called “malt coolers” with the alcoholic content limits
stated herein.)



   BREWER. A person who manufactures 3.2% malt liquor for sale.



   BREWERY. A manufacturer of malt liquor for sale.



   CLUB. An incorporated organization organized under the laws of the
state for civic, fraternal, social, or business purposes, for intellectual
improvement, or for the promotion of sports, or a congressionally chartered
veterans’ organization, which:



      (1)   Has more than 30 members;



      (2)   Has owned or rented a building or space in a building
for more than 1 year that is suitable and adequate for the accommodation of
its members; and



      (3)   Is directed by a board of directors, executive
committee, or other similar body chosen by the members at a meeting held for
that purpose. No member, officer, agent, or employee shall receive any profit
from the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the club, or
their guests, beyond a reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each year
by the governing body.



   COMMISSIONER. The State Commissioner of Public Safety.



   EXCLUSIVE LIQUOR STORE. An establishment used exclusively for the sale
of liquor except for the incidental sale of ice, tobacco, 3.2% malt liquor,
beverages for mixing with liquor, and soft drinks may also be sold, and the
establishment may offer recorded or live entertainment and make available
coin-operated amusement devices. EXCLUSIVE LIQUOR STORE also includes an
on-sale or combination on-sale and off-sale liquor establishment which sells
food for on-premises consumption when authorized by the city.



   HOTEL. An establishment where food and lodging are regularly furnished
to transients and which has:



      (1)   A resident proprietor or manager;



      (2)   A dining room serving the general public at tables and
having facilities for seating at least 30 guests at 1 time; and



      (3)   At least 25 guest rooms.



   LICENSE. A document, issued by the city, to an applicant permitting the
applicant to carry on and transact the business stated therein.



   LICENSE FEE. The money paid to the city pursuant to an application and
prior to issuance of a license to transact and carry on the business stated
therein.



   LICENSED PREMISES. The premises described in the issued license.



   LICENSEE. An applicant who, pursuant to an approved application, holds
a valid, current, unexpired license, which has neither been revoked nor is
then under suspension, from the city for carrying on the business stated
therein.



   LIQUOR. Ethyl alcohol and distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous, and
malt beverages containing in excess of 3.2% of alcohol by weight. (This
definition includes so-called “wine coolers” and “malt coolers” with
the alcoholic content limits stated herein.)



   MALT LIQUOR. Any 3.2% malt liquor, ale, or other beverage made from
malt by fermentation and containing not less than 1/2 of 1% alcohol by volume.



   MANUFACTURER. Every person who, by any process of manufacture,
fermenting, brewing, distilling, refining, rectifying, blending, or by the
combination of different materials, prepares or produces alcoholic beverages
for sale.



   MINOR. Any natural person who has not attained the age of 19 years;
provided, that after September 1, 1980, the term means any natural person who
either:



      (1)   Has not attained the age of 21 years;



      (2)   Was born after September 1, 1967.



   OFF-SALE. The sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for
consumption off the licensed premises only.



   ON-SALE. The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
licensed premises only.



   PACKAGE and ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any container or receptacle holding
alcoholic beverages, which container or receptacle is corked, capped, or
sealed by a manufacturer or wholesaler.



   RESTAURANT. An establishment other than a hotel under the control of a
single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the
premises and served at tables to the general public, and having a minimum
seating capacity of not less than 30 guests at 1 time.



   SALE, SELL, and SOLD. All barters and all manners or means of
furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons, including such furnishing in
violation or evasion of law.



   TAPROOM. A licensed premises within or adjacent to a brewery that
offers on-sale purchase and



consumption of malt liquor from the brewery and retail sales of related
merchandise pursuant to the requirements of M.S. § 340A.301, subds. 6b and
6d, as it may be amended from time to time, and this code of ordinances.



   WHOLESALER. Any person engaged in the business of selling alcoholic
beverages to a licensee from a stock maintained in a warehouse.



   WINE. A beverage made without rectification or fortification by the
fermentation of sound ripe grapes, grape juice, other fruits, or honey, and
also carbonated wine, wine made from condensed grape must, wine made from
other agricultural products, imitation wine, compounds sold as wine,
vermouth, cider, perry and sake, containing not less than 1/2 of 1% nor more
than 14% alcohol by volume. (This definition includes so-called “wine
coolers” with the alcoholic content limits stated herein.)



(2013 Code, § 5.01)  (Ord. 198, passed 7-24-1986; Ord. 225, passed
7-27-1987; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992; Ord. 779, passed 7-12-2007; Ord. 891,
passed 9-16-2014)



§ 114.02  APPLICATIONS AND LICENSES; PROCEDURE AND ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Applications. All applications shall be made at the office of
the City Administrator upon forms prescribed by the proper agency of the
state together with such additional information as the Council or the City
Administrator may desire. All questions asked or information required by
application forms shall be answered fully and completely by the applicant.



   (B)   False statements. It is unlawful for any applicant to
intentionally make a false statement or omission upon any application form.
Any false statement in such application, or any willful omission to state any
information called for on such application form shall, upon discovery of such
falsehood, work as an automatic refusal of license, or if already issued,
shall render any license issued pursuant thereto void and of no effect to
protect the applicant from prosecution for violation of this chapter, or any
part thereof.



   (C)   Application, investigation, fee, certificates of occupancy and
of compliance.



      (1)   Application and investigation fees. At the time of the
initial application, an applicant for either an off-sale or on-sale license
shall pay the city the amount of the application and investigation fees,
which investigation fee shall be nonrefundable and to cover the costs of the
city for processing of the application and investigation thereof. Such fee
shall be fixed and determined by the Council and adopted by resolution, and
uniformly enforced. The application and investigation fee may, from time to
time, be amended by the Council by resolution. A copy of the resolution
setting forth the currently effective application and investigation fee shall
be kept on file in the office of the City Administrator and open to
inspection during the regular business hours.



      (2)   Investigation and certificates required.



         (a)   Inspection and permits required.



            1.   Original licenses and premises.



               a.   Prior to issuing a license for a new
facility or existing building which has never had a license hereunder, the
facility shall be inspected by the Building Official, the Fire Marshal and
Electrical Inspector for full compliance with all applicable codes. Should
nonconforming uses or code violations be found, they shall be corrected prior
to the issuance of the license.



               b.   All other requirements herein provided
for renewal of license shall be complied with.



            2.   Renewal of license. No license shall be
renewed if the building does not meet all code terms at renewal time.



            3.   When permits required.



               a.   All establishments licensed pursuant to
this chapter are required to secure permits prior to any construction,
remodeling, or decorating which will alter floor plans, occupant loads, wall,
ceiling, or floor covering or any electrical, mechanical, or structural
change.



               b.   Prior to the reissuance of such
license, a code compliance certificate must be issued by the Building
Official.



         (b)   Certificate of occupancy and compliance required
for on-sale establishments.



            1.   No license shall be issued if a suitable
location is not part of the application and there must be a certificate of
occupancy and of code compliance in effect before a license is issued.



            2.   Prior to the issuance of any such
certification, the licensed premises shall be connected to public sewer and
water except within a planned unit development and there shall be posted
therein an occupant load certificate for a maximum permitted occupancy
computed by Table 33A of the State Uniform Building Code.



         (c)   Delayed issuance of license. Notwithstanding the
foregoing provisions of this division (C)(2) or division (D)(2) below, the
Council may, in its sole discretion and in the case of a new facility, grant
an application for a license but direct that the license shall not issue
until the applicant has fully complied with all of the requirements of this
division (C)(2) and division (D)(2) below. The time lapse between Council
action in granting the application and the issuance of the license shall be
limited to a 12-month period and if compliance is not completed within such
time, a re-application shall be required.



   (D)   Action.



      (1)   Granting. The Council may approve any application for
the period of the remainder of the then current license year or for the
entire ensuing license year. All applications including proposed license
periods must be consistent with this chapter. Prior to consideration of any
application for a license, the applicant shall furnish a bond and proof of
insurance, pay a license fee, and, if applicable, pay the investigation fee.



      (2)   Issuance. If an application is approved, the City
Administrator shall forthwith issue a license pursuant thereto in the form
prescribed by the city or the proper agency of the state as the case may be.
All licenses shall be on a fiscal year basis, July 1 to June 30. For licenses
issued and which are to become effective other than on the first day of the
licensed year, July 1, the fee to be paid with the application shall be
pro-rated on the basis of 1/12 for each calendar month or part thereof
remaining in the then current licensed year. Licenses shall be valid only at
one location and on the premises therein licensed.



      (3)   License refund in certain cases. In the event that,
during the license year, the licensed premises shall be destroyed or so
damaged by fire, or otherwise, that the licensee shall cease to carry on the
licensed business, or in case the business of the licensee, shall cease by
reason of the licensee’s illness or death, or if it shall become unlawful
for the licensee to carry on the licensed business under the license, except
when such license is revoked, the city shall, upon the happening of any such
event, refund to the licensee, or to the licensee’s estate, such part of
the license fee paid by the licensee as corresponds to the time such license
had yet to run. In the event of death of the licensee, the personal
representative is hereby authorized to continue operation of said business
for not more than 90 days after the death of such licensee.



      (4)   Transfer. No license shall be transferable between
persons. No license shall be transferable to a different location without
prior consent of the Council and upon payment of the fee for a duplicate
license. It is unlawful to make any transfer in violation of this division
(D)(4).



      (5)   Refusal and termination. The Council may, in its sole
discretion and for any reasonable cause, refuse to grant any application. No
license shall be granted to a person of questionable moral character or
business reputation. Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or
revocation.



      (6)   Revocation or suspension.



         (a)   The Council shall revoke or suspend, for a period
not to exceed 60 days, a license granted under the provisions of this
chapter, or impose a civil fine not to exceed $2,000, for each violation on a
finding that the licensee has failed to comply with a statute, regulation, or
provision of this code of ordinances  relating to alcoholic beverages. The
Council shall revoke the license upon conviction of any licensee or agent or
employee of a licensee for violating any law relating to the sale or
possession of 3.2% malt liquor, wine, or liquor upon premises of the
licensee, or if such revocation is mandatory by statute, if it shall be made
to appear at the hearing thereon that such violation was not willful, the
Council may order suspension; provided, that revocation shall be ordered upon
the third such violation or offense.



         (b)   No suspension or revocation shall take effect
until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the
Council, a committee of the Council, or a hearing under the Administrative
Procedures Act, as may be determined by the Council in action calling the
hearing. Such hearing shall be called by the Council upon written notice to
the licensee served in person or by certified mail not less than 15 nor more
than 30 days prior to the hearing date, stating the time, place, and purpose
thereof.



         (c)   As additional restrictions or regulations on
licensees under this chapter, and in addition to grounds for revocation or
suspension stated in the this code of ordinances or statute, the following
shall also be grounds for such action:



            1.   The licensee suffered or permitted illegal
acts upon licensed premises unrelated to the sale of 3.2% malt liquor, wine,
or liquor;



            2.   The licensee had knowledge of such illegal
acts upon licensed premises, but failed to report the same to police;



            3.   The licensee failed or refused to cooperate
fully with police in investigating such alleged illegal acts upon licensed
premises;



            4.   The activities of the licensee created a
serious danger to public health, safety, or welfare; or



            5.   The licensee violated the letter or spirit of
the state charitable gambling law.



      (7)   Corporate applicants and licensees.



         (a)   A corporate applicant, at the time of application,
shall furnish the city with a list of all persons that have an interest in
such corporation and the extent of such interest. The list shall name all
shareholders and show the number of shares held by each, either individually
or beneficially for others. It is the duty of each corporate licensee to
notify the City Administrator of any change in legal ownership or beneficial
interest in such corporation or in such shares.



         (b)   The Council, or any officer of the city designated
by it, may at any reasonable time examine the stock transfer records and
minute books of any corporate licensee in order to verify and identify the
shareholders, and the Council or its designated officer may examine the
business records of any other licensee to the extent necessary to disclose
the interest which persons other than the licensee have in the licensed
business.



         (c)   The Council may revoke any license issued upon its
determination that a change of ownership of shares in a corporate licensee or
any change of ownership of any interest in the business of any other licensee
has actually resulted in the change of control of the licensed business so as
materially to affect the integrity and character of its management and its
operation, but no such action shall be taken until after a hearing by the
Council on 30 days’ notice to the licensee.



   (E)   Duplicate license. Duplicates of all original licenses may be
issued by the City Administrator, without action by the Council, upon
licensee’s affidavit that the original has been lost, and upon payment of a
fee of $2 for issuance of the duplicate. All duplicate licenses shall be
clearly marked “DUPLICATE”.



   (F)   Posting. All licensees shall post their licenses in their
places of business.



   (G)   Unlawful acts.



      (1)   Consumption. It is unlawful for any person to consume,
or any licensee to permit consumption of 3.2% malt liquor, wine, or liquor on
licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the hour when a sale thereof can
legally be made.



      (2)   Removal of containers. It is unlawful for any on-sale
licensee to permit any glass, bottle, or other container, containing more
than a trace amount of 3.2% malt liquor, wine, or liquor to remain upon any
table, bar, stool, or other place where customers are served, more than 30
minutes after the hour when a sale thereof can legally be made.



      (3)   Closing. It is unlawful for any person, other than an
on-sale licensee’s bona fide employee actually engaged in the performance
of the employee’s duties, to be on premises licensed under this chapter
more than 30 minutes after the legal time for making licensed sales;
provided, however, that this  division (G) shall not apply to licensees,
employees of licensees, and patrons on licensed premises for the sole purpose
of preparing, serving, or consuming food or beverages other than 3.2% malt
liquor, wine, or liquor.



   (H)   Delinquent taxes and charges. No license under this chapter
shall be granted for operation on any premises upon which taxes, assessments,
or installments thereof, or other financial claims of the city are owed by
the applicant and are delinquent and unpaid. For the purpose of this section,
APPLICANT includes persons and related persons (spouses, blood relatives, and
spouses of blood relatives):



      (1)   Owning at least a 50% beneficial interest in the
proposed license or in the entity making the application; and



      (2)   At least an undivided 1/2 interest in the premises
proposed to be licensed, or at least a 50% beneficial interest in the entity
owning such premises.



   (I)   Water and sewer connection requirement.



      (1)   No on-sale license under this chapter, except a
temporary 3.2% malt liquor license, shall be granted for operation on any
premises which does not have city water and sewer connections with suitable
lavatory facilities, except within a planned unit development. The Council
may waive the requirement of this division (I) for any business having
obtained an on-sale license prior to July 1, 1997, and operating at premises
where potable water is supplied from a well; provided, that water quality
from the well is tested and approved by the State Department of Health in
accordance with their standards.



      (2)   As a condition of receiving a waiver, the license shall
comply with all water quality directives of the State Department of Health.



(2013 Code, § 5.02)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 64, passed 6-18-1981;
Ord. 124, passed 8-4-1983; Ord. 160, passed 3-14-1985; Ord. 179, passed
8-22-1985; Ord. 195, passed 6-12-1986; Ord. 226, passed 8-27-1987; Ord. 238,
passed 12-24-1987; Ord. 271, passed 8-25-1989; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992;
Ord. 348, passed 12-10-1992; Ord. 440, passed 12-28-1995; Ord. 486, passed
6-12-1997; Ord. 585, passed 11-16-2000; Ord. 779, passed 7-12-2007) 
Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.03  CONDITIONAL LICENSES.



   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Council may,
upon a finding of the necessity therefor, place such conditions and
restrictions upon a license as it, in its discretion, may deem reasonable and
justified.



(2013 Code, § 5.03)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)



§ 114.04  CONVICTION OF CRIME; DENIAL OF LICENSE.



   A license may be denied to an applicant by the Council solely or in
part due to a prior conviction of a crime by an applicant only upon a finding
that such conviction directly relates to the occupation for which the license
is sought, and then only after considering evidence of rehabilitation and
such other evidence as may be presented, all in accordance with state
statutes; provided, however, that an applicant must show that the applicant
is presently fit to perform the occupation for which the license is sought.



(2013 Code, § 5.04)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 114.05  REQUIRED APPROVALS AND REVIEW.



   All 3.2% malt liquor and liquor applications, bonds, and insurance
coverage shall be approved by the Council. All bonds and insurance
certificates and policies shall be reviewed by the City Attorney as to form
before Council approval.



(2013 Code, § 5.05)  (Ord. 118, passed 6-30-1983; Ord. 779, passed
7-12-2007)



§ 114.06  FIXING LICENSE FEES.



   All license fees provided for in this chapter, including, but not by
way of limitation, license fees for on-sale and off-sale of 3.2% malt liquor,
temporary on-sale of 3.2% malt liquor, on-sale and off-sale of liquor,
on-sale of liquor by clubs, on-sale of wine, brewer taproom license, small
brewer license, and consumption and display of liquor, shall be fixed and
determined by the Council, adopted by resolution, and uniformly enforced.
Such license fees may, from time to time, be amended by the Council by
resolution. A copy of the resolution setting forth currently effective
license fees shall be kept on file in the office of the City Administrator,
and open to inspection during regular business hours.



(2013 Code, § 5.06)  (Ord. 6, passed 5-25-1978; Ord. 779, passed 7-12-2007;
Ord. 891, passed 9-16-2014)



§ 114.07  INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Financial responsibility requirements.



      (1)   Whenever an insurance policy or certificate is filed as
evidence of financial responsibility as required by this chapter, the
applicant shall file with the City Clerk a policy or certificate of insurance
showing:



         (a)   The limits are at least as high as required:



         (b)   Coverage is effective for at least the license
term approved; and



         (c)   Such insurance will not be canceled or terminated
without 10 days’ written notice served upon the City Clerk if cancellation
is for nonpayment of premium and 30 days’ written notice if cancellation is
for any other reason.



      (2)   Cancellation or termination of such coverage shall be
grounds for license revocation.



   (B)   General liability requirements. Whenever a general liability
(public liability) insurance policy or certificate is required by this
chapter, the applicant shall file with the City Clerk a policy or certificate
of insurance showing:



      (1)   The limits are at least as high as required;



      (2)   Coverage is effective for at least the license term
approved; and



      (3)   The issuing company will endeavor to mail 10 days’
written notice to the City Clerk prior to cancellation of the policy.
Cancellation or termination of such coverage shall be grounds for license
revocation.



(2013 Code, § 5.07)  (Ord. 256, passed 10-14-1998)



§ 114.08  MINORS; UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   Consumption. It is unlawful for any:



      (1)   Licensee to permit any minor to consume alcoholic
beverages on licensed premises; or



      (2)   Minor to consume alcoholic beverages except in the
household of the minor’s parent or guardian, and then only with the consent
of such parent or guardian.



   (B)   Purchasing. It is unlawful for any:



      (1)   Person to sell, barter, furnish, or give alcoholic
beverages to a minor unless such person is the parent or guardian of the
minor, and then only for consumption in the household of such parent or
guardian;



      (2)   Minor to purchase or attempt to purchase any alcoholic
beverage; and



      (3)   Person to induce a minor to purchase or procure any
alcoholic beverage.



   (C)   Possession. It is unlawful for a minor to possess any
alcoholic beverage with the intent to consume it at a place other than the
household of the minor’s parent or guardian. Possession of an alcoholic
beverage by a minor at a place other than the household of the parent or
guardian is prima facie evidence of intent to consume it at a place other
than the household of the parent or guardian.



   (D)   Entering licensed premised.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any minor, as defined in this
chapter, to enter licensed premises for the purpose of purchasing or
consuming any alcoholic beverage.



      (2)   It is not unlawful for any person who has attained the
age of 18 years to enter licensed premises for the following purposes:



         (a)   To perform work for the establishment, including
the serving of alcoholic beverages, unless otherwise prohibited by statute;



         (b)   To consume meals; and



         (c)   To attend social functions that are held in a
portion of the establishment where liquor is not sold.



      (3)   It is unlawful for a licensee to permit a person under
the age of 18 years to enter licensed premises unless attending a social
event at which alcoholic beverages are not served, or in the company of a
parent or guardian.



   (E)   Misrepresentation of age. It is unlawful for a minor to
misrepresent their age for the purpose of purchasing an alcoholic beverage.



   (F)   Proof of age. Proof of age for purchasing or consuming
alcoholic beverages may be established only by a valid driver’s license, a
state identification card, or, in the case of a foreign national, by a valid
passport.



(2013 Code, § 5.08)  (Ord. 198, passed 7-24-1986; Ord. 226, passed
8-27-1987; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.09  FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF LICENSEES.



   (A)   Proof. No 3.2% malt liquor, wine, liquor, brewer taproom, or
small brewer license shall be issued or renewed unless and until the
applicant has provided proof of financial responsibility imposed by state
statutes by filing:



      (1)   Evidence of financial responsibility as required by
state law is furnished by filing a liability insurance policy, a certificate
of such insurance or a binder for such coverage in the form and in the amount
and conditioned all as required by M.S. § 340A.409, subd. 1(1), as it may be
amended from time to time, in force and effect at the time of filing the
license application;



      (2)   A bond of a surety company with minimum coverages as
provided in division (A)(1) above; or



      (3)   A certificate of the State Treasurer that the licensee
has deposited with the State Treasurer $100,000 in cash or securities which
may legally be purchased by savings banks or for trust funds having a market
value of $100,000.



   (B)   Exemption. This section does not apply to on-sale 3.2% malt
liquor licensees with sales of less than $25,000 of 3.2% malt liquor for the
preceding year or off-sale 3.2% malt liquor licensees with sales of less than
$50,000 of 3.2% malt liquor for the preceding year. This exemption shall not
apply where sales are made on public property. All licensees desiring to
claim this exemption must prove entitlement thereto in such a manner as the
Council shall by resolution from time to time determine.



   (C)   Delayed issuance of license. Notwithstanding the foregoing
provisions of this section, the Council may, in its sole discretion and in
the case of a new facility, grant an application for a license but direct
that the license shall not be issued until the applicant has fully complied
with all of the requirements of this section. The time lapse between Council
action in granting the application and the issuance of the license shall be
limited to a 12-month period and if compliance is not completed within such
time a re-application shall be required.



(2013 Code, § 5.09)  (Ord. 124, passed 8-4-1983; Ord. 179, passed
8-22-1985; Ord. 193, passed 5-29-1986; Ord. 195, passed 6-12-1986; Ord. 198,
passed 7-24-1986; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992; Ord. 440, passed 12-28-1995;
Ord. 513, passed 2-5-1998; Ord. 779, passed 7-12-2007; Ord. 891, passed
9-16-2014)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.10  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN CERTAIN BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS.



   It is unlawful for any person to introduce upon, or have in the
person’s possession upon, or in, any school ground, or any schoolhouse or
school building, any alcoholic beverage, except for experiments in
laboratories and except for those organizations who have been issued
temporary licenses to sell 3.2% malt liquor, and for any person to possess
3.2% malt liquor as a result of a purchase from those organizations holding
temporary licenses.



(2013 Code, § 5.091)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992;
Ord. 779, passed 7-12-2007)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.11  CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION ON PUBLIC STREETS, PROPERTY, AND THE
LIKE.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided for in § 91.03(O), it is
unlawful for any person to consume, or possess in an unseated container, any
alcoholic beverage on any city park, street, public property, or private
parking lot to which the public has access, except on such premises when and
where permission has been specifically granted or licensed by the Council.



   (B)   It is also unlawful for any person to consume, or possess in
an unsealed container, any alcoholic beverage on any private property of
another which is not a private parking lot to which the public has access,
without a specific oral or written invitation or permit to do so from the
owner, lessee, or other person in lawful possession of such property;
provided, that this section shall not apply to the possession of an unsealed
container in a motor vehicle when the container is kept in the trunk of such
vehicle if it is equipped with a trunk, or kept in some other area of the
vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers, if the motor
vehicle is not equipped with a trunk.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, a utility or glove
compartment shall be deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver or
passengers; provided, however, that it is not a violation of this section to
consume or possess in an unsealed container any 3.2% malt liquor in a city
park where such possession and consumption is in a picnic, grandstand, or
shelter area; provided further, however, that this exception pertaining to
3.2% malt liquor does not apply during the time for which the city has issued
a temporary 3.2% malt liquor license in conjunction with a civic or community
event being held at a city park.



(2013 Code, § 5.092)  (Ord. 198, passed 7-24-1986; Ord. 779, passed
7-12-2007; Ord. 802, passed 7-10-2008; Ord. 862, passed 12-27-2012) 
Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.12  3.2% MALT LIQUOR LICENCE REQUIRED; FEES FOR TEMPORARY LICENSE,
AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   3.2% malt liquor license required.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly,
on any pretense or by any device, to sell, barter, keep for sale, or
otherwise dispose of 3.2% malt liquor, as part of a commercial transaction,
without a license therefor from the city. This division (A) shall not apply
to sales by manufacturers to wholesalers or to sales by wholesalers to
persons holding 3.2% malt liquor licenses from the city. Annual on-sale 3.2%
malt liquor licenses may be issued only to drug stores, restaurants, hotels,
bowling centers, clubs, and establishments used exclusively for the sale of
3.2% malt liquor with the incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks.



      (2)   Any person licensed to sell liquor at on-sale shall not
be required to obtain an on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license, and may sell 3.2%
malt liquor on-sale without an additional license. Any person licensed to
sell liquor off-sale shall not be required to obtain an off-sale 3.2% malt
liquor license, and may sell 3.2% malt liquor off-sale without an additional
license.



(2013 Code, § 5.10)



   (B)   3.2% malt liquor license fees.



      (1)   Accompany application. Fees provided for herein shall
accompany an application for license. If the application is denied the
accompanying license fee shall be refunded to the applicant.



      (2)   Real estate taxes. Each such application shall also be
accompanied by a receipt showing the payment of at least the first half of
the current real estate taxes.



(2013 Code, § 5.11)



   (C)   Temporary 3.2% malt liquor license permitted; terms and fees.



      (1)   Applicant. A club or charitable, religious, or nonprofit
organization, duly incorporated as a nonprofit or religious corporation under
the laws of the state, and having its registered office and principal place
of activity within the city, shall qualify for a temporary on-sale 3.2% malt
liquor license.



      (2)   Terms.



         (a)   An application for a temporary license shall state
the exact dates and place of temporary sale.



         (b)   All such temporary licenses shall be subject to
any terms as shall be established by the Council at the time such license is
granted, and any violation of such terms shall be grounds for refusing to
issue such a temporary license to the violating club, charitable, religious,
or nonprofit organization for a period of up to 3 years. If the license is
for sales on public property, a general public liability insurance policy
with limits of at least the amounts established by M.S. § 466.04, as it may
be amended from time to time, shall be a condition to issuance of the
license. The insurance requirement may be satisfied by filing with the city a
proper certificate of such insurance along with proof of nonprofit status, if
applicable.



         (c)   The applicant shall comply with all other
restrictions, limitations, and regulations for the sale of 3.2% malt liquor
under this code of ordinances and statutes.



(2013 Code, § 5.12)



   (D)   3.2% malt liquor license restrictions and regulations.



      (1)   Conviction. No license shall be issued or renewed if the
applicant, prior to the date of such application, has been convicted of
violating any law relating to the sale of 3.2% malt liquor or liquor;
provided, that such denial is not contrary to any other provision of this
code of ordinances or other law.



      (2)   Citizen. No license shall be issued to other than a
citizen of the United States or a resident alien, at least 21 years of age,
and who shall be of good moral character and repute.



      (3)   Good order. Every licensee shall be responsible for the
conduct of the licensee’s place of business and shall maintain conditions
of sobriety and order.



      (4)   Minors. No person who has not attained the age of 18
years shall be employed to sell or serve 3.2% malt liquor in any on-sale
establishment.



      (5)   Hindering police. No licensee, or employee of a
licensee, shall hinder or prevent a police or health officer from entering
upon and inspecting the premises of the licensee during business hours
without a search and seizure warrant, and such police or health officer may
seize all liquors found on the licensed premises.



      (6)   Intoxicating liquor. No 3.2% malt liquor licensee shall,
during the effective period of such license, be the owner or holder of a
federal retail liquor dealer’s tax stamp for the sale of intoxicating
liquor, and the ownership or holding thereof shall be grounds for revocation,
unless there has also been issued to such person a license to sell
intoxicating liquor pursuant to the laws of this state and provisions of this
code of ordinances at such place.



      (7)   Manufacturer. No license shall be granted to a
manufacturer of 3.2% malt liquor or to anyone holding a financial interest in
such manufacture.



(2013 Code, § 5.13)



   (E)   3.2 malt liquor sales to obviously intoxicated persons. It is
unlawful to sell 3.2% malt liquor to a person who is obviously intoxicated,
or to a habitual drunkard.



(2013 Code, § 5.16)



(Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 6, passed 5-16-1978; Ord. 94, passed 7-8-1982;
Ord. 124, passed 8-4-1983; Ord. 179, passed 8-13-1985; Ord. 198, passed
7-24-1986; Ord. 226, passed 8-27-1987; Ord. 256, passed 10-14-1988; Ord. 277,
passed 11-21-1989; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992; Ord. 779, passed 7-12-2007) 
Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.13  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   It is unlawful for any:



   (A)   Person to knowingly induce another to make an illegal sale or
purchase of 3.2% malt liquor;



   (B)   Licensee to sell 3.2% malt liquor on any day, or during any
hour, when such sales are not permitted by state statutes;



   (C)    Licensee to allow consumption of 3.2% malt liquor on licensed
premises on any day, or during any hour, when sales of 3.2% malt liquor are
not permitted by state statutes; or



   (D)   Person to purchase or consume 3.2% malt liquor on licensed
premises on any day, or during any hour, when sales of 3.2% malt liquor are
not permitted by state statutes.



(2013 Code, § 5.14) (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 779, passed 7-12-2007) 
Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.14  LIQUOR LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any
pretense or by any device, to sell, barter, keep for sale, or otherwise
dispose of liquor, as part of a commercial transaction, without a license
therefor from the city.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to:



      (1)   Such potable liquors as are intended for therapeutic
purposes and not as a beverage;



      (2)   To industrial alcohol and its compounds not prepared or
used for beverage purposes;



      (3)   To wine in the possession of a person duly licensed
under this chapter as an on-sale wine licensee;



      (4)   To sales by manufacturers to wholesalers duly licensed
as such by the Department of Public Safety; or



      (5)   To sales by wholesalers to persons holding liquor
licenses from the city.



   (C)   The city may issue annual on-sale liquor licenses-only to the
following:



      (1)   Hotels;



      (2)   Restaurants;



      (3)   Clubs or congressionally chartered veterans’
organizations; provided, that liquor sales will be made only to members and
bona fide guests;



      (4)   Exclusive liquor stores; and



      (5)   Auto racing facilities. A license for an auto racing
facility may authorize sales both to persons attending events at the
facility, and sales in a restaurant, bar, or banquet facility located on the
premises of the auto racing facility. A license for an auto racing facility
authorizes sales on all days of the week and may be issued for a space that
is not compact and contiguous; provided, that the licensed premises may
include only the space within a defined area as described in the application
for the license.



   (D)   The city may issue annual off-sale or combination off-sale and
on-sale liquor licenses to exclusive liquor stores. Any person licensed to
sell liquor at on-sale shall not be required to obtain an on-sale 3.2% malt
liquor license, and may sell 3.2% malt liquor on-sale without an additional
license. Any person licensed to sell liquor off-sale shall not be required to
obtain an off-sale 3.2% malt liquor license, and may sell 3.2% malt liquor
off-sale without an additional license.



(2013 Code, § 5.30)  (Ord. 198, passed 7-24-1986; Ord. 779, passed
7-12-2007; Ord. 846, passed 6-16-2011)



§ 114.15  LIQUOR LICENSE RESTRICTIONS, REGULATIONS, AND UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   Limitations on issuance of licenses to 1 person or place.



      (1)    No off-sale liquor license may be issued to any 1
person for more than one place in the city. Any person holding an interest in
2 or more such licenses in the city shall be deemed to hold more than 1
license.



      (2)   (a)   For the purpose of this division (A), the term
INTEREST:



            1.   Includes any pecuniary interest in the
ownership, operation, management, or profits of a retail liquor
establishment, and a person who receives money from time to time directly or
indirectly from a licensee, in the absence of consideration and excluding
gifts or donations, has a pecuniary interest in the retail business; and



            2.   Does not include loans; rental agreements;
open accounts or other obligations held with or without security arising out
of the ordinary and regular course of business of selling or leasing
merchandise, fixtures, supplies to the establishment; an interest in a
corporation owning or operating a hotel but having at least 150 or more
rental units holding a liquor license in conjunction therewith; or 10% or
less interest in any other corporation holding a license.



         (b)   In determining whether an INTEREST exists, the
transaction must have been bona fide and the reasonable value of the goods
and things received as consideration for a payment by the licensee and all
other facts reasonably tending to prove or disprove the existence of a
purposeful scheme or arrangement to evade the restrictions of this division
(A) must be considered.



   (B)   Licenses limited to certain areas. No on-sale or off-sale
license shall be effective beyond the compact and contiguous space named
therein for which the same was granted.



   (C)   Federal permits as a condition to license. No license shall be
effective until a permit shall be issued to the licensee under the laws of
the United States, if such a permit be required under such laws.



   (D)   Persons disqualified.



      (1)   No license under this chapter may be issued to:



         (a)   A person under 21 years of age;



         (b)   A person who within 5 years of the license
application has been convicted of a willful violation of a federal or state
law, or local ordinance governing the manufacture, sale, distribution, or
possession for sale or distribution, of alcoholic beverages;



         (c)   A person who has had an alcoholic beverage license
revoked within 5 years of the license application, or to any person who at
the time of the violation owns any interest, whether as a holder of more than
5% of the capital stock of a corporate licensee, as a partner or otherwise,
in the premises or in the business conducted thereon, or to a corporation,
partnership, association, enterprise, business, or firm in which any such
person is in any manner interested; or



         (d)   A person not of good moral character and repute.



      (2)   No person holding a license from the Department of
Public Safety as a manufacturer, brewer, or wholesaler may have any
ownership, in whole or in part, in a business holding an alcoholic beverage
license from the city except taproom or small brewer licensees authorized by
M.S. § 340A.301, subds. 6b and 6d, as it may be amended from time to time,
and §§ 114.35 and 114.36 of this chapter.



   (E)   Number of licenses. The Council may issue the number of
licenses authorized by statute or restrict such number from time to time as
it may, in its discretion, deem proper.



   (F)   Application. Every person desiring a license shall file with
the City Clerk a written and verified application in the form prescribed by
the proper agency of the state and with such information as may be required
thereon. All applications for license renewal and proof of insurance required
by this chapter shall be submitted to the city at least 20 days prior to the
regular Council meeting in June of each year.



   (G)   Conduct of business. Every licensee shall be responsible for
the conduct of the licensee’s place of business and shall maintain
conditions of sobriety and order therein, and for compliance, by the licensee
and all agents and employees, with the provisions of this code of ordinances
and all laws relating to the operation of the licensee’s business.



   (H)   Right of inspection. No licensee, or employee of a licensee,
shall hinder or prevent a police or health officer from entering upon and
inspecting the premises of the licensee during business hours without a
search and seizure warrant.



   (I)   Employment of minors. No person under 18 years of age may sell
or serve liquor on licensed premises.



   (J)   Unlawful acts. It is unlawful for any:



      (1)   Licensee to sell, offer for sale, or keep for sale,
liquor in any original package which has been refilled or partly refilled;



      (2)   Person to knowingly induce another to make an illegal
sale or purchase of liquor;



      (3)   Licensee, or an employee of a licensee, to sell liquor
on any day, or during any hour, when sales of liquor are not permitted by
state statutes;



      (4)   Person to purchase liquor on licensed premises on any
day, or during any hour, when sales of liquor are not permitted by state
statutes; or



      (5)   Licensee to sell liquor on any day, or during any hour,
when sales of liquor are not permitted by state statutes.



(2013 Code, § 5.32)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 154, passed 12-27-1984;
Ord. 179, passed 8-13-1985; Ord. 198, passed 7-24-1986; Ord. 237, passed
11-26-1987; Ord. 256, passed 10-14-1988; Ord. 277, passed 12-1-1989; Ord.
307, passed 3-1-1991; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992; Ord. 440, passed 12-5-1995;
Ord. 891, passed 9-16-2014)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.16  SUNDAY SALES.



   The electorate of the city having heretofore authorized the same, a
Sunday liquor license may be issued to hotels, restaurants, or clubs, as
herein defined, which hold an on-sale intoxicating liquor license and have
facilities for seating not less than 30 guests at 1 time between the hours
authorized by state statutes, in connection with the sale of food. Sales
authorized hereunder may begin at 10.00 a.m. on Sunday morning.



(2013 Code, § 5.34)  (Ord. 239, passed 12-24-1987; Ord. 327, passed
1-16-1992; Ord. 832, passed 5-13-2010)



§ 114.17  SPORTS OR CONVENTION FACILITIES LICENSE.



   (A)   The Council may authorize any holder of an on-sale liquor
license issued by the city or by an adjacent municipality to sell liquor at
any convention, banquet, conference, meeting, or social affair conducted on
the premises of a sports or convention facility owned by the city, or
instrumentality thereof having independent policy making and appropriating
authority and located within the city.



   (B)   The licensee must be engaged to sell liquor at such an event
by the person or organization permitted to use the premises, and may sell
liquor only to persons attending the event. The licensee shall not sell
liquor to any person attending or participating in any amateur athletic
event. Such sales may be limited to designated areas of the facility. All
such sales shall be subject to all laws relating thereto.



(2013 Code, § 5.35)  (Ord. 124, passed 8-4-1983)



§ 114.18  TEMPORARY LIQUOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Licensed authorized. Notwithstanding any provision of this
code of ordinances to the contrary, the Council may issue a license for the
temporary on-sale of liquor in connection with a social event sponsored by
the licensee. Such license may provide that the licensee may contract with
the holder of a full-year on-sale license, issued by the city, for liquor
catering services. The City Council may grant a variance from the requirement
that the holder be licensed by the city, upon a showing that no local
licensee is able to provide the liquor.



   (B)   Applicant. The applicant for a license under this section must
be a club or charitable, religious, or other nonprofit organization in
existence for at least 3 years.



   (C)   Terms and conditions of license.



      (1)   No license is valid until approved by the Department of
Public Safety.



      (2)   No license shall be issued for more than 4 consecutive
days.



      (3)   All licenses and licensees are subject to all provisions
of statutes and this code of ordinances relating to liquor sale and
licensing, except § 114.09, and those laws and ordinances which by their
nature are not applicable. Notwithstanding this exception, the licensee or
caterer shall provide proof of financial responsibility coverage when a
license is requested on city property and proof of the extension of such
coverage to the licensed premises.



      (4)   Licenses may authorize sales on premises other than
those owned or permanently occupied by the licensee.



(2013 Code, § 5.36)  (Ord. 198, passed 7-24-1986; Ord. 380, passed
7-28-1994; Ord. 779, passed 7-12-2007)



§ 114.19  ON-SALE WINE LICENSE.



   (A)   License required. It is unlawful for any person to sell, or
keep or offer for sale, any wine, which shall not exceed 14% alcohol by
volume, without a license therefor from the city.



   (B)   Wine license restrictions.



      (1)   It is unlawful to sell wine during hours, or on days,
when the on-sale of liquor is not permitted by state statutes.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to consume, or any
licensee to permit consumption of, any wine on licensed premises more than 30
minutes after the hour when a sale can legally be made; provided, that this
shall not prevent a licensee from continuing to serve food after the legal
time for making wine sales. It is also unlawful for any licensee to prohibit
or prevent a police officer, by any means, from making an inspection to
observe whether or not this division (B) is being complied with.



      (3)   It is unlawful to sell wine to persons to whom liquor
sales are not permitted by the city.



      (4)   No wine license shall be issued to an applicant other
than a restaurant, as defined in this code of ordinances or licensed bed and
breakfast facility; provided, however, for purposes of this section, such
restaurant shall have appropriate facilities for seating not less than 30
guests at 1 time. An on-sale wine license may be issued to a bed and
breakfast facility with the approval of the State Commissioner of Public
Safety. Such license authorizes a bed and breakfast facility to furnish wine
only to registered guests of the facility.



      (5)   It is unlawful for any licensee to make any sale of wine
except for consumption on licensed premises and in conjunction with the sale
of food.



      (6)   No person under 18 years of age may sell or serve wine
on licensed premises.



      (7)   The holder of an on-sale wine license issued pursuant to
law who is also licensed to sell 3.2% malt liquor at on-sale and whose gross
receipts are at least 60% attributable to the sale of food is authorized to
sell intoxicating malt liquor at on-sale without an additional license.



(2013 Code, § 5.40)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 6, passed 5-16-1978;
Ord. 64, passed 6-18-1981; Ord. 229, passed 8-27-1987; Ord. 256, passed
10-14-1988; Ord. 296, passed 10-19-1990)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.20  CONSUMPTION AND DISPLAY OF LIQUOR.



   (A)   License required. It is unlawful for any public place to allow
the consumption or display of liquor or the serving of any liquids for the
purpose of mixing liquor without a license therefore from the city.



   (B)   Term. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 114.02, the term of
such license shall run from April 1 to March 31 of the following year.



   (C)   Consumption and display restrictions and regulations.



      (1)   It is unlawful to consume or allow consumption or
display of liquor in any private club or public place during days and hours
other than those permitted for on-sale liquor by any other on-sale liquor
licensee.



      (2)   Any private club or public place allowing the
consumption or display of liquor shall be open for inspection at all times by
authorized peace officers and it is unlawful to refuse to permit such peace
officers to inspect such premises.



      (3)   Liquor sold, served, or displayed in violation of this
section shall be subject to seizure for purposes of evidence.



(2013 Code, § 5.45)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 6, passed 5-16-1978;
Ord. 244, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 332, passed 4-16-1992)



§ 114.21  CONSUMPTION AND DISPLAY OF 1-DAY LICENSE.



   (A)   License required. Any nonprofit organization desiring to serve
liquids for the purpose of mixing with liquor and permitting the consumption
and display of liquor in conjunction with a social activity sponsored by it,
shall first obtain a license therefor from the city. It is unlawful for any
such organization to fail to obtain such license.



   (B)   Term. The term of such license shall be 1 day only.



   (C)   Limitation on number. No more than 10 licenses shall be issued
in any calendar year.



   (D)   License fee. The fee for such 1-day license is $25, in
accordance with state statutes.



   (E)   Approval. In addition to Council approval, such license must
be approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.



(2013 Code, § 5.46)  (Ord. 124, passed 8-4-1983)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.22  CLUBS.



   (A)   Club license required. It is unlawful for any club to sell or
keep or offer for sale any liquor without a license therefor from the city.



   (B)   Club license restrictions and regulations.



      (1)   No club shall sell liquor to persons other than its
members and their bona fide guests.



      (b)   All liquor license restrictions, liquor sale
regulations, and hours and days of liquor sales, as stated in this chapter or
permitted by state statutes relating to the on-sale of liquor, shall be
binding upon all club licenses.



(2013 Code, § 5.50)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 6, passed 5-16-1978;
Ord. 64, passed 6-18-1981) Penalty, see § 144.99



§ 114.23  NUDITY OR OBSCENITY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      NUDITY. Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal
human genitals, pubic areas, the post-pubertal human female breast below a
point immediately above the top of the areola, or the covered human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state. For purposes of this definition, a
female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and
the areola only are covered.



      OBSCENE PERFORMANCE. A play, motion picture, dance, show, or
other presentation, whether pictured, animated or live, performed before an
audience and which in whole or in part depicts or reveals nudity, sexual
conduct, sexual excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse, or which includes
obscenities or explicit verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual
conduct.



      OBSCENITIES. Those slang words currently generally rejected for
regular use in mixed society, that are used to refer to genitals, female
breasts, sexual conduct, or excretory functions or products, either that have
no other meaning or that in context are clearly used for their bodily, sexual
or excretory meaning.



      SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a
person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in revealing or bizarre
costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically
restrained on the part of one so clothed.



      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or any
touching of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or
female, or the breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the
same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent
sexual stimulation or gratification.



      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals
or the breasts of the female when in a state of sexual stimulation, or the
sensual experiences of humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct or
nudity.



   (B)   Prohibition. It is unlawful for any 3.2% malt liquor, wine, or
liquor licensee to permit upon licensed premises any nudity, obscene
performance, or continued use of obscenities by any agent, employee, patron,
or other person.



(2013 Code, § 5.70)  (Ord. 1, passed 1-1-1978; Ord. 779, passed
7-12-2007)  Penalty, see § 114.99




BREWER TAPROOM LICENSE




§ 114.35  BREWER TAPROOM LICENSE.



   (A)   License required. It is unlawful for the owner of any brewery
to operate a taproom that offers on-sale consumption of the malt liquor
produced by the brewery without a brewer taproom license issued by the city.



   (B)   Brewer taproom license restrictions.



      (1)   A brewer may only have 1 taproom license issued by the
city, and may not have an ownership interest in a brewery licensed under M.S.
§ 340A.301, subd. 6, clause (d), as it may be amended from time to time.



      (2)   A brewer taproom license will not be issued to a brewer
if the brewer seeking the license or any person having an economic interest
in the brewer seeking the license or exercising control over the brewer
seeking the license, is a brewer that brews more than 250,000 barrels of malt
liquor annually or a winery that produces more than 250,000 gallons of wine
annually.



      (3)   All provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended
from time to time, that apply to a retail liquor license shall apply to a
brewer taproom license, unless the provision is inconsistent with M.S. §
340A.301, subd. 6b, as it may be amended from time to time.



      (4)   It is unlawful for a brewer taproom licensee, or an
employee of a licensee to sell malt liquor on any day, or during any hour,
when sales of liquor are not permitted by state statutes.



   (C)   Sunday sales. A taproom licensed under this section may be
open and may conduct on-sale business on Sundays.



(Ord. 891, passed 9-16-2014)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.36  SMALL BREWER LICENSE.



   (A)   License required. It is unlawful for a brewer to offer for
off-sale purchase, malt liquor that has been produced and packaged by the
brewer at the brewery premises without a small brewer license issued by the
city.



   (B)   Small brewer license restrictions.



      (1)   The amount of malt liquor sold at off-sale for purchase
may not exceed 500 barrels annually.



      (2)   Malt liquor sold at off-sale shall be limited to the
legal hours for off-sale at exclusive liquor stores in the city, except that
a small brewer may also sell malt liquor off-sale from 8:00 a.m. until 10:00
p.m. on Sunday. The malt liquor sold off-sale must be removed from the
premises before the applicable off-sale closing time.



      (3)   The malt liquor sold off-sale shall be packed in
64-ounce containers commonly known as “growlers” or in 750 milliliter
bottles. The containers shall bear a twist-type closure, cork, stopper, or
plug. At the time of the sale, a paper or plastic adhesive band, strip, or
sleeve shall be applied to the container or bottle and extended over the top
of the twist-type enclosure, cork, stopper, or plug forming a seal that must
be broken upon opening of the container or bottle. The adhesive band, strip,
or sleeve shall bear the name and address of the brewer. The containers or
bottles shall be identified as malt liquor contain the name of the malt
liquor, bear the name and address of the brewer selling the malt liquor, and
shall be considered intoxicating liquor unless the alcoholic content is
labeled as otherwise in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rules
7515.1100.



      (4)   A brewer may, but is not required to refill any growler
with malt liquor for off-sale at the



request of a customer. A brewer refilling a growler must do so at its
licensed premises and the growler must be filled at the tap at the time of
sale. A growler refilled under this division (B)(4) must be sealed and
labeled in the manner described in division (B)(3) above.



      (5)   A brewer may only have 1 small brewer license issued by
the city.



      (6)   A small brewer license will not be issued to a brewer if
the brewer seeking the license or any person having an economic interest in
the brewer seeking the license or exercising control over the brewer seeking
the license, is a brewer that brews more than 20,000 barrels of its own brand
of malt liquor annually or a winery that produces more than 250,000 gallons
of wine annually.



      (7)   It is unlawful for a smaller brewer licensee, or an
employee of a licensee to sell malt liquor on any day, or during any hour,
when sales of liquor are not permitted by state statutes.



(Ord. 891, passed 9-16-2014; Ord. 904, passed 5-19-2015)  Penalty, see §
114.99



§ 114.37  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter becomes effective from and after its passage and
publication.



(Ord. 891, passed 9-16-2014)



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or
provision of this chapter when the person performs an act thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a
misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.



(2013 Code, § 5.99)



   (B)   (1)   The purpose of this division (B) is to establish a
uniform set of penalties for licensees who furnish or sell alcoholic
beverages to minors. The penalties for a first or second incident shall be
imposed and administered by the City Administrator upon an admission by the
licensee that the licensee furnished or sold an alcoholic beverage to a
minor. The penalties for a third or fourth incident may only be imposed by
the City Council.



      (2)   The following penalties shall be imposed if a licensee
furnishes or sells alcoholic beverages to a minor:



         (a)   A $1,000 fine and a 1-day license suspension for
the first incident; provided, however, that $500 of the fine and the 1-day
license suspension will be suspended for 1 year on the condition that the
licensee has no further incidents of furnishing or selling alcoholic
beverages to minor during that 1-year period;



         (b)   A $1,500 fine and a 5-day license suspension for a
second incident occurring within 3 years of the date of the previous incident;



         (c)   A $2,000 fine and a 10-day license suspension for
a third incident occurring within 3 years of the dates of the previous 2
incidents;



         (d)   A $2,000 fine and a suspension of the license for
a minimum of 30 days or a revocation of the license for a fourth or
subsequent incident occurring within 3 years of the dates of the previous
incidents.



      (3)   All multiple-day license suspensions shall run
consecutively beginning at 12:01 a.m. on the first day of the suspension
period and ending at midnight on the last day of the suspension period.



      (4)   Any person whose license to sell alcoholic beverages is
revoked under this division (B)(4) may not apply for a new license for at
least 30 days after the effective date of the revocation.



      (5)   No suspension or revocation shall be imposed by either
the City Council or the City Administrator until the licensee has been
afforded an opportunity for a hearing in accordance with § 114.02(D).



(2013 Code, § 5.08)



(Ord. 1, passed 1-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992; Ord. 621, passed
3-21-2002; Ord. 634, passed 7-18-2002)



CHAPTER 115:  COMMERCIAL AMUSEMENTS



Section




Outdoor Performance Centers




   115.30   Definition



   115.31   License required



   115.32   Application procedure



   115.33   Application fee



   115.34   Insurance requirements



   115.35   Performance surety



   115.36   Special conditions



   115.37   Prohibited conduct on the premises



   115.38   Licenses



   115.39   Expiration of licenses



   115.40   Revocation or suspension



 



   115.99   Penalty




OUTDOOR PERFORMANCE CENTERS




§ 115.30  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OUTDOOR PERFORMANCE CENTER. Any outdoor premises in or on which shows,
theatrical performances, concerts, exhibits, or events are performed or put
on from a stage or similar location for viewing by more than 1,000 patrons at
any 1 time and for which an admission charge is made.



(2013 Code, § 6.42B)  (Ord. 230, passed 10-22-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)



§ 115.31  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall construct, operate, or maintain an outdoor performance
center within the city without first having obtained a license as hereinafter
provided from the city.



(2013 Code, § 6.42B)  (Ord. 230, passed 10-22-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992) Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.32  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)    Applications for licenses issued hereunder shall be made in
writing and in duplicate and shall state:



      (1)   Number of automobiles or other vehicles which the
facility is designed to accommodate;



      (2)   The number of persons the facility is designed to
accommodate;



      (3)   The hours of operation of the facility; and



      (4)   The number of employees and attendants to be employed.



   (B)   The application hereunder shall be accompanied by a plat or
drawing of the facility which plat or drawing shall show the following:



      (1)   Location, size, and capacity;



      (2)   Locations and size of entrances and exits;



      (3)   Parking plan and type of ground surfacing;



      (4)   Location, size, and construction of all proposed
structures;



      (5)   Locations, size, and design of all signs, marquees, and
billboards;



      (6)   Location, size, and construction of all walls, fences,
and barriers surrounding the premises;



      (7)   Location and description of all artificial lighting to
be used on the premises;



      (8)   Locations and description of all drives connected to
public highways;



      (9)   Plan of traffic control and number and description of
persons used in controlling traffic, all of which must receive the written
approval of the city’s Chief of Police; and



      (10)   Certificate of approval in writing from the Fire Chief
of the city as to fire lanes and other public safeguards.



(2013 Code, § 6.42B)  (Ord. 230, passed 10-22-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)



§ 115.33  APPLICATION FEE.



   An application hereunder shall be accompanied by an application fee in
an amount set by Council resolution and no part of which is refundable.



(2013 Code, § 6.42B)  (Ord. 230, passed 10-22-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)



§ 115.34  INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Every application for a license hereunder shall be accompanied
by a bond, approved as to form by the City Attorney and then approved by the
City Council, executed by a bonding or surety company authorized to do
business in the state in the penal sum and amount of $3,000,000 conditioned
upon the payment by the licensee of any and all final judgments for injuries
or damages resulting to persons or property arising out of the operation or
maintenance of the facility.



   (B)   Such bond shall run to the city for the benefit of any person
who may have received injuries and for the benefit of any person who may
claim redress for property damages resulting from the operation or
maintenance of such facility. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect
for the full period of the time for which this license is effective. A
liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in the state conforming to the requirements of this chapter may be
permitted in lieu of the bond, but before becoming effective, must be
approved.



(2013 Code, § 6.42B)  (Ord. 230, passed 10-22-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)



§ 115.35  PERFORMANCE SURETY.



   (A)   In addition to the provisions of § 115.34, every application
for a license hereunder shall be accompanied by proof of an escrow deposit in
form acceptable to the City Attorney and then approved by the City Council in
an amount of $50,000 or shall be accompanied by a letter of credit so
conditioned in the same manner as the escrow and the escrow deposit or letter
of credit must be at a bank acceptable to the city.



   (B)   The conditions of the obligation of the escrow deposit or
letter of credit shall be such that if the licensee shall comply with the
terms of the license or any modification, extension, or renewal thereof and
all pertinent laws of the state or the city and that if the licensee shall
further pay when due all taxes, licenses, penalties, and other charges
provided by law and it shall further provide that in the event of any
violation of the provisions of the license or relevant law, that all or a
portion of such escrow or letter of credit, to be determined after a hearing
by the City Council, shall be forfeited to the city and that if the licensee
shall pay to the extent of the principal amount of the escrow or letter of
credit any amount so due thereunder or resulting from the violation of any of
the provisions of the ordinance or law of the state or the city then the
obligation of the escrow or letter of credit shall be void otherwise shall
remain in full force and effect.



(2013 Code, § 6.42B)  (Ord. 230, passed 10-22-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)



§ 115.36  SPECIAL CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Prior to the granting of any license, the licensee must supply
the city with a list and a description of its upcoming bookings and, if the
bookings come in after the application, this information must be supplied to
the Council 60 days prior to the date of the engagement.



   (B)   In an emergency situation, but not more than once in any
calendar year, the time of such notice could be cut to 20 days and in no
event less that 7 days before the event.



   (C)   The city may withhold a license for any applicant who in the
past has violated any provision of this subchapter or other relevant
ordinances or pertinent laws of the city and the state.



   (D)   Performance standards as to noise emitting from and on the
facility must be measured according to PCA standards of sound level and the
measurement must prove conformance at the property line of the facility and
at the property line of the nearest residence or residences, and under no
circumstances, may the sound level exceed the PCA standards as they are set
from time to time.



(2013 Code, § 6.42B)  (Ord. 230, passed 10-22-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)



§ 115.37  PROHIBITED CONDUCT ON THE PREMISES.



   (A)   The licensee shall not knowingly allow the continuation of the
following prohibited activities and if such activities are discovered by
licensee, the licensee shall take whatever action is reasonably needed to
terminate the following: brawling or fighting; or conduct tending to
reasonably arouse, alarm, anger or resentment in others.



   (B)   There shall be no intentional throwing of any object, thing,
or article onto the stage, playing field, or area where an event is
conducted, which may be likely to endanger any person or property or
interfere with the orderly play or conduct of the event.



   (C)   There shall be no intentional running or going onto the stage,
playing field, or area where an event is conducted.



   (D)   There shall be no obstruction of any aisle properly marked
“exit” or taking or obstructing the seat of another.



   (E)   There shall be no possession with intent to consume, serve, or
dispense any intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating malt liquor on the
premises, except in areas clearly designated for such purposes.



   (F)   No person shall be permitted to appear or be at any event in
an intoxicated or drug induced condition.



(2013 Code, § 6.42B)  (Ord. 230, passed 10-22-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992) Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.38  LICENSES.



   Whenever the City Council has authorized the issuance of a license
under the provisions of this chapter, such license shall be issued upon the
payment by the applicant to the city of a fee to be set by resolution.



(2013 Code, § 6.42B)  (Ord. 230, passed 10-22-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)



§ 115.39  EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.



   All licenses issued under this subchapter, shall expire on November 1
next following the issuance thereof. No license issued hereunder shall be
transferrable.



(2013 Code, § 6.42B)  (Ord. 230, passed 10-22-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)



§ 115.40  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.



   The City Council shall have authority to revoke or suspend a license
issued hereunder when it finds that the premises are used as campground,
place of residence, or other similar occupancy before, during, or after the
usual closing hours of any entertainment on the facility.



(2013 Code, § 6.42B)  (Ord. 230, passed 10-22-1987; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or provision
of this chapter when the person performs an act thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows.



   (A)   Misdemeanor. Where the specific section, subdivision,
paragraph, or provision specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, the
person shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.



   (B)   Petty misdemeanor. As to any violations not constituting a
misdemeanor under the provisions of division (A) above, the person shall be
punished as for a petty misdemeanor.



(2013 Code, § 6.99)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992;
Ord. 352, passed 1-7-1993)



CHAPTER 116:  MASSAGE PARLORS



Section



   116.01   Purpose



   116.02   Definitions



   116.03   License required



   116.04   License applications



   116.05   Licensee eligibility



   116.06   Restrictions and regulations



   116.07   Revocation



 



   116.99   Penalty



§ 116.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The city recognizes and accepts therapeutic massage, as
distinguished from other forms of massage, as a scientific health care,
maintenance technique, and procedure for the human muscles, tendons, tissues,
and the like. The city, however, equally recognizes the potential for illicit
massage operations or establishments in the wake of legitimate professional
therapeutic massage establishments.



   (B)   Accordingly, in order to prevent or protect against the
existence of illicit massage establishments or operations in the city and to
protect the public’s health, safety, and welfare, including the protection
of the city’s legitimate massage therapists’ profession and reputation,
the city deems it necessary to regulate therapeutic massage establishments
and massage therapists through the licensing process.



(2013 Code, § 6.45)  (Ord. 860, passed 9-13-2012)



§ 116.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCREDITED INSTITUTION. An educational institution holding accredited
status from the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools (“NCA”)
or another regional accrediting agency approved by the U.S. Department of
Education presently or at the time the applicant obtained his or her diploma
or certificate of graduation.



   ACCREDITED PROGRAM. A professional massage program that is presently,
or at the time the applicant obtained his or her diploma or certificate of
graduation, accredited by the Commission on Massage Therapy Accreditation
(“COMTA”), or a comparable national or regional organization which is
approved by the U.S. Department of Education for its accrediting program for
compliance with quality and competency standards through a process of
periodic review and self-study.



    MASSAGE THERAPIST. A person who practices or provides therapeutic
massage to another for a fee or other consideration paid either directly or
indirectly. A person licensed as a medical doctor, chiropractor, osteopath,
podiatrist, licensed nurse, physical therapist, athletic director or trainer,
or beautician (cosmetologist) or barber who confines his or her treatment to
the scalp, face, and neck or the lower leg and feet in the case of a pedicure
shall not be deemed to be a MASSAGE THERAPIST.



   MASSAGE THERAPY or THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE. Scientific health care or
health maintenance techniques or procedures carried out by a massage
therapist involving the rubbing, tapping, pounding, or kneading of a
person’s skin, muscles, and tissues or the stretching of body limbs (e.g.,
Thai massage) for the purpose of easing mental and physical tension, the
breaking up of fatty tissues, relaxing muscles or alleviating muscle spasms,
and the improvement of circulation through the body.



   MASSAGE THERAPY BUSINESS.



      (1)   Any enterprise, establishment, or operation, whether
under control of an individual or legal entity, providing or offering to
provide massage therapy services within the city for a fee or other
consideration paid either directly or indirectly, that:



         (a)   Has 1 or more massage therapists employed or
contracted to provide massage therapy services for the massage therapy
business; or



         (b)   Is located in a fixed location in a nonresidential
zoning district within the city wherein massage therapy services are provided.



      (2)   Any health or medical facility, office, or clinic
operated by state licensed medical professional(s) or any health or
medical-related business operated by state licensed medical professional(s)
duly licensed under the provisions of M.S. §§ 144.50 through 144.60, as
they may be amended from time to time, which provides therapeutic massage to
its patients, shall not be deemed to be a massage therapy business.



      STUDENT OF MASSAGE THERAPY. A person who is enrolled in and
attends classes at an accredited institution or accredited program as defined
by this chapter. This includes students attending a post-graduate continuing
education class, provided the class has been approved by the National
Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork or other nationally
recognized organization.



(2013 Code, § 6.45)  (Ord. 860, passed 9-13-2012)



§ 116.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Massage therapist licence required. It shall be unlawful for
any person to practice massage therapy or provide or offer to provide massage
therapy within the city without a massage therapist license issued by the
city. This includes persons providing massage therapy at massage therapy
businesses that have massage therapy business licenses.



   (B)   Massage therapy business license required. It shall be
unlawful for any person or entity to operate a massage therapy business
within the city without a massage therapy business license issued by the city.



   (C)   Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to and no massage
therapist or massage therapy business license shall be required for:



      (1)   A health care office, clinic, or facility:



         (a)   Owned by a municipal corporation organized under
the laws of the state;



         (b)   Owned by the state or any of its agencies; or



         (c)   Licensed by the state.



      (2)   Any business or entity owned and operated by state
licensed medical professional(s) through whom massage therapy or therapeutic
massage is provided to its patients as a secondary health care treatment
provided by the business or entity.



      (3)   Accredited institutions which provide an accredited
program of study or course work in massage therapy or therapeutic massage;
provided, that:



         (a)   The massage therapy or therapeutic massage is
provided during and as part of a course or clinical component of the
institution’s program or course work; and



         (b)   Students are supervised by an instructor while
performing massage therapy or therapeutic massage.



      (4)   A massage therapist who is working for or an employee of
a medical professional licensed under M.S. Chs. 147 or 148, as they may be
amended from time to time, or is an employee of a health care office, clinic,
or facility that is:



         (a)   Owned by a municipal corporation organized under
the laws of the state;



         (b)   Owned by the state or any of its agencies; or



         (c)   Licensed by the state.



      (5)   Students of massage therapy; provided, that:



         (a)   The massage is provided during and as part of an
accredited program of study or course work in massage therapy; and



         (b)   The student is supervised by an instructor while
providing or performing massage therapy services. A notice, which advises the
public that the person who may provide massage therapy services is a student
of massage therapy and is not licensed by the city, shall be posted in a
conspicuous location in the room in which the massage therapy is provided.



   (D)   Massage therapy business license period and renewal. A massage
therapy business license issued under this chapter shall be an annual
license, expiring on November 1 of each year. A massage therapy business
license may be annually renewed, provided the licensee completes and files a
license renewal application with the city no later than October 15 of the
year in which the license is to be renewed. The licensee must provide the
city with any changes in ownership interest throughout the duration of the
license period. If ownership interests have changed, an additional
investigation may be necessary and an additional investigation fee may be
required to be paid.



   (E)   Massage therapist license. All massage therapists practicing
in the city must be licensed and must apply to the city for a massage
therapist license. A massage therapist license does not expire and is not
required to be renewed.



   (F)   License and investigation fees. The license and investigation
fees for licenses required by this chapter shall be determined by the City
Council in the city’s fee schedule. If a license application is received in
the middle of a license term, the license fee shall be pro-rated for the
remaining term of the license. All required license fees shall be paid on a
pro-rated quarterly basis.



(2013 Code, § 6.45)  (Ord. 860, passed 9-13-2012)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.04  LICENSE APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Massage therapy business license.



      (1)   An application for a massage therapy business license
shall be filed, along with all required fees and information, including a
background investigation fee with the City Clerk. The amount of the
background investigation fee shall be equivalent to the city’s cost of the
background investigation of the massage therapy business and all persons or
entities that have a 5% financial interest in the business. The Police
Department shall conduct a background investigation on the applicant. An
inspection of the business premises by the Building Inspector is also
required. After the background investigation and building inspection are
complete, all applications shall be considered by the City Clerk and granted
or denied by the City Council.



      (2)   The application for a license under this chapter shall
be made on a form supplied by the city and shall contain the following
information:



         (a)   For all applicants:



            1.   Whether the applicant is an individual,
corporation, partnership, or other form of organization;



            2.   Specify the full name, address, date, and
place of birth, and telephone number of the natural person designated by the
applicant as the massage therapy business’s on-site manager or agent along
with the notarized written consent of the person to:



               a.   Take full responsibility for the
conduct of the licensed premises and operation; and



               b.   Serve as the business’s agent for
purposes of services of notices and other processes related to the license by
the city.



            3.   Evidence that the massage therapy
business’s on-site manager or agent has legal work status in the United
States;



            4.   A list of the massage therapy business’s
employees along with proof that all of the employees who are massage
therapists are licensed by the city;



            5.   The legal description and address of the
premises to be licensed together with a plan of the area showing dimensions,
location of buildings, street access, and parking facilities;



            6.   If the applicant does not own the premises, a
copy of the lease agreement allowing the applicant to occupy the premises;



            7.   The floor number, street number, and rooms
where the massage services are to be conducted;



            8.   Whether all taxes and special assessments
that are due and payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and
if not, the years and amounts that are unpaid;



            9.   If the application is for premises either
planned or under construction or undergoing substantial alteration, the
application must be accompanied by preliminary plans showing the design of
the proposed premises; if the plans for design are on file with the Building
Inspector, no plans need be submitted;



            10.   The name and street address of the business
if it is to be conducted under a designation or name other than the name of
the applicant, and a certified copy of the certificate required by M.S. §§
333.01 and 333.02, as they may be amended from time to time;



            11.   Proof of general liability insurance
coverage in effect as required by this chapter;



            12.   With respect to the owner, operator, or any
person who has a 5% financial interest in the business and the appointed
on-site manager or agent of the applicant, proof of workers’ compensation
insurance as required by state law;



            13.   If the owner, operator, or any person who
has a 5% financial interest in the business and the appointed on-site manager
or agent of the applicant has ever had a massage therapist or massage therapy
business-related license in the city or another jurisdiction that was
suspended or revoked within the past 10 years;



            14.   a.   Proof of identification consisting
of 1 of the following:



                  i.   A valid driver’s license or
identification card issued by a state of the United States or a province of
Canada that includes the photograph and date of birth of the applicant;



                  ii.   A valid military identification
card issued by the U.S. Department of Defense; or



                  iii.   A valid passport issued by the
United States or another country if the applicant is a foreign national.



               b.   For purposes of satisfying this
requirement, the applicant is deemed to be the on-site manager or agent for
the massage therapy business that is signing the application on behalf of the
business.



            15.   Other information that the city may require.



         (b)   For applicants who are individuals:



            1.   The full name, address, date, and place of
birth, and telephone number of the applicant;



            2.   If the applicant has ever used or been known
by a name other than the applicant’s name, and if so, the name or means and
information concerning the dates and places where used;



            3.   Residence addresses of the applicant during 5
years preceding the date of application;



            4.   The type, name, and location of every
business or occupation the applicant has been engaged in during the preceding
5 years;



            5.   Names and addresses of the applicant’s
employers for the preceding 5 years;



            6.   If the applicant has ever been convicted of a
crime other than a minor traffic offense; if so, the applicant must furnish
information as to the time, place, and offense involved in the conviction; and



            7.   If the applicant has ever been engaged in the
operation of massage services; if so, the applicant must furnish information
as to the name, place, and length of time of involvement in such activity.



         (c)   1.   For applicants that are partnerships:



               a.   The names and addresses of all general
and limited partners and the information concerning each general partner
described above in division (A)(2)(b) above;



               b.   The managing partners must be
designated, and the interest of each general and limited partner in the
business must be disclosed; and



               c.   A true copy of the partnership
agreement must be submitted with the application, and if the partnership is
required to file a certificate as to a trade name under M.S. § 333.02, as it
may be amended from time to time, a certified copy of that certificate must
be submitted.



            2.   The license if issued will be in the name of
the partnership.



         (d)   1.   For applicants that are corporations:



               a.   The name of the corporation or
business, and if incorporated, the state of incorporation;



               b.    A true copy of the certificate of
incorporation, and, if a foreign corporation, a certificate of authority as
described in M.S. § 303.06, as it may be amended from time to time;



               c.   The names of any general managers,
corporate officers, proprietors, and other persons in charge of the premises
to be licensed, and the information about those persons described in division
(A)(2)(b) above; and



               d.   A list of the persons who own or have a
5% or greater interest in the corporation or who are officers of the
corporation or organization, together with their addresses and the
information regarding such persons described in division (A)(2)(b) above.



            2.   The license if issued will be in the name of
the corporation.



   (B)   Massage therapist license applications.



      (1)   An application for a massage therapist license shall be
filed, along with all required fees, with the City Clerk. The Police
Department shall conduct a background investigation on the applicant. After
the background investigation is complete, all applications shall be
considered by the City Clerk and granted or denied by the City Council.



      (2)   The application for a license under this chapter shall
be made on a form supplied by the city and shall contain the following
information:



         (a)   The applicant’s full name, address, date and
place of birth, and telephone number;



         (b)   The name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant’s current employer;



         (c)   The applicant’s employers for the previous 10
years, including the employer’s name, address, and dates of employment;



         (d)   The applicant’s residence address for the
previous 10 years;



         (e)   The applicant’s weight, height, color of eyes,
and color of hair;



         (f)   If the applicant has ever been convicted of a
crime other than a minor traffic offense and, if so, the time, place, and
offense involved in the conviction;



         (g)   If the applicant has ever had a massage therapist
or massage therapy business-related license in the city or another
jurisdiction that was suspended or revoked within the past 10 years;



         (h)   If the applicant has ever used or been known by a
name other than the applicant’s name, and if so, the name or names used and
information concerning dates and places where used;



         (i)   Evidence that the applicant has legal work status
in the United States;



         (j)   Evidence that the applicant has or will have
general liability insurance coverage meeting the requirements of this chapter
in effect at the time of issuance of the license;



         (k)   Evidence that the applicant has 1 of the following:



            1.   Has a diploma or certificate of graduation
from an accredited institution for a comprehensive massage therapy program
that includes subjects of anatomy, physiology, hygiene, ethics, massage
theory and research, and massage practice;



            2.   Has completed at least 500 credit hours of
certified therapeutic massage training/course work that includes subjects of
anatomy, physiology, hygiene, ethics, massage theory and research, and
massage practice from an accredited institution or program; or



            3.   Has passed either:



                  a.   The National Certification Exam
offered by the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and
Bodywork; or



                  b.   The Massage and Bodywork
Licensing Examination offered through the Federation of State Massage Therapy
Boards and has a minimum of 7 years of full-time work experience as a massage
therapist in the United States.



         (l)   Proof of identification consisting of 1 of the
following:



            1.   A valid driver’s license or identification
card issued by a state of the United States or a province of Canada that
includes the photograph and date of birth of the applicant;



            2.   A valid military identification card issued
by the U.S. Department of Defense; or



            3.   A valid passport issued by the United States
or another country if the applicant is a foreign national.



         (m)   Other information that the city requires.



(2013 Code, § 6.45)  (Ord. 860, passed 9-13-2012)



§ 116.05  LICENSEE ELIGIBILITY.



   (A)   The City Council may deny issuance of a massage therapy
business license in any of the following circumstances:



      (1)   The proposed premises in which the massage therapy
business proposes to operate is located in a residential zoning district or
is located in a commercial or industrial zoning district in which medical or
health care facilities or uses are not permitted or conditional uses;



      (2)   The owner, operator, any person who has a 5% financial
interest in the business or the appointed on-site manager or agent has a
conviction for, or was charged with, but convicted of a lesser charge of, a
crime involving a violation of any massage therapy-related regulation in any
other jurisdiction, any prostitution-related offense, criminal sexual
conduct, indecent exposure, surreptitious intrusion, disorderly house as
defined by state statutes, theft, felony drug offense, any crime of violence
as defined by state statutes, or any other similar crime or offense which
conviction date is within 10 years of the date of application;



      (3)   The owner, operator, any person who has a 5% financial
interest in the proposed licensed massage therapy business or the on-site
manager or agent had a massage therapist or massage therapy business-related
license in another jurisdiction that was either suspended or revoked within
10 years preceding the date of application;



      (4)   The information provided in the application does not
meet the requirements of this chapter;



      (5)   The applicant provided false or misrepresented
information in the application;



      (6)   The business is proposed to be operated on premises on
which property taxes, assessments, or other financial claims by the state,
county, or city are due, delinquent, or unpaid, provided the applicant or
other entity in which the applicant has an interest has the legal duty to pay
said taxes, assessments, or claims due and owing;



      (7)   The applicant does not have insurance coverage in effect
as required by this chapter; or



      (8)   The applicant has been denied a license under this
chapter within the preceding 12 months.



   (B)   The City Council may deny issuance of a massage therapist
license in any of the following circumstances:



      (1)   The applicant has a conviction for or was charged with,
but convicted of a lesser charge, a crime involving a violation of any
massage therapy-related regulation in any other jurisdiction, any
prostitution-related offense, criminal sexual conduct, indecent exposure,
surreptitious intrusion, disorderly house as defined by state statutes,
theft, felony drug offense, any crime of violence as defined by state
statutes, or any other similar crime or offense within 10 years of the date
of application;



      (2)   The applicant had a massage therapist or massage therapy
business-related license in another jurisdiction that was suspended or
revoked within 10 years preceding the date of application;



      (3)   The applicant is not 18 years of age or older;



      (4)   The information provided in the application does not
meet the requirements of this chapter;



      (5)   The applicant provided false or misrepresented
information on the application;



      (6)   The applicant does not have insurance coverage in effect
as required by this chapter; or



      (7)   The applicant has been denied a license under this
chapter within the preceding 12 months.



(2013 Code, § 6.45)  (Ord. 860, passed 9-13-2012)



§ 116.06  RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.



   All massage therapy business licensees and massage therapist licensees
must comply with the following restrictions and regulations.



   (A)   A massage therapy business must not provide massage therapy
services at any location other than the premises identified on the license,
except a licensed massage therapist employed or contracted by the massage
therapy business licensee may provide massage therapy services in the
following circumstances:



      (1)   To a client at the client’s residence or place of care
if in a long- or short-term care facility, such as a hospital, nursing home,
or convalescence facility;



      (2)   In connection with a special event or function whereby
the massage therapist provides massage services to attendees of the event or
function; or



      (3)   At the location of any business in the city that
contracts with a licensed massage therapy business to perform massage
therapist services at the site of the contracting business.



   (B)   The act of any employee of a massage therapy business licensee
is deemed to be the act of the licensee. The licensee shall be responsible
for all acts and conduct attributable to and in connection with massage
therapy services provided by the licensee or occurring on the premises of the
business.



   (C)   The person who is receiving a massage shall at all times have
his or her anus, intergluteal cleft (buttocks crease), and genitals covered
with clothing or properly draped with non-transparent material. The person
who is receiving massage therapy of the breast or buttocks (gluteus) shall
have the breast or buttock (gluteus muscle) that is not then immediately
receiving massage therapy properly covered and draped with non-transparent
material.



   (D)   The massage therapist and all others working on the premises
shall at all times be fully clothed and shall not expose his or her breasts,
buttocks, anus, or genitals.



   (E)   At no time shall the massage therapist touch or offer to touch
or massage the penis, scrotum, mons veneris, vulva, or vaginal area of any
customer or person inquiring of massage therapy services.



   (F)   No beer, liquor, narcotic drug, or controlled substances, as
such terms are defined by state statutes or this code of ordinances, shall be
used, ingested or present during any massage therapy session.



   (G)   No doors of massage rooms, when occupied by 1 or more persons,
shall be locked. All locks, if any, shall be keyed only from the exterior of
the massage rooms.



   (H)   Only massage therapists who are licensed by the city shall
practice or provide massage therapy services for or within a licensed massage
therapy business.



   (I)   The licensee shall comply with any and all provisions of this
chapter, all provisions of this code of ordinances, federal, and state laws
and regulations.



   (J)   No massage therapy services shall be provided and the massage
therapy business shall not be open between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. of any day.



   (K)   The licensed premises of a massage therapy business shall,
during all operating hours, be open to inspection by any city building,
zoning, code, or police officer to determine whether this chapter and all
other laws are being observed. All persons, as a condition to being issued
the license, consent to these inspections. It is unlawful for any licensee,
agent, or employee of a licensee to hinder or prevent the city inspecting
officer from making an inspection.



   (L)   If a licensed massage therapy business’s on-site manager or
agent ceases to be located at the licensed premises or ceases to act in such
capacity for the licensee without appointment of a successor, the license
issued pursuant to such appointment shall be subject to revocation or
suspension.



   (M)   A massage therapist shall have the license issued by the city
in his or her possession while providing massage services within the city. A
massage therapy business shall conspicuously post the license issued by the
city on its premises in a conspicuous location that is accessible to the
public.



   (N)   No license issued under this chapter may be transferred.
Massage therapy business licenses shall terminate upon any change in officers
or ownership interests of the licensee, unless the change is approved by the
City Council in which case the license shall only continue in force until the
end of the license term.



   (O)   The licensee shall have in effect during the license period
general liability insurance providing minimum coverage of $300,000 combined
single limit per occurrence. Employees of licensed massage therapy businesses
are not required to carry individual general liability insurance; provided,
that proof of required insurance coverage has been provided by the business
to the city.



   (P)   The licensee shall comply with all laws of health and
sanitation.



   (Q)   No massage therapy business shall be used or operated as or in
conjunction with an adult establishment as defined in § 130.68.



(2013 Code, § 6.45) (Ord. 860, passed 9-13-2012; Ord. 895, passed
10-7-2014)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.07  REVOCATION.



   Violation of any provision of this chapter, or any building, safety, or
health regulation shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license,
as determined by the City Council. Before revocation or suspension of any
license, the city shall give notice to the licensee and grant the licensee
the opportunity to be heard.



(2013 Code, § 6.45)  (Ord. 860, passed 9-13-2012)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.99  PENALTY.



   Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or provision
of this chapter when the person performs an act thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows.



   (A)   Misdemeanor. Where the specific section, subdivision,
paragraph, or provision specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, the
person shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.



   (B)   Petty misdemeanor. As to any violations not constituting a
misdemeanor under the provisions of division (A) above, the person shall be
punished as for a petty misdemeanor.



(2013 Code, § 6.99)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992;
Ord. 352, passed 1-7-1993)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   PUBLIC PROTECTION, CRIMES, AND OFFENSES



CHAPTER 130:  PUBLIC PROTECTION, CRIMES, AND OFFENSES



Section




Public Protection




   130.01   Unlawful use and furnishing of tobacco



   130.02   Toilet installation required



   130.03   Dog, cat, and domestic animal regulation and licensing



   130.04   Other animals



   130.05   Falsely reporting fire



   130.06   Open burning



   130.07   Adoption of the State Fire Code



   130.08   Hazardous materials



   130.09   Fires, open flames, or barbeques on balconies or patios



   130.10   Consumer fireworks



   130.11   Public nuisance



   130.12   Permitting a public nuisance



   130.13   Bungee jumping on city property



   130.14   Jumping rides



   130.15   Shade tree disease and shade tree pest control and
prevention



   130.16   Rules and regulations governing public parks



   130.17   Maintenance of vegetation



   130.18   Junk cars, furniture, household furnishings, and appliances
stored on public or private property



   130.19   Smoking on Community Activity Center property



   130.20   Social hosts




Offenses Against Public Peace and Public Order




   130.35   Unlawful deposit of litter



   130.36   Dangerous weapons and articles



   130.37   Falsely reporting crime or ordinance violation



   130.38   Unlawful assembly; presence at unlawful assembly



   130.39   Curfew



   130.40   Concealing identity



   130.41   Abandoning a motor vehicle



   130.42   Interference with ambulance service



   130.43   Coercion



   130.44   Interfering with religious observance



   130.45   Noise elimination and noise prevention



   130.46   Trespass upon land for the purpose of using controlled
substances



   130.47   Parades and races



   130.48   Disorderly house or place of public resort




Offenses Against Public Morals




   130.65   Indecent conduct



   130.66   Gambling



   130.67   Adult establishments



   130.68   Premises conducive to high-risk sexual conduct



 



   130.99   Penalty




PUBLIC PROTECTION




§ 130.01  UNLAWFUL USE AND FURNISHING OF TOBACCO.



   (A)   Minor using. It is unlawful for any person, under the age of
18 years, to use tobacco in any form.



   (B)   Furnishing to minors. It is unlawful for any person to furnish
tobacco, by any manner or means and in any form, to any person under the age
of 18 years.



(2013 Code, § 10.02)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Tobacco, Tobacco Products, and Tobacco-Related Devices, see §§
110.055 through 110.067



 



§ 130.02  TOILET INSTALLATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is the duty of every owner or occupant of any property
within the city, having a dwelling house or business building situated
thereon, which property is within 500 feet of any municipal water and sewer
mains, to install a toilet in such dwelling or business building and make
connection thereof with such water and sewer mains.



   (B)   Whenever the noncompliance of the owner or occupant of such
property is reported to the Building Official, the Building Official shall
forthwith make such investigation as the Building Official deems necessary or
proper and report the findings to the Council. If the Building Official finds
and reports that in Building Official’s opinion the lack of toilet
facilities is an unhealthful or insanitary condition, the city shall
forthwith serve written notice upon said owner or occupant requiring the
installation of toilet facilities upon premises described in said notice, and
connection thereof with the sewer and water mains, all of which shall be done
within 30 days after service of such written notice.



   (C)   Whenever any owner or occupant shall default in compliance
with such written notice, the Council may by resolution direct that a toilet
be installed and connection made with the water and sewer mains and that the
actual cost of such installation be paid in the first instance out of the
General Revenue Fund, and assessed against the property so benefitted. After
such installation and connection is completed by order of the Council, the
city shall serve a written notice of intention to make an assessment
therefor. If such assessment is not paid within 10 days, the city shall
certify the amount thereof to the County Auditor in the same manner as with
other special assessments; provided, that the Council may by resolution
provide that the assessment be spread over a term of 3 years upon written
request by the owner of the property.



(2013 Code, § 10.03)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  DOG, CAT, AND DOMESTIC ANIMAL REGULATION AND LICENSING.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      AT LARGE. Outside of the premises of the owner and not under
restraint.



      DANGEROUS DOG. Any dog that has:



         (a)   Without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily
harm on a human being on public or private property;



         (b)   Killed a domestic animal without provocation while
off the owner’s property; or



         (c)   Been found to be potentially dangerous, and after
the owner has notice that the dog is potentially dangerous, the dog
aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic
animals.



      GREAT BODILY HARM. The meaning given it under M.S. § 609.02,
subd. 8, as it may be amended from time to time.



      OWNER. Any person as defined in § 10.05 possessing, harboring,
keeping, having care, or custody or control of a dog or cat, or the parents
or guardians of a person under 18 years of age who possesses, harbors, keeps,
or has the care or custody or control of a dog or cat.



      POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. Any dog that:



         (a)   When unprovoked, inflicts bites on a human or
domestic animal on public or private property;



         (b)   When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person,
including a person on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public
or private property, other than the dog owner’s property, in an apparent
attitude of attack; or



         (c)   Has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition
to attack unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of
humans or domestic animals.



      PROPER ENCLOSURE. Securely confined indoors or in a securely
enclosed and locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the animal from
escaping and providing protection from the elements for the dog. A PROPER
ENCLOSURE does not include a porch, patio, or any part of a house, garage, or
other structure that would allow the dog to exit of its own volition, or any
house or structure in which windows are open or in which door or window
screens are the only obstacles that prevent the dog from exiting.



      SUBSTANTIAL BODILY HARM. The meaning given it under M.S. §
609.02, subd. 7a, as it may be amended from time to time.



      UNDER RESTRAINT. On the premises of the owner, or on a leash and
under a responsible persons control and obedience. The leash shall be a
restraint or a line, belt, cord, or chain, not more than 10 feet in length
for leading or restraining a dog, securely fastened around the neck or collar
of said dog. In the case of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog, the
leash shall be no longer than 4 feet in length.



   (B)   Running at large prohibited . It shall be unlawful for the dog
or cat of any person who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat, to run at
large, except as otherwise allowed at the city’s dog park.



   (C)   License required. It is unlawful for any person, or other
possessor, of a dog over 6 months of age, to fail to obtain a proper city
license therefor. It shall be the duty of each owner of a dog to obtain a
license immediately, if not licensed already, or upon acquiring ownership of
any unlicensed dog, or within 30 days of establishing residence in the city,
or upon expiration of an existing license. The owner of any dog picked up by
the Pound Master whose license is not current, shall be subject to a fine as
established by the Council by resolution. This fine must be paid prior to
releasing the dog,



   (D)   Application. Application for a dog license shall be on a form
supplied by the city.



   (E)   License fee and term. All fees for the licensing and
impounding of dogs and cats shall be fixed and determined by the Council,
adopted by resolution, and uniformly enforced. Such fees may from time to
time be amended by the Council by resolution. A copy of the resolution
setting forth currently effective fees shall be kept on file in the office of
the City Clerk and open to inspection during regular business hours.



   (F)   Tag required. All licensed dogs shall wear a collar and have a
tag firmly affixed thereto evidencing such license and vaccination. A
duplicate for a lost tag may be issued by the city upon payment of the fee as
determined by the Council, adopted by resolution, for issuance of the
duplicate.



   (G)   Inoculation against rabies. All dogs shall be inoculated
against rabies by a veterinarian duly licensed to practice veterinary
medicine in the state. It is the duty of the owner of the animal to keep
inoculations current. The owner of any dog picked up by the Pound Master
whose rabies inoculation is not current, shall be subject to a fine as
established by the Council by resolution. The fine must be paid prior to the
release of the dog. Upon payment of the fine and release of the dog, the
owner shall have 15 days in which to have the dog inoculated. If the dog is
picked up after this 15-day period and the owner cannot provide proof of
inoculation against rabies, the owner shall be subject to another fine.



   (H)   Records. The city shall keep a record of all dog licenses
issued, with the name and address and phone number of the person to whom
issued, and name, age, and description of the dog.



   (I)   Obligation to prevent nuisances.



      (1)   It is unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat to
permit, by action or inaction, such dog or cat to commit a nuisance.



      (2)   Each occurrence of any of the following acts shall be
considered a separate nuisance:



         (a)   For any dog or cat to habitually or frequently
bark or cry;



         (b)   For any dog or cat to frequent school grounds,
playgrounds, playing fields, parks, or public beaches;



         (c)   For any dog or cat to chase vehicles or
individuals;



         (d)   For any dog or cat to molest or annoy any person,
if such person is not on the property of the owner;



         (e)   For any dog or cat to damage, molest, defile, or
destroy any property, public or private;



         (f)   For any owner of any dog or cat not to immediately
remove any feces left by such animal on any public or private property
including yards and boulevards and to dispose of such feces in a sanitary
manner;



         (g)   For any owner not to have in such owners
possession a device or equipment for picking up and removal of such animal
feces. The provisions of this division (I)(2)(g) shall not apply to a paved
or traveled portion of a public street or road or to rural undeveloped areas
of the city, nor to guide dogs accompanying a blind person or to a dog used
by police or in rescue operations; and



         (h)   For any owner to keep a dog with a propensity,
tendency, or disposition to attack, cause injury, or otherwise endanger the
safety of human beings or other domestic animals as evidenced by its habitual
or repeated chasing, snapping, barking, or howling; which attacks a human
being or other domestic animal without provocation; or which is owned or
harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting. It shall not
be a violation of this division (I)(2)(h) if the dog is inside a building,
kennel, or pen; or outside on a 4-foot leash and muzzled by a muzzling device
sufficient to prevent the dog from biting persons or other animals, except
when shown in a sanctioned American Kennel Show.



   (J)   City Pound. A City Pound is established which shall be at such
location, either within or without the city, as the Council, by resolution,
shall designate. A Pound Master shall be appointed by the Council who shall
attend to the maintenance of such Pound and who shall file a monthly report
with the Council relating to the operation of such Pound.



   (K)   Impounding. Any dog found in the city without a tag or running
at large shall be placed in the City Pound. Any dog or cat committing a
nuisance as provided in division (I) above shall be seized and may be
impounded. All dogs and cats placed in the City Pound shall be held for
redemption by the owner for a period of not less than 5 regular business
days. A REGULAR BUSINESS DAY is one during which the Pound is open for
business to the public for at least 4 hours between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
Impoundment records shall be preserved for a minimum of 6 months and shall
show:



      (1)   The description of the animal by specie, breed, sex,
approximate age, and other distinguishing traits;



      (2)   The location at which the animal was seized;



      (3)   The date of seizure;



      (4)   The name and address of the person from whom any animal
3 months of age or over was received; and



      (5)   The name and address of the person to whom any animal 3
months of age or over was transferred. Any dog or cat which is not claimed
within 5 days after impounding may be sold, for not less than the amount
provided in division (M) below, to anyone desiring to purchase the dog or
cat. If unclaimed, such dog or cat shall be humanely destroyed and the
carcass disposed of, unless it is requested by a licensed educational or
scientific institution under authority of state law; provided, however, that
if a tag affixed to the animal, or a statement by the animals owner after
seizure specifies that the animal should not be used for research, such
animal shall not be made available to any such institution but may be
destroyed after the expiration of the 5-day period.



   (L)   Notice of impounding. Upon the impounding of any dog or cat
the owner shall be notified, or if the owner of the dog or cat is unknown,
written notice shall be posted for 5 days at the City Hall describing the dog
or cat and the place and time of taking.



   (M)   Release from City Pound. Dogs and cats shall be released to
their owners or persons previously in possession or them, upon a sworn
statement of ownership, proof that a license has been duly issued for an
impounded animal, proof that the rabies inoculation is current, and payment
of impounding fees as established by the Council by resolution. In the case
of an unlicensed dog the owner shall purchase a license from the Pound Master.



   (N)   Permissible return of unrestrained dogs. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this section to the contrary, if a licensed dog is found
“at large” and its owner can be identified and located, such dog need not
be impounded but may, instead, be taken to the owner. In order to release the
dog to the owner; however, the owner shall pay the impoundment fees as
specified in division (M) above.



   (O)   Enforcement. It is unlawful for any person to interfere with,
hinder or molest the Pound Master in the exercise of their duties.



   (P)   Right of entry. The Pound Master or police officer shall have
the right to enter upon any premises at all reasonable times for the purpose
of discharging the duties imposed upon them by this section where there is a
reasonable belief that a violation has been committed.



   (Q)   Quarantine. Any animal which bites a person shall be
quarantined for 10 days.



   (R)   State statutes adopted by reference. The provisions of M.S.
§§ 35.67, 35.68, and 35.69, as they may be amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as though set forth fully
herein.



   (S)   Dangerous dogs.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to possess, own, or keep a
potentially dangerous dog or dangerous dog within the city limits, except as
provided in this section. The provisions of this section do not apply to dogs
used by law enforcement officials for police work.



      (2)   The city may designate any dog as a potentially
dangerous dog or a dangerous dog upon determining that the dog meets the
applicable definitional criteria as stated in division (A) above. The city
shall cause the owner of the dog to be notified in writing that such dog is
designated as potentially dangerous, or dangerous.



      (3)   If the city designates a dog as a potentially dangerous
dog or a dangerous dog, the owner shall maintain posting on the owner’s
property warning that there is a dangerous dog on the premises. The posting
shall be in a conspicuous location in plain sight on the property and be in a
form authorized by the city.



      (4)   No person may own a potentially dangerous dog or a
dangerous dog unless the dog is registered and has microchip identification
as provided in M.S. §§ 347.51, 347.515, and 347.52, as they may be amended
from time to time.



      (5)   Any potentially dangerous dog, or dangerous dog must be
kept in a proper enclosure while on the owner’ property. If the dog is
outside the proper enclosure, the dog must be muzzled and restrained by a
substantial chain or leash not longer than 4 feet in length and be under the
physical restraint of a responsible person.



   (T)   Compliance with Dog Park regulations. It us unlawful for any
person to violate any of the city’s rules regulating the city’s Dog Park.



(2013 Code, § 10.21)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 91, passed 4-15-1982;
Ord. 128, passed 8-4-1983; Ord. 298, passed 10-26-1990; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992; Ord. 660, passed 4-10-2003; Ord. 719, passed 2-10-2005; Ord. 894,
passed 10-7-2014)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.04  OTHER ANIMALS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any of the following animals:



         (a)   Domestic dogs, excluding hybrids with wolves,
coyotes, or jackals;



         (b)   Domestic cats, excluding hybrids with ocelots or
margays;



         (c)   Farm animals;



         (d)   The following other mammals: chinchillas; pot
bellied pigs; and pygmy goats;



         (e)   The following rodents: rabbits; guinea pigs;
hamsters; gerbils; mice; and rats;



         (f)   The following reptiles: iguanas; anoles;
chameleons; non-venomous snakes; terrapins; turtles; and tortoises;



         (g)   The following amphibians: frogs; toads; and newts;



         (h)   The following birds: captive-bred species of
common cage birds, including parakeets; finches; love birds; doves; parrots;
cockatiels; cockatoos;



         (i)   Non-poisonous spiders;



         (j)   Hermit crabs; and



         (j)   Fish.



      WILD ANIMAL. Any animal other than a domestic animal.



   (B)   Keeping. It is unlawful for any person to keep any wild animal
in any part of the city. It is unlawful for any person to keep any animal
which is not approved by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, or the State
Department of Natural Resources, in any part of the city. Except as otherwise
allowed in division (H) below, farm animals, pot bellied pigs, and pygmy
goats may be kept only in that portion of the city zoned for agricultural
purposes or where these animals are a permitted, conditional, or accessory
use.



   (C)   Housing. It is unlawful for any person to keep any domestic or
wild animal in any structure infested by rodents, vermin, flies, or insects.



   (D)   Treatment. It is unlawful for any person to treat any domestic
or wild animal in a cruel or inhumane manner.



   (E)   Restraint and confinement. It is unlawful for any person to
permit any animal to run at large.



   (F)   Trespasses. It is unlawful for any person to herd, ride, or
drive any animal over and upon any grass, turf, boulevard, city park,
cemetery, garden, or lot without specific permission therefor from the owner.



   (G)   Biting animals.



      (1)   Animals bites human being.



         (a)   Whenever any animal within the corporate limits of
the city has bitten any human being, and such animal is of a species which
can carry rabies, the city shall impound such animal for a period of 10 days
separate and apart from other animals until it is determined whether the
animal had or has rabies. If the animal is found to be rabid it shall be
destroyed. If it is found not to be rabid, it shall be returned to the owner
provided the owner shall first pay for the cost of keeping said animal. If
the owner does not claim or retrieve the animal, the animal may be disposed
of as provided in this code of ordinances.



         (b)   Whenever the city can determine the person owning,
possessing or harboring the animal that has bitten the human being, the city
may permit the owner to impound such animal for a period of 10 days separate
and apart from other animals under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian
until it is determined whether the animal had or has rabies. If the animal is
rabid, it shall be destroyed. In all cases, the city shall make the
determination of how the animal shall be impounded, and shall base its
decision upon the owner’s ability to properly impound the animal, and the
current rabies vaccination status of the animal.



      (2)   Animal bites animal. Any animal known to have been
bitten or exposed to rabies shall be impounded or destroyed; provided,
however, that such animal may be immediately destroyed, if with reasonable
effort it cannot first be taken up and impounded. If such an animal is
impounded, it shall not be destroyed if the owner makes provision for
suitable quarantine for a period of not less than 6 months, or proof of
immunization is furnished and booster injections are given by a licensed
veterinarian at the expense of the owner.



   (H)   Hen chickens.



      (1)   No more than 5 hen chickens are allowed on any parcel of
land in the city.



      (2)   Every person who owns, controls, keeps, maintains, or
harbors hen chickens must keep them confined on the premises at all times in
a chicken coop or chicken run. Hen chickens are not allowed in any part of a
house or garage.



      (3)   Any chicken coop or chicken run must comply with all
applicable building and zoning codes and regulations.



      (4)   No chicken coop or run shall be constructed on any
parcel of land before construction of the principal building.



      (5)   A chicken coop or run cannot be located in the front or
side yard.



      (6)   A chicken coop or run must be setback at least 50 feet
from any residential structure on any adjacent lot and at least 10 feet from
the property line.



      (7)   A chicken coop or run must be screened from view with a
solid fence or landscaped buffer with a minimum height of 4 feet.



      (8)   A chicken coop can be no larger than 10 square feet per
chicken and cannot exceed 6 feet in height. A chicken run cannot exceed 20
square feet per chicken and the fencing cannot exceed 6 feet in height. A
chicken run may be enclosed with wood or woven wire materials, and may allow
chickens to contact the ground. A chicken run must have a protective overhead
netting to keep the chickens separated from other animals.



      (9)   A chicken coop must be elevated a minimum of 12 inches
and a maximum of 24 inches above grade to ensure circulation beneath the coop.



      (10)   Chicken grains and feed must be stored in rodent-proof
containers.



      (11)   No chicken may be kept or raised in a manner as to
cause injury or annoyance to persons on other property in the vicinity by
reason of noise, odor, or filth.



      (12)   Any chicken running at large may be impounded by the
city and, after being impounded for 3 days or more without being reclaimed by
the owner, may be destroyed or sold. A person reclaiming any impounded
chicken must pay the cost of impounding and keeping the same.



(2013 Code, § 10.22)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1979; Ord. 8, passed 6-29-1978;
Ord. 66, passed 6-18-1981; Ord. 360, passed 8-5-1993; Ord. 416, passed
7-13-1995; Ord. 885, passed 7-17-2014)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.05  FALSELY REPORTING FIRE.



   It is unlawful for any person to inform the Fire Department that a fire
is in progress, knowing that it is false and intending that the Fire
Department shall act in reliance upon it.



(2013 Code, § 10.27)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1979)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.06  OPEN BURNING.



   (A)   Burning. It is unlawful for any person to burn or permit
burning of any grass, weeds, leaves, rubbish, or other substance upon
premises owned or occupied by that person, except as otherwise provided by
this code of ordinances.



   (B)   State regulations. M.S.§§ 88.16 through 88.171, as they may
be amended from time to time,  are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at
length herein



   (C)   Exceptions. The following open burning shall be excepted from
the regulation of this section; provided, that with respect to divisions
(C)(3), (C)(4), (C)(5), (C)(6), (C)(7), (C)(8), and (C)(9) below, and an
appropriate permit shall first be obtained.



      (1)   Open fires used solely for the preparation of food;



      (2)   Fires set by the City Fire Prevention Bureau and/or City
Fire Department personnel or by their authorized representatives for the
instruction and training in the use of fire protection equipment;



      (3)   Fires set for the instruction and training of public and
industrial fire fighting personnel;



      (4)   Fires set for the elimination of fire hazards which
cannot be abated by any other practical means;



      (5)   Fires set for the clearing of and parcels greater than
20 acres in size;



      (6)   Running fires on agricultural croplands greater than 5
acres in size;



      (7)   Running fires conducted by state or federal agencies;



      (8)    Running fires to cultivate or replace native plant
landscapes; provided, that the overall parcel size is greater than 2 acres in
size and the fire area is greater than 1/2 acre in size. The property owner
and/or occupant shall contract with a company specializing in native plant
landscape management;



      (9)   Recreational fires; provided, that all of the following
criteria are met. For the purpose of this division (C)(9) the following terms
shall apply:



         RECREATIONAL FIRE.



            1.   The burning of materials other than rubbish
for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, or similar purposes where the
fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace,
barbecue grill, or barbecue pit and where the total fuel area is 3 feet or
less in diameter and 3 feet or less in height;



            2.   RECREATIONAL FIRES shall not be conducted
within 25 feet of a single- or multi-family residential structure or
commercial structure unless contained in an outdoor fireplace constructed of
non-combustible materials containing a base supported by a minimum of 3 legs,
a wire mesh screen on all sides, and a lid. Conditions which could cause a
fire to spread to within 25 feet of a structure must be eliminated prior to
ignition;



            3.   An outdoor fireplace as defined above shall
not be used within 15 feet of a single- or multi-family structure or
commercial structure;



            4.    Buckets, shovels, garden hoses, or a fire
extinguisher with a minimum 4-A rating shall be readily available for use at
RECREATIONAL FIRES;



            5.   RECREATIONAL FIRES shall be constantly
attended by a person knowledgeable in the use of fire extinguishing
equipment. An attendant shall supervise a RECREATIONAL FIRE until such fire
has been extinguished;



            6.   Any member of the City Fire Prevention
Bureau, Officer of the City Fire Department, State DNR, City Police
Department, or County Sheriff Department is authorized to require that
RECREATIONAL FIRES be immediately discontinued if such fires are determined
to constitute a hazardous or nuisance condition;



            7.   RECREATIONAL FIRES are not allowed if a total
burning ban is in effect;



            8.   Maximum wind speed including gusts must not
exceed 15 mph; and



            9.   The prevailing winds must be away from
occupied structures.



         RUBBISH. Waste material including, but not limited to,
garbage, waste paper, leaves, grass, yard and garden waste, debris from
construction or demolition, hazardous materials, oils, rubber, plastic,
chemically treated materials, or other materials which produce excessive or
noxious smoke.



      (10)   Bonfires, providing that all the following criteria are
met. For the purpose of this division (C)(10) the following terms shall apply:



         BONFIRE. The burning of materials other than rubbish for
pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, or similar purposes where the fuel
being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace, barbecue
grill, or barbecue pit and where the total fuel area is greater than 3 feet
in diameter and greater than 3 feet in height.



            1.   Permits will only be issued for bonfires at
community involvement functions, spiritual functions, and special event
functions approved by the City Fire Prevention Bureau and the City Fire
Department.



            2.   The bonfire shall not be conducted within 250
feet of a single- or multi-family residential structure or any commercial
structure. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread, shall be eliminated
prior to ignition.



            3.   The fuel area shall be contained to an area
not to exceed 15 feet in diameter.



            4.   The City Fire Department personnel and
apparatus shall be on stand-by at the bonfire site until such time that the
fire is, in their judgment, contained.



            5.   Upon request of the City Fire Prevention
Bureau, City Fire Department, or City Police Department, the permit holder
shall provide an attendant to supervise the bonfire until such fire has been
extinguished.



            6.   The bonfire shall be immediately discontinued
if such fire constitutes a hazardous or nuisance condition.



            7.   Bonfires will not be allowed if a total
burning ban is in effect.



         RUBBISH. Waste material including, but not limited to,
garbage, waste paper, leaves, grass, yard and garden waste, debris from
construction or demolition, hazardous materials, oils, rubber, plastic,
chemically treated materials, or other materials which produce excessive or
noxious smoke.



   (D)   Permit required. Burning pursuant to divisions (C)(3), (C)(4),
(C)(5), (C)(6), (C)(7), (C)(8), and (C)(10) above shall be permitted upon the
issuance of a special permit by the City Fire Prevention Bureau, under the
following conditions:



      (1)   The permit holder, or holders authorized representative,
will be present at any fire so allowed;



      (2)   Such burning will be done only when weather conditions
are such that resultant smoke will be carried away from the neighboring
residences or other affected property owners or public roadways;



      (3)   Such permit be subject to revocation at any time if the
city determines that there is a practical, available alternative method for
disposal of the material to be burned or that such burning will constitute a
fire hazard, or a health hazard, or that a traffic hazard would result; and



      (4)   Such burning must be done in accordance with state
regulations and this section.



   (E)   Fees. Fees for permits and charges for Fire Department
response to a permitted fire shall be the responsibility of the permit
holder. Fees shall be based on the city fee schedule.



(2013 Code, § 10.29)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992;
Ord. 408, passed 3-16-1995; Ord. 562, passed 11-11-1999; Ord. 581, passed
10-5-2000; Ord. 599, passed 6-14-2001)



§ 130.07  ADOPTION OF THE STATE FIRE CODE.



   The following are amendments to the State Fire Code.



   (A)   Section 103.1 of the State Fire Code is hereby amended to
read: A Fire Prevention Bureau is hereby established within the city. The
Bureau shall consist of such personnel as may be assigned thereto by the city
and/or the Fire Chief. The function of this Bureau shall be the
implementation, administration, and enforcement of the provisions of this
code.



   (B)   Section 105.1.1 of the State Fire Code is changed by adding a
new section 105.1.1.1 to read: 105.1.1.1 Fees for Permits. Fees for permits
required by this Code shall be based on the city fee schedule.



   (C)   Section 202, Amendment F of the State Fire Code is changed by
modifying the definition of Fire Chief to read: Fire Chief. The chief officer
of the Fire Department serving the jurisdiction or the Chief’s authorized
representatives. For the purposes of enforcing this Code, the term CHIEF also
includes the representatives of the City Fire Prevention Bureau and the State
Fire Marshal’s office.



   (D)   Section 903.3.1.5 of the State Fire Code is changed by adding
the following uses:



      (1)   Cafeterias with an occupant load of 100 or more in Group
A, Group E, or Group R occupancies; and



      (2)   Multi-purpose rooms with an occupant load of 100 or more
in Group A, Group E, or Group R occupancies.



   (E)   Section 903.4.1 of the State Fire Code is hereby changed by
modifying Exemption 3 to read: For existing sprinkler systems installed on or
after July 1, 1998, monitoring is required when the number of sprinklers is
20 or more. For existing sprinkler systems installed prior to July 1, 1998,
monitoring is required when the number of sprinklers is 100 or more.



   (F)   Section 903.4.2 of the State Fire Code is changed to read:



      (1)   903.4.2 Alarms. Approved audible devices shall be
connected to every automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water-flow
alarm devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a
single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. An
approved audible alarm device shall be provided in the interior of the
building in a normally occupied location. An approved audible and visual
device shall be provided on the exterior of the building in an approved
location.



      (2)   903.4.2.1 Multiple Tenant Buildings. Multiple tenant
buildings shall be provided with an approved audible alarm device in each
tenant space. The device shall be located in a normally occupied location.



   (G)   Section 905.3.1. of the State Fire Code is changed to read.



      (1)   905.3.1 Building Height. Class III standpipe systems
shall be installed throughout buildings where the floor level of the highest
story is located 30 feet or more above the lowest level of Fire Department
vehicle access, or where the highest story is located 3 or more stories above
the highest level of Fire Department vehicle access, or where the floor level
of the lowest story is located 20 feet or more below the highest level of
Fire Department vehicle access.



      (2)   Exceptions. Exceptions to section 905.3.1 shall not be
amended.



   (H)   Ch. 10 of the State Fire Code is changed by adding a new
section 1012 to read:



      (1)   Overcrowding. Section 1012 Overcrowding and Standby
Personnel;



      (2)   1012.1 Overcrowding. Overcrowding and admittance of
persons beyond the approved capacity of a place of assembly are prohibited.
The code official, upon finding overcrowding conditions or obstructions in
the aisles, aisle access ways, or other means of egress, or upon finding a
condition which constitutes a serious menace to life, is authorized to cause
the performance, presentation, spectacle, or entertainment to be stopped
until such condition or obstruction is corrected; and



      (3)   1012.2 Standby Personnel. When, in the opinion of the
code official, it is essential for public safety in a place of assembly or
any other place where people congregate, due to the number of persons, or the
nature of the performance, exhibition, display, contest, or activity, the
owner, agent, or lessee shall employ 1 or more qualified persons, as required
and approved, to be on duty at such place. Such individuals shall be subject
to the code official’s orders at all times when so employed and shall be in
uniform and remain on duty during the times such places are open to the
public, or when such activity is being conducted. Before each performance or
the start of such activity, such individuals shall inspect the required
safety appliances provided to see that they are in the proper location and
are in good working order, and shall keep diligent watch for fires or other
public safety hazards during the time such place is open to the public or
such activity is being conducted and take prompt measures for extinguishment
of fires that may occur. Such individuals shall not be required or permitted,
while on duty, to perform any other duties than those herein specified.



   (I)   The following appendices of the International Fire Code are
adopted by reference. One copy of the code shall be kept on file in the
office of the Fire Prevention Bureau:



      (1)   Appendix B - Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings;



      (2)   Appendix C - Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution;



      (3)   Appendix D - Fire Apparatus Access Roads;



      (4)   Appendix E - Hazard Classifications;



      (5)   Appendix F - Hazard Ranking; and



      (6)   Appendix G - Cryogenic Fluids - Weight and Volume
Equivalents.



   (J)   Appendix H of the State Fire Code is not adopted.



(2013 Code, § 10.35) (Ord. 566, passed 3-30-2000; Ord. 665, passed 5-29-2003)



§ 130.08  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.



   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CHEMICALS. All agricultural chemicals, all toxic, flammable, and
caustic chemicals and all materials in liquid, gas, inert, or solid form.



   (B)   Storage area enclosed. All storage areas for chemicals shall
be partitioned off from the rest of the area and be locked when not in use.



   (C)   Information required. The location of all storage areas for
chemicals shall be reported annually in writing to the Police Department and
the Fire Department; such writings to contain the location and layout of the
storage area; types of materials stored therein; the hazards involved; and
the names, telephone numbers and addresses of the persons responsible for the
storage area.



   (D)   Additional storage requirements.



      (1)   All containers containing chemicals shall be stored a
sufficient distance away from windows and other openings and out of the sun
so that they will not be subject to heat and ignition.



      (2)   All combustible chemicals shall be stored a sufficient
distance away from steam lines and heat so as not to be subject to heat and
ignition.



      (3)   All highly toxic pesticides shall be stored in 1 common
area.



   (E)   Explosives.



      (1)   Any use requiring the storage, utilization, or
manufacturing of products which could explode shall be located at least 400
feet from any residence.



      (2)   This provision shall not apply to the storage or usage
of liquified petroleum or natural gas for normal residential or business
purposes.



   (F)   Prohibited actions and occurrences.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to cause or allow any
hazardous, flammable, or toxic materials, liquids or gases as defined herein,
to be improperly stored, spilled, or dumped upon any premises owned or
occupied by that person.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to dump or spill any
hazardous, flammable, or toxic materials or liquids or gases as defined
herein upon any private or public property.



   (G)   Responsibility for cleanup.



      (1)   Any person who causes or allows any hazardous,
flammable, or toxic materials, liquids or gases as herein defined to be
spilled, dumped, or improperly stored on any private or public property shall
be liable to the city for any material or labor provided by the city, its
Police Department, its Fire Department, or its Public Works Department in
cleaning it up or removing it from the property or otherwise correcting the
situation.



      (2)   Any unpaid charges for said cleanup or removal as herein
provided shall be a lien against the property or any other property owned by
the person who has caused the situation or permitted the situation to arise,
except as are exempt by law, and may be collected as a special assessment, as
provided by statutes.



(2013 Code, § 10.36)  (Ord. 56, passed 2-26-1981; Ord. 338, passed
8-6-1992)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.09  FIRES, OPEN FLAMES, OR BARBEQUES ON BALCONIES OR PATIOS.



   (A)   Fires prohibited. In or on any structure containing 3 or more
dwelling units, it is unlawful for any person to kindle, maintain, or cause
to be kindled and maintained any fire or open flame on any balcony above
ground level, or on any ground floor patio within 15 feet of said structure.



   (B)   Storage of fuels and devices prohibited. It is unlawful for
any person to store or use any charcoal, lighter fluid, natural gas, propane,
fuel, barbecue grill, fire pit, torch, or other similar heating device,
lighting chemical, or other open flame device in the locations designated
above.



   (C)   Exceptions. The following exceptions shall apply:



      (1)   Listed electric grills which are permanently mounted or
portable electric grills which maintain a minimum of 30 inches of clearance
from all combustibles (unless listed for lesser clearance by the
manufacturer) may be used within 15 feet of the structure and may be used on
balconies above ground level;



      (2)   Permanently mounted gas fired grills which are plumbed
to the buildings gas system and maintain a minimum of 30 inches clearance to
all combustibles may be used on the ground level. Existing permanently
mounted gas fired grills may remain on balconies above ground level.
Replacement of existing grills and new grill installation is not allowed on
balconies that are above ground level; and



      (3)   Grills that are cold to the touch may be stored adjacent
to the structure on the ground level only.



(2013 Code, § 10.37)  (Ord. 265, passed 6-23-1989; Ord. 819, passed
5-14-2009)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.10  CONSUMER FIREWORKS.



   (A)   Purpose. Due to the inherent risks of fire and injury to
persons and property associated with the sale, possession, and use of
fireworks, the City Council has determined that it is necessary and in the
interest of public health, safety, and welfare to establish reasonable
regulations concerning fireworks.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Wire or wood sparklers of not more than 100
grams of mixture per item, other sparkling items which are nonexplosive and
non-aerial and contain 65 grams or less of chemical mixture per tube or a
total of 200 grams or less for multiple tubes, snakes, and glow works, smoke
devices, or trick noisemakers which include paper streamers, party poppers,
string poppers, snappers, and drop pops, each consisting of not more than 25
hundredths grains of explosive mixture.



      LARGE FACILITY. A facility where the net weight of pyrotechnics
compound greater than 125 pounds is stored or displayed (net weight of
pyrotechnics compound in fully sprinklered facilities greater than 250
pounds). If the net weight is not available, 25% of the gross weight shall be
used to calculate the weight of pyrotechnics compound.



      SMALL FACILITY. A facility where the net weight of pyrotechnics
compound of 125 pounds or less is stored or displayed (net weight of
pyrotechnics compound in fully sprinklered facilities of 250 pounds or less).
If the net weight is not available, 25% of the gross weight shall be used to
calculate the weight of pyrotechnics compound.



   (C)   Permit required. It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer
for sale, expose for sale, or sell at retail or wholesale any consumer
fireworks in the city without first having obtained a permit from the City
Fire Prevention Bureau.



   (D)   Permit application. The applicant shall completely fill out
and submit an application form for a consumer fireworks permit prepared by
the city. Information to be submitted as part of the permit application
includes, but is not necessarily limited to the following information: name,
address, and telephone number of the applicant; address of location where the
fireworks will be sold; a description of the fireworks to be sold; estimated
weight and quantity of the fireworks that will be stored on the premises;
description of the premises and facility from which the fireworks are
proposed to be sold; a site plan showing the location of the facility on the
property; and permission from the person legally responsible for the property
on which such sale is to take place for the use of the property. Applications
must be made a minimum of 5 days prior to the date when the activity is to
commence.



   (E)   Conditions of permit. A permit to sell consumer fireworks
shall be issued only upon the following terms and conditions:



      (1)   General conditions.



         (a)   A determination by the City Fire Prevention Bureau
that the location where the consumer fireworks are to be stored or sold is
not hazardous to property or endangers any person;



         (b)   Any permit issued is non-transferable, either to a
different person or location;



         (c)   The permit must be publicly displayed on the
premises;



         (d)   The premises are subject to inspection by city
employees during normal business hours of the premises for the purpose of
inspecting the building or property and for the purpose of checking for
violations of this section. Upon request, the licensee must provide a test
sample to the Inspector for the purpose of verifying the chemical content of
the merchandise;



         (e)   The sale of consumer fireworks is permitted only
in B-1, I-1 and I-2 zoning districts where commercial or industrial
activities are authorized under the applicable zoning regulations of the city;



         (f)   Storage of consumer fireworks on the premises must
be in compliance with the State Fire Code;



         (g)   The premises must be in compliance with the State
Fire Code and the State Building Code;



         (h)   Consumer fireworks shall not be sold to persons
under the age of 18;



         (i)   Where retail sales of consumer fireworks are not
conducted within a permanent structure, the retail sales area shall be
covered by a canopy, tent, or permanent membrane structure;



         (j)   Public address systems shall not be audible
outside any permanent or temporary consumer fireworks retail sales facility;



         (k)   Consumer fireworks retail sales facilities shall
not block any sidewalk, public right-of-way, or alley. Additional setback
requirements may apply based on zoning requirements. All facilities shall be
located as approved by the City Fire Prevention Bureau and the city;



         (l)   Tents, canopies, and temporary membrane structures
shall be used for a period of not more than 180 days within a 12-month period
on a single premises



         (m)    No signs may be installed, modified or maintained
without first obtaining a sign permit (including temporary signs). Contact
the Planning Department for a copy of the sign permit application. Submittal
of a permit includes: the application; fee, site plan, to-scale wall and/or
freestanding sign drawings; and the period of installation (if temporary);



         (n)   No signage is allowed in the public right-of-way
(typically an area that extends from the curb to approximately 12 feet behind
the curb);



         (o)   One temporary sign is allowed per property, with a
maximum area of 32 square feet and a display period not to exceed 30 days per
calendar year; provided, a sign permit is obtained prior to installation;



         (p)   When a consumer fireworks retail facility is
located in a temporary structure, a minimum of 1 on-site parking space shall
be provided for each 500 square feet of gross sales area; and



         (q)   The permit can be revoked at the discretion of the
Fire Inspector if these or any additional conditions of the permit are not
complied with.



      (2)   Conditions for large facilities. Large facilities shall
meet the requirements of M.S. § 624.20, as it may be amended from time to
time.



      (3)   Conditions for small facilities.



         (a)   Small facilities shall be limited to Group B and
Group M occupancies when located in permanent structures. The occupancy class
shall be determined based on the requirements of the State Building Code.



         (b)   A site plan for the small facilities shall be
provided with the permit application.



         (c)   Small facilities shall only be permitted in
structures not exceeding 1 story in height when the structure is of permanent
construction. Retail sales shall not be allowed in basements.



         (d)   Where small facilities are located in a tent,
canopy, or membrane structure, the structure shall comply with the State Fire
Code.



         (e)   Where small facilities are located in
multiple-tenant buildings, the minimum separation from other tenants shall be
by a fire barrier with a minimum fire resistance rating of 1 hour. Where the
structure is provided with a fire sprinkler system designed and installed in
accordance with NFPA 13, the barrier shall not be required to be rated.



         (f)   Portable fire extinguishers are required. Maximum
travel distance to a fire extinguisher in a permanent structure shall be 75
feet and in temporary facilities shall be 35 feet. All small facilities shall
have a minimum of 1 2A:20BC fire extinguisher. Small facilities with 1,000
square feet or more of gross floor area shall provide a minimum of 2 2A:20BC
fire extinguishers.



         (g)   Small facilities shall be located so that no
portion of an exterior wall of the structure, sidewall, of a tent, or other
defined perimeter or the facility shall be located more than 150 feet from a
public way or an approved fire apparatus access road.



         (h)   Combustible materials including dry grass, dry
brush, and combustible debris shall be kept a minimum of 30 feet from any
small facility.



         (i)   Parking of vehicles or trailers is prohibited
within 10 feet of small facilities.



         (j)   No fireworks shall be discharged within 300 feet
of the facility. At least 1 sign shall be conspicuously posted on the
exterior of each side of the facility. This sign shall have letters at least
4 inches in height on a contrasting background and shall read, “NO
FIREWORKS DISCHARGE WITHIN 300 FEET”.



         (k)   Smoking shall be prohibited within the premises.
When the sales area is enclosed within or protected under any temporary
structure, tent, or canopy, smoking shall also be prohibited within 25 feet
of any portion of the premises. No smoking signs shall be posted at each
entrance and throughout the sales area;



         (l)   Minimum setback from any lot line shall be 20
feet, unless the facility is located in a permanent building;



         (m)   Minimum setback from any other structure shall be
20 feet, unless the facility is located in a permanent building;



         (n)   Minimum setback from motor vehicle fuel-dispensing
station dispensers, propane-dispensing station, compressed natural gas
dispensing station, and propane cylinder exchange enclosures shall be 25 feet.



         (o)   Small facilities shall be provided with a minimum
of 2 exits. The minimum exit width shall be 32 inches. All exits shall be
provided with internally or externally illuminated or self-luminous exit
signs. The means of egress shall be provided with emergency lighting.



         (p)   Travel distance to an exit shall not exceed 75
feet. When the facility is located in a temporary structure and the gross
floor area exceeds 800 square feet, the maximum travel distance to an exit
shall not exceed 35 feet.



         (q)   Aisles shall have a minimum clear width of 36
inches. In retail sales stands where the interior is not accessible to the
public, the minimum clear aisle width shall not be less than 28 inches.



         (r)   Merchandise and display fixtures shall be limited
to 6 feet in height within the consumer fireworks retail sales area.



         (s)   All fireworks shall be contained in their original
packaging. Damaged packages shall be removed from sale. The sale of
unpackaged fireworks is prohibited.



         (t)   Electrical equipment shall meet applicable codes.



         (u)   Heating sources shall be listed and shall be used
in accordance with their listing. Temporary heat sources shall have tip-over
and temperature-overheat protection. Open-flame and exposed-element heating
devices are prohibited.



         (v)   Portable generators and their fuels shall be
located not less than 20 feet from any small facility.



         (w)   Cooking equipment of any type shall not be
permitted within 20 feet of any temporary facility.



         (x)   Small facilities shall be secured when unoccupied
and not open for business, unless fireworks are not kept in the facility
during such times.



         (y)   Minimum of 50% of the floor area of the premises
shall be open space that is unoccupied by fireworks displays and is used for
aisles and cross-aisles.



         (z)   Housekeeping shall be kept neat and orderly at all
times.



         (aa)   Safety training shall be provided to all
personnel handling consumer fireworks.



         (bb)   Any person selling consumer fireworks shall not
knowingly sell consumer fireworks to any person who is obviously under the
influence of alcohol or drugs.



         (cc)   Inventory records shall be maintained and shall
be available for inspection upon request.



   (F)   Permit fee. The permit fee shall be in the amount set forth in
the city fee schedule. Permits shall be issued for a calendar year (January
to December) and will not be pro-rated.



(2013 Code, § 10.38) (Ord. 629, passed 6-13-2002; Ord. 693, passed 2-5-2004;
Ord. 698, passed 4-15-2004)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.11  PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   (A)   Generally. It is unlawful for any person to maintain a public
nuisance by their act or failure to perform a legal duty.



   (B)   Description of nuisance. A public nuisance includes the
following:



      (1)   Maintaining or permitting a condition, which
unreasonably annoys, injures, or endangers the safety, health, morals,
comfort, or repose of any considerable number of members of the public;



      (2)   Interfering with, obstructing, or rendering dangerous
for passage, any street, public right-of-way, or waters used by the public;



      (3)   Allowing noise, odors, vibration, smoke, air pollution,
liquid or solid wastes, heat, glare, dust, or other adverse influences that
in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or nearby property;



      (4)   Failing to dispose of waste in a manner that is not
dangerous to public health and safety, and that does not damage public waste
transmission or disposal facilities;



      (5)   Emitting odors that exceed the standards stated in the
Air Pollution Control Regulations, Numbers 9 and 10;



      (6)   Allowing the effluence from any cesspool, septic tank,
drainfield, or human sewage disposal system, to discharge upon the surface of
the ground, or dumping the contents thereof at any place except as authorized;



      (7)   Allowing the pollution of any public well or cistern,
stream, or lake, canal, or body of water by sewage, industrial waste, or
other substances;



      (8)   Owning, possession, or having control of any unused
refrigerator or other container, with doors which fasten automatically when
closed, of sufficient size to retain any person, which is exposed and
accessible to the public, without removing the doors, lids, hinges, or
latches or providing locks to prevent access by the public;



      (9)   (a)   Failing to remove or cover graffiti within 10
calendar days, after receiving written notice from the city to remove
graffiti.



         (b)   For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         GRAFFITI. Any inscription, word, figure, painting, or other
defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn,
painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of a permanent
structure, fixture, or object, including, but not limited to, buildings,
walls, fences, bridges, benches, shelters, sidewalks, hydrants, fountains,
pavement, curbs, trees, rocks, signs, utility poles, or boxes situated on
public or private property, to the extent that the inscription, word, figure,
painting, or other defacement was not authorized in advance by the
responsible party for the property.



         RESPONSIBLE PARTY. An owner, legal occupant, or an entity
or person acting as an agent for an owner who has authority over the real
property or is responsible for the property’s maintenance or management.
There may be more than 1 responsible party for a particular property.



      (10)   Any other act or omission declared by law to be a
public nuisance.



   (C)   Graffiti abatement.



      (1)   Notice. The City Administrator, or Administrator’s
agent, may notify the responsible party to remove graffiti from the property.
The City Administrator will send notice to the responsible party by mail or
by personal delivery.



      (2)   City removal. If the responsible party does not remove
graffiti, as defined in division (B)(9)(b) above within 10 calendar days
after receiving notice from the city, the city may remove the graffiti in a
manner it deems appropriate.



   (D)   Right to hearing. At any time prior to the city’s removal of
the graffiti, the responsible party may submit a written request for a
hearing before the City Council to show cause why the graffiti should not be
removed. At the hearing, the responsible party may present relevant testimony
and evidence. The Council will make findings either for or against the
removal of the graffiti.



   (E)   Costs. If the city removes the graffiti, the responsible party
must reimburse the city for its actual costs within 30 days after the city
has mailed the bill for the costs. If the responsible party does not
reimburse the city within 30 days, the city’s costs will be charged as a
lien upon the affected real estate and collected in the manner provided by
law for the collection of special assessments.



(2013 Code, § 10.53)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 338, passed 8-6-1992;
Ord. 777, passed 5-31-2007)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.12  PERMITTING A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   It is unlawful for any person to permit real property under their
control to be used to maintain a public nuisance, or let the same to another
knowing it is to be so used.



(2013 Code, § 10.54)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.13  BUNGEE JUMPING ON CITY PROPERTY.



   (A)   Purpose. The City Council finds that the practice of bungee
jumping, also known as bungee cord jumping and reverse bungee jumping, has
resulted in personal injuries and deaths which are likely to continue to
occur. The City Council notes that most bungee jumping operations are
conducted in combination with the use of a crane which has not been designed
or manufactured for those purposes. The City Council concludes that bungee
jumping is an inherently dangerous and life-threatening practice, likely to
cause great harm or death to the participants.



   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      BUNGEE JUMPING. The sport, activity, or practice of jumping,
stepping out, dropping, or otherwise being released into the air while
attached or fastened to a cord made of rubber, latex, or other elastic type
material, whether natural or synthetic, whereby the cord stops the fall,
lengthens and shortens, allows the person to bounce up and down and is
intended to finally bring the person to a stop at a point above the surface.



   (C)   Prohibition. The practice of bungee jumping in any form
whatsoever, whether open to the general public or for demonstration,
exhibition, or other purpose, on city property, is hereby prohibited.



(2013 Code, § 10.57)  (Ord. 365, passed 2-10-1994)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.14  JUMPING RIDES.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to ride in or jump into or upon
any vehicle without the consent of the driver and no person shall, when
riding, allow any part of the body to project beyond the limits of any motor
vehicle except when signaling as required, nor shall any person board or
alight from nor hang on to any motor vehicle when such motor vehicle is in
motion. If the driver of any vehicle shall permit anyone to do any of the
things prohibited hereby, the driver shall also be guilty of a violation
hereunder.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to any person whose employment
makes it necessary to ride in or on a vehicle otherwise than as herein
provided, when engaged in the necessary duties of such employment; nor shall
it apply to any person participating in a duly authorized parade, carnival,
or show.



(2013 Code, § 10.59)  (Ord. 12, passed 9-21-1978; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.15  SHADE TREE DISEASE AND SHADE TREE PEST CONTROL AND PREVENTION.



   (A)   Policy and purpose. The city has determined that the health of
shade trees is threatened by fatal disease and pests. It has further
determined that the loss of shade trees located on public and private
property would substantially depreciate the value of property and impair the
safety, good order, general welfare, and convenience of the public. It is
declared to be the intention of the Council to control and prevent the spread
of these diseases and pests, and provide for the removal of dead or diseased
trees, as nuisances.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      NUISANCE.



         (a)   Any living or standing tree infected to any degree
with a shade tree disease or shade tree pest; or



         (b)   Any logs, branches, stumps, or other parts of any
dead or dying tree, so infected, unless such parts have been fully burned or
treated under the direction of the Tree Inspector.



      SHADE TREE DISEASE. A disease affecting an over story deciduous
tree such as Dutch elm disease or oak wilt disease.



      SHADE TREE PEST. Any vertebrate or invertebrate animal, plant
pathogen, or plant in the community threatening to cause significant damage
to a shade tree or community forest such as the Emerald Ash Borer.



      TREE INSPECTOR. The City Administrator, or such other employee of
the city as the Council may designate and who shall thereafter qualify,
together with their duly designated assistants.



   (C)   Scope and adoption by reference. M.S. §§ 89.001, 89.01,
89.51 through 89.64, Ch.18G, as they may be amended from time to time, and
M.S. Ch. 18J, as it may be amended from time to time, inclusive, as they may
be amended by from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at
length herein, together with the rules and regulations of the State
Commissioner of Agriculture relating to shade tree diseases; provided, that
this section shall supercede such statutes, rules, and regulations, only to
the extent of inconsistencies.



   (D)   Unlawful act. It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to
keep, maintain, or permit upon premises owned by that person or upon public
property where that person has the duty of tree maintenance, any nuisance as
herein defined.



   (E)   Inspection and diagnosis. It is the power and duty of the Tree
Inspector to enter upon public and private property, at any reasonable time,
for the purpose of inspecting for, and diagnosing, shade tree disease or a
shade tree pest, in cases of suspected shade tree disease or shade tree pest,
and in performance of Inspector’s duties, the Tree Inspector may remove
such specimens, samples, and biopsies as may be necessary or desirable for
diagnosis.



   (F)   Abatement of nuisance. Abatement of a nuisance, defined
herein, shall be by spraying, removing, burning, or otherwise effectively
treating the infected tree or wood to prevent spread of shade tree disease or
shade tree pest. Such abatement procedures shall be carried out in accordance
with the current technical and expert methods and plans as may be designed by
the Commissioner of Agriculture of the state. The city shall establish
specifications for tree removal and disposal methods consistent therewith.



   (G)   Procedure for removal of infected trees and wood.



      (1)   Whenever the Tree Inspector finds with reasonable
certainty that the infection, or danger of infection, exists in any tree or
wood on any public or private property, the Tree Inspector shall proceed as
follows.



         (a)   The Tree Inspector shall notify in writing the
owner of record or occupant of the premises that a public nuisance exists and
order that the nuisance be terminated or abated. The notice may be given in
person or by mail. Failure of any party to receive the mail does not
invalidate the service of the notice. A copy of the notice will be filed with
the Parks, Recreation, and Natural Resources Department.



         (b)   The notice of abatement shall state that unless
the public nuisance is abated by the owner or occupant, it will be abated by
the city at the expense of the owner or occupant. The notice shall specify
the control measures to be taken to abate the nuisance, and provide a
reasonable amount of time to abate the nuisance.



         (c)   If the control measures prescribed in the notice
of abatement are not complied with within the time provided by the notice or
any additional time granted, the Tree Inspector or designated person shall
have the authority to enter the property, and carry out abatement in
accordance with the notice of abatement.



      (2)   If the Tree Inspector determines that the danger if
infection or infestation to other shade trees is imminent, and delay in
control measures may put public health, safety, or welfare in immediate
danger, the Tree Inspector may provide for abatement without following
division (G)(1) above or division (H) below. The Tree Inspector must
reasonably attempt to notify the owner or occupant of the affected property
of the intended action and any cost recovery by the next regularly scheduled
Council meeting.



      (3)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the city, without
notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition that poses an
imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.



      (4)   The Tree Inspector shall keep a record of the costs of
abatements done under this division (G) and shall report quarterly to the
City Administrator all work done for which assessments are to be made stating
and certifying the description of the land, lots, parcels involved, and the
amount chargeable to each.



      (5)   The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been
abated by the city shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of the
abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the work has been
completed and the cost determined, the City Clerk or other official shall
prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner. Thereupon the amount
shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the City Clerk.



      (6)   On or before September 1 of each year, the City
Administrator shall list the total unpaid charges for each abatement against
each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this
section. The Council may then spread the charges or any portion thereof
against the property involved as a special assessment under M.S. § 429.101,
as it may be amended from time to time, and other pertinent statutes for
certification to the County Auditor and collection the following year along
with current taxes.



      (7)   No damage shall be awarded the owner for destruction of
any tree, wood, or part thereof pursuant to this section.



   (H)   High-cost abatement. If the Tree Inspector determines that the
cost of abating a nuisance will exceed $5,000 based on a reasonable, good
faith estimate, the written notice referred to in division (G) above must
provide that if the nuisance is not abated within the reasonable amount of
time provided, the matter will be referred to the City Council for a hearing.
The date, time, and location of the hearing must be provided in the notice.



   (I)   Spraying trees.



      (1)   Whenever the Tree Inspector determines that any tree or
wood is infected or threatened with infection, the Tree Inspector may spray
or treat all nearby high value trees with an effective concentrate or
fungicide or both. Activities authorized by this division (I) shall be
conducted in accordance with technical and expert opinions and plans of the
Commissioner of Agriculture and under the supervision of the Commission and
Inspector’s agents whenever possible.



      (2)   The notice and assessment provisions of division (G)
above apply to spraying and treatment operations conducted under this
division (I).



   (J)   Transporting wood prohibited. It is against the law (M.S.§§
89.551, § 2, subd. 3b, as it may be amended from time to time) to bring
unapproved firewood into any state park, state forest, or day-use area.



   (K)   Interference prohibited. It is a petty misdemeanor for any
person to prevent, delay, or interfere with the Tree Inspector while the Tree
Inspector is engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this



   (L)   Additional duties of Tree Inspector. It is the additional duty
of the Tree Inspector to coordinate, under the direction and control of the
Council, all activities of the city relating to the control and prevention of
shade tree disease or shade tree pests. The Tree Inspector shall recommend to
the Council the details of a program for the control of the diseases or
pests, and perform the duties incident to such a program adopted by the
Council.



   (M)   Diseased trees in streets. The rights, duties, and
responsibilities of property owners set forth in this section shall be
equally applicable to, and binding upon, abutting property owners with tree
maintenance responsibilities under § 90.05.



   (N)   Subsidies. The duty of any property owner to bear the cost of
removing or maintaining trees, whether by private contract or assessment,
shall be subject to a subsidy policy, if any, established by the city for the
treatment or removal of trees infected with shade tree disease or shade tree
pest.



(2013 Code, § 10.70)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992,
Ord. 826, passed 12-10-2009)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.16  RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING PUBLIC PARKS.



   The City Administrator is hereby empowered to issue and promulgate such
regulations as may be necessary from time to time for the protection and
proliferation of wild animals and birds and their natural habitat within
public parks. In addition, the City Administrator shall, as the Council may
from time to time direct, make such improvements within the parks as may be
beneficial to foster, and encourage the proliferation of wild animals and
birds in the park and the enjoyment thereof by the public.



(2013 Code, § 10.71)  (Ord. 101, passed 9-16-1982)



§ 130.17  MAINTENANCE OF VEGETATION.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      GARDEN. A cultivated area dedicated to growing vegetables,
fruits, flowers, ornamental grasses, groundcovers, shrubs, and similar plants
that were planted in a well defined location.



      NATIVE PLANTED AREA. An area where native plants are being or
have been seeded or planted and are currently being maintained to remove
weeds in a designated area. A NATIVE PLANTED AREA does not include a garden.



      NATIVE PLANTS. Those grasses (including prairie grasses), sedges
(solid, triangular-stemmed plants resembling grasses), forbs (flowering
broadleaf plants), trees, and shrubs that are plant species native to the
state, excluding prohibited noxious species as identified and defined by the
State Department of Agriculture. NATIVE PLANTS do not include weeds.



      NATURAL AREA. An area that was purposely left to grow in a
natural state and can maintain itself in a stable condition without human
intervention and contains native plants. An area containing more than 50%
turfgrass and/or weeds and is not maintained is not a natural area.



      ORNAMENTAL GRASSES. Grasses that are not native to the state that
are intended to add beauty to a garden. ORNAMENTAL GRASSES do not include
turfgrasses or weeds.



      TURFGRASS. Commercially available cultured grass varieties,
including bluegrass, fescue, and ryegrass blends, commonly used in regularly
cut lawn care areas.



      WEEDS.



         (a)   Noxious weeds as identified and defined by the
State Department of Agriculture; or



         (b)   The City Weed Inspector shall maintain a list of
volunteer plants that are prohibited.



   (B)   Herbaceous vegetation heights. An owner, occupant, or agent of
any lot or parcel of land in the city, other than the agricultural
preservation, shall not allow any herbaceous vegetation growing upon such lot
or parcel of land or growing upon city right-of-way which abuts the lot or
parcel of land, including the area between any sidewalk or trail and the curb
of the street, to a greater height than 8 inches or to allow such herbaceous
vegetation to go to seed.



   (C)   Private property. The provisions of division (B) above shall
not apply on private property as follows:



      (1)   To herbaceous vegetation that is located:



         (a)   On slopes greater than or equal to 3 feet
horizontal to 1-foot vertical (3:1);



         (b)   In natural areas;



         (c)   In a conservation easement;



         (d)   In a garden;



         (e)   In city park and open space;



         (f)   In a wetland or floodplain area designated on the
official zoning map; or



         (g)   Within a drainage pond or ditch which stores or
conveys stormwater.



      (2)   To native planted areas; provided, that:



         (a)   They are setback not less than 20 feet from the
front lot line. For the purposes of this section, corner lots shall be deemed
to have 2 front yards;



         (b)   They are setback not less than 5 feet from the
side and/or rear lot lines to provide a transition zone. No setback is
required on the side or rear lot lines if:



            1.   There is a fully opaque fence at least 5 feet
in height installed between the native plants and the side or rear lot lines;
or



            2.   The native plants abut a neighboring native
planted area. Plantings must not impede drainage.



         (c)   The native plant landscape area is maintained
either by removing weeds, mowing, or city-approved and permitted burning.



   (D)   Setback maintenance. The setback area required by division (C)
above shall be composed of regularly mowed turfgrass, garden beds, trees,
shrubs, mulch, wood chips, rock, and/or gravel consistent with this code of
ordinances. Plantings must not impede drainage.



   (E)   Visual obstructions. The native planted area, garden, or
natural area shall not obscure, block, or impede visual sight lines, fire
hydrants, regulatory, warning, or street identification signs, or street
light illumination required to ensure the safe and efficient circulation of
vehicles and pedestrians on streets, intersections, trail, pathways, and
sidewalks.



   (F)   City property or easements. The city may require the owner or
occupant who has planted, or has allowed to be planted, native plants, or
other vegetation within a drainage and utility easement or a right-of-way of
a city street to remove the native plants or other vegetation from the
right-of-way drainage and utility easement at no expense to the city. The
city will not be responsible for damage to turfgrass and/or any landscaped
areas resulting from public works improvements or snow removal activities
within rights-of-ways or drainage and utility easements.



   (G)   Notice and assessment.



      (1)   Notice. Once a failure to comply with the requirements
of this section are identified, notice of such failures shall be given by the
city to the affected property owner. The notice shall state and describe the
property affected; allow 7 days for the property owner to cause such
vegetation to be cut, removed, and/or treated for weeds; that if such
vegetation is not cut, removed, and/or treated for weeds within the stated
time the city will cause such vegetation to be cut, removed, and/or treated
for weeds; that all cost thereof will be billed to the property owner payable
within 30 days, the costs will be assessed against the property from which
such vegetation has been removed pursuant to and in accordance with M.S. §
429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, or any similar provision
hereafter enacted.



      (2)   Assessment.



         (a)   In all cases in which vegetation is cut, removed,
and/or treated for weeds or caused to be by the city, the costs, if not paid
by the owner as provided in this division (G), shall be assessed against the
property from which such vegetation is cut, removed, and/or treated for weeds
pursuant to and in accordance with M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from
time to time, or any similar provision hereafter enacted. Such assessments
shall be paid with interest, in installments, and within a period not to
exceed 1 year from the date of assessment.



         (b)   The city will not be responsible for damage to
turfgrass and/or any landscaped areas resulting from enforcement of this
section.



(2013 Code, § 10.73)  (Ord. 806, passed 9-11-2008)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.18  JUNK CARS, FURNITURE, HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS, AND APPLIANCES
STORED ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   It is unlawful to park or store any unlicensed, unregistered, or
inoperable vehicle, furniture, household furnishings, or appliances, or parts
or components thereof, on any property, public or private, unless housed
within a building, and any violation is hereby declared to be a nuisance. For
the purposes of this section, an INOPERABLE VEHICLE shall be defined as in
state statutes. This section shall not apply to premises on which a duly
licensed junk dealer properly carries on such licensed business, nor shall it
apply to a disposal area operated by a governmental unit.



(2013 Code, § 10.74)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.19  SMOKING ON COMMUNITY ACTIVITY CENTER PROPERTY.



   It is unlawful for any person to smoke on the grounds of the Community
Activity Center property. For purposes of this section, the term SMOKE
includes smoking or carrying a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other
lighted smoking equipment.



(2013 Code, § 10.79)  (Ord. 522, passed 8-13-1998)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.20  SOCIAL HOSTS.



   (A)   Purpose. The City Council desires to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of all persons living in and visiting the city. The use
of alcohol by persons under the age of 21 is prohibited by state statute. The
City Council intends to discourage underage possession and consumption of
alcohol, even if done within the confines of a private residence, and intends
to hold persons criminally responsible who host events or gatherings where
persons under the age of 21 possess or consume alcohol regardless of whether
the person hosting the event or gathering supplied the alcohol or was present.



   (B)   Findings. The City Council finds that:



      (1)   Alcohol is an addictive drug which, if used
irresponsibly, could have drastic effects on those who use it as well as
those who are affected by the actions of an irresponsible user;



      (2)   Consumption of alcohol by persons under the age of 21 is
harmful to those persons and constitutes a potential threat to public safety
from injuries related to alcohol consumption, such as alcohol overdose or
alcohol-related traffic collisions;



      (3)   As a result, events and gatherings held on private or
public property where alcohol is possessed or consumed by persons under the
age of 21 should be prevented as much as possible;



      (4)   Events or gatherings involving underage possession and
consumption often occur outside the presence of parents or other responsible
adults; however, there are times when a parent or other adult is present and
condones the activity, and, in some circumstances, provides the alcohol;



      (5)   Even though giving or furnishing alcohol to an underage
person is a crime, it is difficult to prove, and an ordinance is necessary to
help further combat underage consumption; and



      (6)   A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person
criminally responsible for hosting an event or gathering where underage
possession of consumption occurs.



   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of
wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including
dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process
produced.



      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and
every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which
contains 1/2 of 1% or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage
purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances.



      EVENT or GATHERING. Any group of 3 or more persons who have
assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.



      HOST. To aid, conduct, sponsor, allow, entertain, organize,
supervise, control, or permit a gathering or event, whether the host is
present or not.



      PARENT. Any person having the following relationship to a
juvenile:



         (a)   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent;



         (b)   A legal guardian; or



         (c)   A person to whom legal custody has been given by
order of the court.



      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation,
or any association of 1 or more individuals. PERSON does not include a city,
county, or state agency.



      RESIDENCE or PREMISES. Any location, including a home, yard, farm
field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel, or motel room, or other dwelling
unit, or a hall or meeting room, park, or any other place of assembly, public
or private, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether
occupied as a dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function,
and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without permission or
compensation.



      UNDERAGE PERSON. An individual under 21 years of age.



   (D)   Prohibited acts.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to host an event or
gathering at any residence or premises where alcohol or alcoholic beverages
are present when the person hosting the event or gathering knows that an
underage person:



         (a)   Will or does consume alcohol or an alcoholic
beverage; or



         (b)   Possesses alcohol or an alcoholic beverage with
the intent to consume it.



      (2)   A person is criminally responsible for violating
division (A)(1)(a) above if the person intentionally aids, advises, hires,
counsels, or conspires with or otherwise procures another to commit the
prohibited act.



   (E)   Exceptions.



      (1)   This section does not apply to conduct solely between an
underage person and his or her parent while present in the parents household.



      (2)   This section does not apply to a legally protected
religious observance.



      (3)   This section does not apply to retail intoxicating
liquor or 3.2% malt liquor licensees, municipal liquor stores, or bottle club
permit holders who are regulated by M.S. § 340A.503, subd. 1(a)(1), as it
may be amended from time to time, but it does apply to a person who hosts a
gathering or event at such liquor establishment.



      (4)   This section does not apply to situations where underage
persons are lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during
the course and scope of their employment.



(2013 Code, § 10.81)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 403, passed 3-2-1995;
Ord. 823, passed 7-30-2009)  Penalty, see § 130.99




OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND PUBLIC ORDER




§ 130.35  UNLAWFUL DEPOSIT OF LITTER.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE. A litter storage and collection
receptacle as required and authorized by provisions of this code of
ordinances and regulations as to the city refuse collection system.



      GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.



      LITTER. Garbage, refuse, and rubbish as defined herein, and all
other waste material which, if thrown, deposited, maintain, or stored as
herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety, and
welfare.



      PARK. A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center,
or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted
to active or passive recreation.



      PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets or other public ways and any
and all public parks, ravines, spaces, grounds, and buildings.



      REFUSE. All putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes (except
body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandoned, unlicensed or inoperative vehicles, and solid commercial
and industrial wastes.



      RUBBISH. Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and non-combustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery,
scrap metal, scrap lumber, used vehicle parts, and similar materials.



      VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon on a highway, including, but
not limited to, devices such as automobiles, trucks, bicycles, motorcycles,
snowmobiles, trailers of any kind, and similar forms of conveyance.



   (B)   Litter in public places. It is unlawful for any person to
throw or deposit litter in or upon any street or other public place within
the city except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for
collection, or in official city landfills. Persons placing litter in
authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street or other
public place or upon private property.



   (C)   Litter on gutters and sidewalks prohibited. It is unlawful for
any person to sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other public
place within the city any litter from any building or lot or from any public
or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property,
including commercial or industrial property, shall keep the sidewalk or
boulevard in front of their premises free of litter at all times.



   (D)   Litter from vehicles. It is unlawful for any person, while a
driver or passenger in a vehicle, to throw or deposit litter upon any street
or other public place within the city, or upon private property. No person
shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such
vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents, or
litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, or other public place,
or upon private property. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or
truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in
any street or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or
foreign matter of any kind.



   (E)   Litter in parks, lakes, and streams. It is unlawful for any
person to throw or deposit litter in any park, lake, or stream within the
city except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will
be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of
park, lake, or stream or upon any street or other public place. Where public
receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the
park, lake, or stream by the person responsible for its presence and properly
disposed of elsewhere.



   (F)   Litter on private property. It is unlawful for any person to
throw, deposit, maintain, or store outside any litter on any private property
within the city, whether owned by such person or not, and the owner and the
person in control of any such private property shall at all times maintain
the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this division (F) shall
not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.



   (G)   Exceptions in proper zones. This section shall not prohibit
the lawful keeping of vehicles defined as “refuse” herein on private
property under the following circumstances:



      (1)   On property duly licensed as a junkyard in an
appropriate zone under Ch. 151;



      (2)   When stored inside buildings, provided said building and
land usage complies with all applicable codes and provisions of this code of
ordinances regulating the special hazards and usage thereof; or



      (3)   Temporary outside storage, not exceeding 60 days, in
appropriate commercial or industrial zones, under Ch. 151, while awaiting
repair work thereon.



   (H)   Clearing of litter from private property by city.



      (1)   Notice. The City Administrator, or the Administrator’s
duly authorized agent, is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner
of any private property within the city, or the agent of such owner, to
properly dispose of litter located on such owners property which is
prohibited by this section. The occupier of any property shall be deemed
agent of the property owner for purposes of this section. Notice shall be by
registered mail or personal service in the same manner as civil process in
District Court, and if by mail, shall be addressed to said owner or owners
agent at their last known address. If sent by mail, and returned because of
inability to make delivery thereof, the City Administrator shall make a
reasonable attempt to deliver the same by personal service. The city shall
not be required to furnish notice by personal service outside the state.



      (2)   City removal. Upon failure, neglect, or refusal of any
owner or agent so notified, to properly dispose of litter as prohibited by
this section within 30 days after receipt of written notice cited above, or
within 30 days after the date the same is returned to the city because of
inability to make delivery or personal service thereof, the City
Administrator or Administrator’s duly authorized agent is hereby authorized
and empowered to order the removal and disposal of such litter and pay
therefor with city funds.



      (3)   Right to hearing. At any time prior to city removal of
litter from private property, the owner, or owner’s agent, may submit a
written request for a hearing before the Council to show cause why the litter
should not be removed from said property as required by this section. The
Council shall hear all relevant testimony, receive all evidence bearing upon
the question, and thereafter make findings for or against the proposed
removal. If the owner prevails, all proceedings hereunder arising from said
incident shall terminate and be dismissed by the city. If a violation of this
section is found by the Council, the removal shall be ordered immediately
pursuant to division (B) above.



      (4)   Cost certified to taxes. When the city has effected the
removal of such litter, or has paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof,
plus accrued interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the date of the
completion of the work, if not paid by such owner prior to 30 days following
such removal, shall be charged as a lien upon the real estate affected and
the same certified by the City Administrator to the County Auditor as a
special assessment for collection with regular municipal taxes in the year
following such certification. Such assessment shall constitute a lien against
said real estate and shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the
collection of special assessments. Such certified assessment shall constitute
prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and
that the work has been properly and satisfactorily completed.



(2013 Code, § 10.05)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.36  DANGEROUS WEAPONS AND ARTICLES.



   (A)   Acts prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Recklessly handle or use a gun or other dangerous weapon
or explosive so as to endanger the safety of another;



      (2)   Intentionally point a gun of any kind, capable of
injuring or killing a human being and whether loaded or unloaded, at or
toward another;



      (3)   Manufacture or sell for any unlawful purpose any weapon
known as a slung-shot or sand club;



      (4)   Manufacture, transfer, or possess metal knuckles or a
switch blade knife opening automatically;



      (5)   Possess any other dangerous article or substance for the
purpose of being used unlawfully as a weapon against another;



      (6)   Permit, as a parent or guardian, any child under 14
years of age to handle or use, outside of the parent’s or guardian’s
presence, a firearm or air gun of any kind, or any ammunition or explosive; or



      (7)   (a)   Possess, sell, transfer, or have in possession
for sale or transfer, any weapon commonly known as a throwing star or
nunchaku;



         (b)   For the purposes of this division (A)(7), a
THROWING STAR means a circular metallic device with any number of points
projecting from the edge; and



         (c)   A NUNCHAKUmeans a pair of wood sticks or metallic
rods separated by chain links attached to 1 end of each such stick or rod.



   (B)   Exception for division (A) above. Nothing in division (A)
above shall prohibit the possession of the articles therein mentioned if the
purpose of such possession is for public exhibition by museums or collectors
of art.



   (C)   Discharge of firearms and explosives. It is unlawful for any
person to fire or discharge any cannon, gun, pistol, or other firearm,
firecracker, sky rocket, or other fireworks, air gun, air rifle, or other
similar device commonly referred to as a BB gun.



   (D)   Exception for division (C) above.



      (1)   Nothing in division (C) above  shall apply to a display
of fireworks by an organization or group of organizations which has obtained
a permit under the Fire Code, or to a police officer in the discharge of the
officers duty, or to a person in the lawful defense of their person or
family. This section shall not apply to the discharge of firearms in a range
authorized in writing by the Council.



      (2)   Nothing in division (C) above shall apply to consumer
fireworks as defined in § 130.11(B).



      (3)   Nothing in division (C) above shall apply to hunting or
target shooting if the following provisions are observed:



         (a)   Only BB guns, shot guns with shot shells, or bows
and arrows are used;



         (b)   Shooting is done on contiguous tracts of at least
40 acres;



         (c)   The person shooting either owns or has the written
permission of the owner of the tract;



         (d)   The gun is not discharged within 500 feet of a
building or public road;



         (e)   The area within which the shooting is done lies
south of Vierling Drive extended easterly and County State Aid Highway No. 16
and east of Spencer Street and County Road No. 79 and also an area within
which said shooting is done lies in Section 1, Township 115, Range 23, of the
county, lying northerly of the Minnesota River and westerly of U.S. Highway
No.169; and



         (f)   Hunting or shooting with a bow and arrow or
shotgun using shot shells only within the National Wildlife Refuge east of
Valleyfair to the easterly city limits and north of Highway 101.



      (4)   Nothing in division (C) above section shall apply to the
discharge of firearms in such areas, and under such conditions of
supervision, as the Council may specifically permit.



   (E)   Possession, use, and sale of fireworks. It is unlawful for any
person to sell, possess, or have in possession for the purpose of safe,
except as allowed in division (D) above, any firecrackers, sky rockets, or
other fireworks. It is unlawful for any person to use consumer fireworks on
public property.



   (F)   Exposure of unused container. It is unlawful for any person,
being the owner or in possession or control thereof, to permit an unused
refrigerator, ice box, or other container, sufficiently large to retain any
child and with doors which fasten automatically when closed, to expose the
same accessible to children, without removing the doors, lids, hinges, or
latches.



   (G)   Use of bow and arrow. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, it is unlawful for any person to shoot a bow and arrow except in the
physical education program in a school supervised by a member of its faculty,
a community-wide supervised class or event specifically authorized by the
Chief of Police, or a bow and arrow range authorized by the Council.



   (H)   Model rockets. It is unlawful for any person to fire or set
off model rockets except under supervision and required approval of the
Council.



   (I)   Fireworks defined. For purposes of this section, the term
FIREWORKS means any substance or combination of substances or article
prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by
combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, and includes blank
cartridges, toy cannons, and toy canes in which explosives are used, the type
of balloons which require fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers,
torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, dayglo bombs, or other fireworks of
like construction, and any fireworks containing any explosive or inflammable
compound, or any tablet or other device containing any explosive substance
and commonly used as fireworks. The termFIREWORKS shall not include toy
pistols, toy guns, in which paper caps containing 25 hundredths grains or
less of explosive compound are used, toy pistol caps which contain less than
20 hundredths grains of explosive mixture, and any articles that meet the
definition of “consumer fireworks” under § 130.11.



(2013 Code, § 10.20)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 182, passed 8-29-1985;
Ord. 207, passed 10-16-1986; Ord. 223, passed 8-13-1987; Ord. 314, passed
7-25-1991; Ord. 343, passed 10-29-1992; Ord. 629, passed 6-12-2002; Ord. 649,
passed 12-26-2002; Ord. 839, passed 12-16-2010) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.37  FALSELY REPORTING CRIME OR ORDINANCE VIOLATION.



   It is unlawful for any person to inform a law officer that a crime or
ordinance violation has been committed, knowing that it is false and
intending that the officer shall act in reliance upon it.



(2013 Code, § 10.23)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.38  UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY; PRESENCE AT UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.



   (A)   Unlawful assembly. It is unlawful for 3 or more persons to
assemble, and each participant shall be guilty of unlawful assembly, if the
assembly is with intent to commit any unlawful act by force.



   (B)   Presence at unlawful assembly. It is unlawful for any person
to be present at the place of an unlawful assembly and refuse to leave when
so directed by a law enforcement officer.



(2013 Code, § 10.25)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.39  CURFEW.



   (A)   Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is
maintained for 4 primary reasons:



      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors
committed during the curfew hours;



      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail
during the curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;



      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs
during the curfew hours; and



      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly threatens
the health, safety, or comfort of the minor or a member of the minors
household. The term shall include, but shall not be limited to, seeking
urgent medical treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or
Fire Department personnel, and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent
assistance from a utility company due to a natural or human-made calamity.



      OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by reference to
the master clock used by the Police Department.



      PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT. Those places
that include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades,
shopping malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants, and pool halls.



      PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY. The person who is responsible
for providing food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the
minor. The person providing primary care or custody to the minor shall not be
another minor.



      SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school
calendar by public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned
event.



   (C)   Prohibited acts.



      (1)   It is unlawful for a juvenile under the age of 12 to be
present in any public place or establishment within the city:



         (a)   Any time between 9:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday and 5:00 a.m. of the following day; or



         (b)   Anytime between 10:00 p.m. on any Friday or
Saturday and 5:00 a.m. on the following day.



      (2)   It is unlawful for a juvenile from the ages of 12, 13,
or 14 to be present in any public place or establishment within the city:



         (a)   Any time between 10:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday and 5:00 a.m. of the following day; or



         (b)   Any time between 11:00 p.m. on any Friday or
Saturday and 5:00 a.m. on the following day.



      (3)   It is unlawful for a juvenile, ages 15, 16, or 17 to be
present in any public place or establishment within the city:



         (a)   Anytime between 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday and 5:00 a.m. of the following day; or



         (b)   Any time between 12:01 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any
Saturday or Sunday.



   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until
the curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed



by a parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and
custody of the minor; nor shall this section be construed to diminish or
impair the control of the adult person having the primary care or custody of
the minor.



   (E)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in
the following situations:



      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian,
or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;



      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the
direction of his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor;



      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this
section if in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a
lawful business, trade, profession, or occupation; or to a minor traveling
directly to or from the location of the business, trade, profession, or
occupation and the minors residence. Minors who fall within the scope of this
exception shall carry written proof of employment and proof of the hours the
employer requires the minors presence at work;



      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an event which has been officially designated as a school activity
by public or parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or
traveling directly to or from an official activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, a civic organization, school, religious institution,
or similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor and with the
permission of the minors parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor;



      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course
of interstate travel during the hours of curfew;



      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or
from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free
speech, freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion;



      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence
or abutting the residence of a next- door neighbor if the neighbor does not
complain to the city’s designated law enforcement provider about the minors
presence; and



      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is
otherwise legally emancipated.



   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor. No parent,
guardian, or other adult having the primary care or custody of any minor
shall permit any violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.



   (G)   Duties of other persons. No person operating or in charge of
any place of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor
to enter or remain in his or her place of business during the hours
prohibited by this section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her
parent, guardian, or other adult person having primary care or custody of the
minor, or unless 1 of the exceptions to this section applies.



   (H)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this
section that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly
notified the city’s designated law enforcement provider that a minor was
present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused
to leave.



   (I)   Affirmative defense. A law enforcement officer must look into
whether a minor has an affirmative defense before making an arrest.



Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.40  CONCEALING IDENTITY.



   It is unlawful for any person to conceal their identity in a public
place by means of a robe, mask, or other disguise, unless incidental to
amusement or entertainment.



(2013 Code, § 10.32)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.41  ABANDONING A MOTOR VEHICLE.



   It is unlawful for any person to abandon a motor vehicle on any public
or private property without the consent of the person in control of such
property. For the purpose of this section, a “motor vehicle” is as
defined in M.S. Ch. 169, as it may be amended from time to time. For the
purpose of this section, an ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE is defined as in the
section of this code of ordinances relating to disposal of abandoned motor
vehicles.



(2013 Code, § 10.33)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.42  INTERFERENCE WITH AMBULANCE SERVICE.



   It is unlawful for any person to give, or make or cause to be made a
call for ambulance service without probable cause or to neglect to obey any
reasonable order of a driver or attendants at an ambulance call or to
interfere with the ambulance services discharge of its duties.



(2013 Code, § 10.34)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.43  COERCION.



   It is unlawful for any person to orally or in writing make any of the
following threats and thereby cause another against their will to do any act
or forbear doing a lawful act:



   (A)   A threat to unlawfully inflict bodily harm upon, or hold in
confinement, the person threatened or another;



   (B)   A threat to unlawfully inflict damage to the property of the
person threatened or another;



   (C)   A threat to unlawfully injure a trade, business, profession,
or calling;



   (D)   A threat to expose a secret or deformity, publish, a
defamatory statement, or otherwise to expose any person to disgrace or
ridicule; or



   (E)   A threat to make or cause to be made a criminal charge whether
true or false; provided, that a warning of the consequence of a future
violation of law given in good faith by a magistrate, police officer, or
prosecuting attorney to any person shall not be deemed a threat for the
purpose of this section.



(2013 Code, § 10.51)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.44  INTERFERING WITH RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCE.



   It is unlawful for any person, by threats or violence, intentionally to
prevent another person from performing any lawful act enjoined upon them, or
recommended to them by the religion which that person professes.



(2013 Code, § 10.52)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.45  NOISE ELIMINATION AND NOISE PREVENTION.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning. Any other word or phrase used in this section, and defined
in regulations of the State Pollution Control section, NPC-1 and NPC-4, has
the meaning given in those regulations.



      AIR CIRCULATION DEVICE. A mechanism designed and used for the
controlled flow of air used in ventilation, cooling, or conditioning,
including, but not limited to, central and window air conditioning units.



      L10. The sound level, expressed in decibels (DBA), which is
exceeded 10% of the time for a 1-hour period, as measured by sound level
meter having characteristics as specified in the latest standards, S1.4, of
the American National Standards Institute and using test procedures approved
by the Noise Control Officer.



      L50. The sound level similarly expressed and measured which is
exceeded 50% of the time for a 1-hour period.



      PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, trustee,
association, the state and its agencies and subdivisions, or any body of
persons whether incorporated or not. With respect to acts prohibited or
required herein, PERSON shall include employees and licensees.



   (B)   Noises prohibited.



      (1)   General prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to
make or cause to be made any distinctly and loudly audible noise that
unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, peace, safety, or welfare of any persons or precludes their enjoyment
of property or affects their property’s value. This general prohibition is
not limited by the specific restrictions of divisions (B)(2) through (B)(12)
below.



      (2)   Motor vehicles. It is unlawful for any person to operate
a motor vehicle in the city in violation of the motor vehicle noise limits of
the State Pollution Control Agency (NPC 4 and 6MAR par. 4, 2004).



      (3)   Horns, audible signaling devices, and the like. It is
unlawful for any person to sound any signaling device on any vehicle except
as a warning of danger (M.S. § 169.68, as it may be amended from time to
time).



      (4)   Exhaust. It is unlawful for any person to discharge the
exhaust, or permit the discharge of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, motor vehicle, or
snowmobile except through a muffler or other device that effectively prevents
loud or explosive noises therefrom and complies with all applicable state
laws and regulations.



      (5)   Defective vehicles or loads. It is unlawful for any
person to use any vehicle so out of repair or so loaded as to create loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise.



      (6)   Loading, unloading, or unpacking. It is unlawful for any
person to create loud and excessive noise in loading, unloading, or unpacking
any vehicle.



      (7)   Radios, phonographs, paging systems, and the like. It is
unlawful for any person to use or operate or permit the use or operation of
any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system,
machine, or other device for the production or reproduction of sound in a
distinctly and loudly audible manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and
comfort of any person nearby. Operation of any such set, instrument,
phonograph, machine, or other device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., in such a manner as to be plainly audible at the property line of the
structure or building in which it is located, in the hallway or apartment
adjacent, or at a distance of 50 feet if the source is located outside a
structure or building, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section.



      (8)   Participation in noisy parties or gatherings. It is
unlawful for any person to participate in any party or other gathering of
people giving rise to noise, disturbing the peace, quiet, or repose of
another person. When a police officer determines that a gathering is creating
such a noise disturbance, the officer may order all persons present, other
than the owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance is occurring,
to disperse immediately. No person shall refuse after being ordered by a
police officer to do so. Every owner or tenant of such premises who has
knowledge of the disturbance shall make every reasonable effort to see that
the disturbance is stopped.



      (9)   Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising, and the like.
It is unlawful for any person to operate or permit the use or operation of
any loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other device for the production or
reproduction of sound on a street or other public place for the purpose of
commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any
commercial establishment or vehicle.



      (10)   Animals. It is unlawful for any person to keep any
animal that disturbs the comfort or repose of persons in the vicinity by its
frequent or continued noise.



      (11)   Schools, churches, hospitals, and the like. It is
unlawful for any person to create any excessive noise on a street, alley, or
public grounds adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, or
hospital when the noise unreasonably interferes with the working of the
institution or disturbs or unduly annoys its occupants or residents and when
conspicuous signs indicate the presence of such institution.



      (12)   Engine retarding braking systems. The City Council
finds that the use of engine retarding braking systems or similar methods
such as “transmission braking” or “dynamic braking” within the city
creates unusual and excessive noise that unreasonably disturbs and annoys
residents. A prohibition on the use of such devices and methods is necessary
to protect the health, safety, and public welfare. It is unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to intentionally use an engine retarding braking
system on any public highway, street, parking lot, or alley within the city.
For purposes of this provision the term ENGINE RETARDING BRAKING SYSTEM means
a transmission brake or other similar engine retarding braking system whereby
rapid downshifting of a vehicles engine alters the normal compression of the
engine or a compression release device is used in lieu of applying a vehicles
wheel brakes, causing loud noises to emit from the vehicles engine and
exhaust system.



   (C)   Hourly restriction on certain operations.



      (1)   Recreation vehicles. It is unlawful for any person,
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., to drive or operate any
minibike, snowmobile, or other recreational vehicle not licensed for travel
on public highways.



      (2)   Domestic power equipment. It is unlawful for any person
to operate a power lawn mower, power hedge clipper, chain saw, mulcher,
garden tiller, edger, drill, or other similar domestic power maintenance
equipment except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., on any
weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., on any weekend or
holiday. Snow removal equipment is exempt from this provision.



      (3)   Refuse hauling. It is unlawful for any person to collect
or remove garbage or refuse in any residential district except between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday.



      (4)   Construction activities. It is unlawful for any person
to engage in or permit construction activities involving the use of any kind
of electric, diesel, or gas-powered machine or other power equipment except
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., on any weekday or between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., on any weekend or holiday. Upon timely
application being made and the necessity therefor being established, the
Council may suspend the operation of this division (C) for a specific purpose
at a specific location and for a specific length of time by Council action
and by giving public notice of the nature and limits of such suspension.



   (D)   Receiving land use standards.



      (1)   (a)   Maximum noise levels by receiving land use
districts. It is unlawful for any person to operate or cause or permit to be
operated any source of noise in such a manner as to create a noise level
exceeding the limit set in Table 1 for the receiving land use category
specified when measured at or within the property line of the receiving land
use.



 


Table 1



Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use Districts



 

Day
7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

 

Night
10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.



Land Use Districts
 

L10

 

L50

 

L10

 

L50



Commercial
 

70

 

65

 

70

 

65



Industrial
 

80

 

75

 

80

 

75



Residential
 

65

 

60

 

55

 

50




 



         (b)   The limits of the most restrictive district shall
apply at the boundaries between different land use categories. The
determination of land use shall be by its zoned designation.



      (2)   Exemptions. The levels prescribed in division (D)(1)(a)
do not apply to noise originating on public streets and alleys but such noise
shall be subject to other applicable divisions of this section.



   (E)   Air circulation devices. It is unlawful for any person to
permanently install or place any air circulation device, except a window air
conditioning unit, in any outdoor location until the Noise Control Officer
determines that the device in that location will comply with the noise level
standards prescribed in division (D)(1)(a) above.



   (F)   Exception for emergency work. Noise created exclusively in the
performance of emergency work to preserve the public health, safety, or
welfare, or in the performance of emergency work necessary to restore a
public service or eliminate a public hazard shall be exempt from the
provisions of this section for a period not to exceed 24 hours after the work
is commenced. Persons responsible for such work shall inform the Noise
Control Officer of the need to initiate such work or, if the work is
commenced during non-business hours of the city, at the beginning of business
hours of the first business day thereafter. Any person responsible for such
emergency work shall take all reasonable actions to minimize the amount of
noise.



   (G)   Powers and duties of Noise Control Officer. The Noise Control
Program established by this section shall be administered by the Noise
Control Officer. Until otherwise provided by provisions of this code of
ordinances, the Chief of Police or Chief’s designee shall serve as the
Noise Control Officer.



   (H)   Enforcement. The Police Department or Building Inspector,
whenever applicable, shall enforce the provisions of this section. The Police
Department or its members may inspect private premises other than private
residences and shall make all reasonable efforts to prevent violations of
this section.



   (I)   Testing procedures. The Noise Control Officer shall adopt
guidelines establishing the test procedures and instrumentation to be used in
enforcing the provisions of division (D)(1) above imposing noise standards. A
copy of such guidelines shall be kept on file in the office of the Noise
Control Officer and shall be available to the public for reference during
office hours.



   (J)   Other powers and duties. The Noise Control Officer shall
exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as are reasonable
and necessary to enforce this section.



   (K)   Enforcement. When the Noise Control Officer determines that a
noise exceeds the maximum sound level permitted under division (A)(1) above,
the Noise Control Officer shall give written notice of the violation to the
owner or occupant of the premises where the noise originates and order such
person to correct or remove each specified violation within such reasonable
time as is prescribed in the notice. The failure to remove or correct any
such violation within the time so prescribed constitutes a violation of this
section.



(2013 Code, § 10.60)  (Ord. 108, passed 11-18-1982; Ord. 145, passed
5-24-1984; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992; Ord. 750, passed 3-30-2006)



§ 130.46  TRESPASS UPON LAND FOR THE PURPOSE OF USING CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   Unlawful acts. It is unlawful for any person to do any of the
following:



      (1)   Trespass by individual. The uninvited entry on to land
of another for the purpose of using controlled substances;



      (2)   Trespass by motor vehicles. The uninvited entry by motor
vehicle on the land of another to facilitate the use of controlled
substances; and



      (3)   Permitting trespass by motor vehicle. As owner of a
motor vehicle, to allow the uninvited entry by motor vehicles on the land of
another to facilitate the use of controlled substances.



   (B)   Uninvited entry defined. An entry is uninvited if the person
on the land cannot produce written or oral permission from the landowner or
lessee for the entry, or if the landowner or lessee is not present and
consenting to the entry.



   (C)   Determination of purpose of entry. To determine the purpose of
an uninvited entry of a person or motor vehicle onto the land of another, the
factors to be considered include, without limitation, the following:



      (1)   Time of day;



      (2)   Presence of paraphernalia containing identifiable
residues of a controlled substance;



      (3)   Noise level;



      (4)   Lighting;



      (5)   Identified physiological responses; and



      (6)   Conduct of persons in the presence of a peace officer.



   (D)   Defenses. If the trier of fact finds that the landowner or
lessee expressly consented, endorsed, or ratified the entry onto land, such a
finding shall constitute an absolute defense to charges under this section.



   (E)   Owner; lessee liability. A landowner or lessee who expressly
consents to, endorses, or ratifies an entry onto land is not presumed to be
in control of the persons gathered on the land, nor is the landowner or
lessee presumed to have knowledge or knowledge of an unlawful act merely
because of express consent, endorsement or ratification.



(2013 Code, § 10.62)  (Ord. 172, passed 7-16-1985; Ord. 201, passed
7-17-1986)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.47  PARADES AND RACES.



   (A)   Purpose. The provisions of this section are designed to
regulate the time, place and manner in which a parade or race is conducted,
in order to protect the safety and welfare of participants and
non-participants, and to minimize interference with the customary flow of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic on the streets, sidewalks, and other public
places. In particular, parades and races shall be limited to times and places
which can be provided the necessary level of police protection to allow the
parade or race to occur safely.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      APPLICANT. Any authorized representative of the sponsor who files
a request for a parade or race permit.



      CHIEF. The Chief of Police of the City of Shakopee, Minnesota, or
the Chief’s designated representative.



      CONTROLLED INTERSECTION. Any meeting of 2 or more streets where
traffic from 1 or more directions faces traffic lights, a stop sign, a yield
sign, or other traffic-control device.



      PARADE. Any parade, fun run, bike-a-thon, walk-a-thon, march,
ceremony, pageant, procession (except a funeral procession), or similar
activity involving 10 or more participants who are not competing to complete
the route in a short time.



      PARTICIPANT. Any person actively engaged as a member of a parade
or race, either as an individual, or as part of a parade unit.



      POLICE OFFICER IN CHARGE.The Shift Commander, Acting Shift
Commander, or other individual designated by the Chief.



      RACE. Any race, run-a-thon, marathon, or similar activity
involving 10 or more participants who are competing to complete the route in
the shortest possible time.



      ROUTE.The series of streets, sidewalks, grass areas, or other
surfaces traveled along or across during the duration of the parade or race.



      SPONSOR. The person who provides the main financial,
administrative, organizational, or other support for a parade or race, and
who accepts responsibility for the conduct of the parade or race.



      UNIT. Any float, car, band, or other distinct item, person, or
group of items or people moving together as a part of the parade.



   (C)   Permit.



      (1)   No parade or race shall be allowed within the city
limits without a permit, which permit shall be conditioned upon compliance
with the following regulations. The permit application shall be on a form
approved by the Chief and must specify the route and provide such other
information as required by the Chief.



      (2)   The following application shall be submitted in writing
to the Police Department at least 30 days prior to the parade or race:



         (a)   An application for a permit to hold a parade which
is expected to impede the normal flow of traffic for over 45 minutes; and



         (b)   An application for a permit to hold a race
involving crossing more than 4 controlled intersections where the route
requires or anticipates that the participants shall not obey the
traffic-control devices.



      (3)   All other applications must be submitted in writing to
the Police Department at least 10 days prior to the parade or race.



      (4)   The Chief shall act upon timely-filled applications in
writing by 3 days (72 hours) before the parade or race is scheduled to occur;
and



      (5)    The use of the streets and provision of police officer
protection shall be on a first-come, first-served basis.



   (D)   Standards for issuance. The Chief shall issue a permit when,
from a consideration of the application and from such other information as
may otherwise be obtained, the Chief finds that:



      (1)   The conduct of the parade or race will not substantially
interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its
route;



      (2)   The conduct of the parade or race will not require the
diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly
police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent
normal police protection to the city;



      (3)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at
assembly points of the parade or race will not unduly interfere with proper
fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to
such assembly areas;



      (4)   The conduct of such parade or race will not interfere
with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire;



      (5)   The conduct of the parade or race is not reasonably
likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct,
or create a disturbance;



      (6)   The parade or race is scheduled to move from its point
of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable
delays en route; and



      (7)   The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of
advertising any product, goods, or event, and is not designed to be held
purely for private profit.



   (E)   Equipment.



      (1)   A parade or race applicant or sponsor must obtain and
use such barricades and fluorescent safety vests as are determined by the
Chief to be reasonably necessary to protect the participants,
non-participants, and traffic along the route.



      (2)   The police officer in charge may cancel the parade or
race if the applicant and sponsor fail to substantially comply with the
requirement of providing safety equipment.



   (F)   Time. Parades and races may be held only between 1/2 hour
before sunrise and 1/2 hour after sunset.



   (G)   Conduct.



      (1)   The parade or race shall be coordinated with the police
officer in charge. The parade or race participants must obey all lawful
orders of police officers.



      (2)   Any motor vehicle driven as a part of a parade or race
shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the street as practical and
shall follow any foregoing parade or race units or participants as closely as
is practical and safe; except this division ( G) shall not apply when an
entire road is blocked for the parade or race.



      (3)   (a)   The sponsor of a parade or race agrees to clean
up any and all debris and damage which may be done.



         (b)   In the event such cleanup is not undertaken
promptly, the city reserves the right to do the cleaning itself, and to
charge the sponsor for the actual time and expense incurred in the cleaning.
This charge shall be a private debt against the sponsor.



      (4)   The City Administrator may require insurance, an
indemnification contract, and/or a bond in such instances where deemed
necessary to protect the public interest.



      (5)   The City Administrator shall have the authority to
promulgate rules and regulations under this section, which rules and
regulations shall be maintained on file with the City Clerk.



   (H)   Safety. The following conduct is prohibited as posing a
significant threat to the public health, safety, and welfare:



      (1)   Operation of a motor vehicle by an unlicensed driver;



      (2)   Consumption of an alcoholic beverage while participating
in a parade or race, whether as a driver, rider on a unit, member of a unit,
or otherwise;



      (3)   Operation of a motor vehicle in a careless or reckless
manner. This includes raising 1 wheel of a motorcycle off the ground to
perform a “wheelie”;



      (4)   Throwing candy, balloons, or other items which may
entice children to run into the path of the parade or race; and



      (5)   Discharge of fireworks, firearms, or other weapons;



(2013 Code, § 10.63)  (Ord. 357, passed 7-22-1993)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.48  DISORDERLY HOUSE OR PLACE OF PUBLIC RESORT.



   It is unlawful for any person:



   (A)   To keep a disorderly house or place of public resort, whereby
the peace, comfort, or decency of a neighborhood is habitually disturbed; or



   (B)   Being the owner or in control of any premises, intentionally
permit them to be so used.



(2013 Code, § 10.72)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978)  Penalty, see § 130.99




OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS




§ 130.65  INDECENT CONDUCT.



   (A)   Sexual conduct. In any place open to the public, no person
shall engage in, offer, or attempt to engage in sexual conduct as defined in
§ 114.23.



   (B)   Indecent solicitation. In any place open to the public, no
person shall engage in or solicit another to engage in conduct that involves
the touching of the genitals, buttocks, or female breast for the purpose of
sexual arousal, gratification, annoyance, or offense.



   (C)   Indecent behavior. In any place open to the public, no person
shall engage in, offer or attempt to engage in, or congregate because of
behavior, whether by words or acts, of a nature to outrage the sense of
public decency.



(2013 Code, § 10.49)  (Ord. 451, passed 5-21-1996)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.66  GAMBLING.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      LAWFUL GAMBLING, LAWFUL PURPOSES, and LICENSED ORGANIZATION. As
set forth in M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time.



      TRADE AREA. The City of Shakopee and each city contiguous to the
City of Shakopee.



   (B)   Lawful purposes. Each licensed organization conducting lawful
gambling within the city shall expend 75% of its expenditures for lawful
purposes on lawful purposes conducted or located within the city’s trade
area.



   (C)   Exceptions.



      (1)   Any organization holding a state organization gambling
license may conduct not more than 1 raffle in any given calendar year if it
is held in conjunction with a banquet and/or a dance, without complying with
division (B) above.



      (2)   Any organization exempt under M.S. § 349.166, as it may
be amended from time to time, may conduct not more than 5 raffles in any
given calendar year, without complying with division (B) above, if, prior to
selling any raffle tickets, the organization submits proof satisfactory to
the city that more than 75% of the raffle tickets are reasonably expected to
be sold to nonresidents of the city. Proof may include evidence that the
tickets shall be sold state-wide, at a facility with a large regional
attraction, or to a set of people not generally found in the city (e.g.,
members of an organization of whom fewer than 25% are city residents).



   (D)   Application. An organization seeking to obtain a state
gambling premises permit shall file in the office of the City Clerk an
executed, complete duplicate application, together with all exhibits and
documents accompanying the application to be filed with the State Board,
prior to Council approving a premise permit.



   (E)   Records and reports. Organizations with a premises permit in
the city shall file with the City Clerk 1 copy of all records and reports
required to be filed with the State Board, pursuant to state law, rules, and
regulations. Such records and reports shall be filed on or before the day
they are required to be filed with the State board.



   (F)   Location restriction. Lawful gambling for which a license is
required from the State Gambling Control Board may only be conducted at a
location for which an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or on-sale club
license has been issued, and pull-tab dispensing devices may be used at such
locations. Any organization that is exempt from obtaining a state license in
order to conduct lawful gambling is exempt from this location requirement,
but any such organization must not use pull-tab dispensing devices.



(2013 Code, § 10.61)  (Ord. 182, passed 8-29-1985; Ord. 189, passed
3-13-1986; Ord. 297, passed 11-30-1990; Ord. 345, passed 12-12-1992; Ord.
663, passed 4-15-2003)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.67  ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS.



   (A)   Findings and purpose.



      (1)   Studies conducted by the State Attorney General, the
American Planning Association, and cities such as St. Paul, Minnesota;
Indianapolis, Indiana; Hopkins, Minnesota; Ramsey, Minnesota; Minnetonka,
Minnesota; Rochester, Minnesota; Phoenix, Arizona; Los Angeles, California;
and Seattle, Washington have studied the impacts that adult establishments
have in those communities. These studies have concluded that adult
establishments have adverse impacts on the surrounding neighborhoods. These
impacts include increased crime rates, lower property values, increased
transiency, neighborhood blight, and potential health risks.



      (2)   Based on these studies and findings, the City Council
concludes the following.



         (a)   Adult establishments have adverse secondary
impacts of the types set forth above.



         (b)   The adverse impacts caused by adult establishments
tend to diminish if adult establishments are governed by geographic,
licensing, and health requirements.



         (c)   It is not the intent of the City Council to
prohibit adult establishments from having a reasonable opportunity to locate
in the city.



         (d)   M.S. § 462.357, as it may be amended from time to
time, allows the city to adopt regulations to promote the public health,
safety, morals, and general welfare.



         (e)   The public health, safety, morals, and general
welfare will be promoted by the city adopting regulations governing adult
establishments.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ADULT ESTABLISHMENT. A business where sexually-oriented materials
are sold, bartered, distributed, leased, or furnished and which meet any of
the following criteria:



         (a)   A business where sexually-oriented materials are
provided for use, consumption, enjoyment, or entertainment on the business
premises;



         (b)   A business that is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on the description or display of specified sexual activities;



         (c)   A business that is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on the description or display of specified anatomical areas;



         (d)   An adult cabaret as defined in division (G) below;
and



         (e)   A business providing sexually-oriented materials
only for off-site use, consumption, enjoyment, or entertainment if the
portion of the business used for such purpose exceeds 20% of the retail floor
area of the business or 500 square feet, whichever is less. The phrase
“retail floor area” does not include storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms,
basements, attics, or any portion of the business not open to the public.



      SEXUALLY-ORIENTED MATERIALS. Visual, printed, or aural materials,
objects, or devices that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities.



      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



         (a)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses, or female breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and



         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernable turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered.



      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.



         (a)   Actual or simulated: sexual intercourse; oral
copulation; anal intercourse; oral-anal copulation; bestiality; direct
physical stimulation of unclothed genitals; flagellation or torture in the
context of a sexual relationship; the use of excretory functions in the
context of a sexual relationship; analingus; buggery; coprophagy;
coprophilia; cunnilingus; fellatio; necrophilia; pederasty; pedophilia;
piquerism; sapphism; or zooerastia;



         (b)   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of
sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence;



         (c)   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral
copulation, coitus, or masturbation;



         (d)   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic
regions, buttocks, or female breasts;



         (e)   Situations involving a person or persons, any of
whom are nude, who are clad in undergarments or in sexually-revealing
costumes and engaged in the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding, or
other physical restraint of any person;



         (f)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other
sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or



         (g)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, or
vaginal or anal irrigation.



   (C)   Compliance with zoning restrictions. Adult establishments may
be located only as allowed by § 151.046.



   (D)   Location of adult establishments.



      (1)   No person shall operate an adult establishment on
property, any part of which is within the area circumscribed by a circle
which has a radius of 750 feet from any of the uses listed below. Distances
shall be measured by following a straight fine, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, between the closest points on the property lines of
the 2 uses.



      (2)   This distance requirement applies to the following uses:



         (a)   Property developed or zoned for residential uses;



         (b)   Property located in a major recreation zone;



         (c)   Property frequented by children or designed as a
family destination, such as a day care facility, school, library, park,
playground, state or federal wildlife area or preserve, religious
institution, or other public recreational facility;



         (d)   Premises licensed under Ch. 114, relating to
liquor, beer, and wine licensing;



         (e)   A street with an 10,000 average daily traffic
count, as noted on the most recent Municipal State Aid System Traffic Volume
Map from the State Department of Transportation; and



         (f)   Another adult establishment.



   (E)   Operation of business.



      (1)   Both the owner of an adult establishment and the manager
of the business shall be responsible for the conduct of their employees and
for compliance with this section.



      (2)   No owner or manager of an adult establishment shall
employ a person under the age of 18.



      (3)   No owner, manager, or employee of an adult establishment
shall have been convicted of violating this section 3 or more times within 24
months.



   (F)   Restrictions and regulations of adult establishments. An adult
establishment is subject to the following restrictions and regulations.



      (1)   No owner, manager, or employee shall allow any
sexually-oriented materials or entertainment to be visible or perceivable in
any manner, including aurally, at any time from outside of the business.



      (2)   No owner, manager, or employee of an adult establishment
shall have been convicted of a sex crime, as identified in M.S. §§ 609.293
through 609.352, 609.746 through 609.749, and 609.79, or 518B.01, as they may
be amended from time to time, or related statute dealing with sexual assault,
sexual conduct, harassment, obscenity, or domestic abuse.



      (3)   The business owner, manager, or employee shall ensure
that no person under the age of 18 enters the business.



      (4)   No owner, manager, or employee shall allow any person
under the age of 18 to have access to sexually-oriented materials, whether by
sight, purchase, touch, or any other means.



      (5)   No owner, manager, or employee may sell or display for
sale any sexually-oriented materials except in original unopened packages.



      (6)   (a)   Each business shall display a sign on its main
entrance door which reads: “This business sells sexually-oriented material
or entertainment. Persons under the age of 18 are prohibited from entering”.



         (b)   The sign letters shall be a minimum of 2 inches
high.



      (7)   No business may have a license under Ch. 114, and no
alcoholic beverages may be consumed in the business.



      (8)   No business shall be open except between 7:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.



   (G)   Adult cabarets.



      (1)   An ADULT CABARET is a business that provides dancing or
other live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
presentation, display, or depiction of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, or the presentation, display, or depiction of
matter that seeks to evoke, arouse, or excite sexual or erotic feelings or
desires.



      (2)   Any adult cabaret operating in the city must comply with
the following conditions:



         (a)   An owner, operator, or manager of an adult cabaret
may not allow any dancer or other live entertainer to display specified
anatomical areas or to display or perform specified sexual activities on the
premises of the adult cabaret;



         (b)   A dancer, live entertainer, performer, patron, or
any other person may not display specified anatomical areas in an adult
cabaret;



         (c)   The owner, operator, or manager of an adult
cabaret must provide the following information to the city concerning any
person who dances or performs live entertainment at the adult cabaret: The
persons name; home address; home telephone number; date of birth; and any
aliases;



         (d)   A dancer, live entertainer, or performer may not
be under 18 years old;



         (e)   Dancing or live entertainment must occur on a
platform intended for that purpose and that is raised at least 2 feet from
the level of the floor;



         (f)   A dancer or performer may not perform a dance or
live entertainment closer then 10 feet from any patron;



         (g)   A dancer or performer may not fondle or caress any
patron and no patron may fondle or caress any dancer or performer;



         (h)   A patron may not pay or give any gratuity to any
dancer or performer; and



         (i)   A dancer or performer may not solicit or accept
any pay or gratuity from any patron.



(2013 Code, § 10.77)  (Ord. 511, passed 3-5-1998)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.68  PREMISES CONDUCIVE TO HIGH-RISK SEXUAL CONDUCT.



   (A)   Findings and purpose. The City Council makes the following
findings regarding the need to regulate commercial premises, buildings, and
structures that are conducive to the spread of communicable disease of danger
to persons in order to further the substantial interest of public health.



      (1)   The experience of other cities establishes that certain
commercial premises, buildings, and structures, or parts thereof, by reason
of the design and use of such premises, buildings, or structures are
conducive to the spread of communicable disease of danger to persons
frequenting such premises, buildings, or structures, as well as to the
general public, and that the risk of spreading infectious and contagious
diseases can be minimized by regulating such commercial premises, buildings,
and structures.



      (2)   The experience of other cities where such commercial
premises, buildings, and structures are present indicates that the risk of
spreading the sexually-transmittable disease of Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndrome (AIDS) is increased by the presence of such premises, buildings, and
structures, because the design or use of such premises, buildings, and
structures, or parts thereof can facilitate high-risk sexual conduct.



      (3)   Medical publications of the Center for Disease Control
of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services indicate that the
sexually-transmittable disease of AIDS is currently irreversible and
uniformly fatal. Medical research has further established that the risk
factors for obtaining or spreading AIDS are associated with high risk sexual
conduct.



      (4)   Certain commercial premises, buildings, and structures,
or parts thereof, by reason of their design and use, are conducive to
high-risk sexual conduct and hence the spread of communicable disease, and
that the risk of spreading infectious and contagious diseases can be
minimized by regulating these commercial premises, buildings, and structures.



      (5)   The public health, safety, morals, and general welfare
will be promoted by the city adopting regulations governing commercial
premises, buildings, and structures conducive to high-risk sexual conduct.



      (6)   The purpose of this section is to prescribe regulations
governing commercial premises, buildings, and structures that are conducive,
by virtue of design and use, to high-risk sexual conduct which can result in
the spread of sexually-transmitted diseases to persons frequenting such
premises, buildings, and structures.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      BOOTHS, STALLS, or PARTITIONED PORTIONS OF A ROOM OR INDIVIDUAL
ROOM. Enclosures specifically offered to persons for a fee or as an incident
to performing high-risk sexual conduct, or enclosures which are part of a
business operated on the premises which offers movies or other entertainment
to be viewed within the enclosure, including enclosures wherein movies or
other entertainment is dispensed for a fee, but does not include enclosures
that are private offices used by the owners, managers, or persons employed by
the premises for attending to the tasks of their employment, and which are
not held out to the public or members of the establishment for hire or for a
fee or for the purpose of viewing movies or other entertainment for a fee,
and are not open to any persons other than employees.



      DOORS, CURTAINS, or PORTAL PARTITIONS. Full, complete,
non-transparent closure devices through which 1 cannot see or view activity
taking place within the enclosure.



      HAZARDOUS SITE. Any commercial premises, building or structure,
or any part thereof, which is a site of high-risk sexual conduct as defined
herein.



      HIGH-RISK SEXUAL CONDUCT.



         (a)   Fellatio;



         (b)   Anal intercourse; or



         (c)   Vaginal intercourse with persons who engage in
sexual acts in exchange for money.



      OPEN TO AN ADJACENT PUBLIC ROOM SO THAT THE AREA INSIDE IS
VISIBLE TO PERSONS IN THE ADJACENT PUBLIC ROOM. Either the absence of any
entire “door, curtain, or portal partition” or a door or other device
which is made of clear, transparent material such as glass, plexiglass, or
other similar material meeting building code and safety standards, which
permits the activity inside the enclosure to be entirely viewed or seen by
persons outside the enclosure.



      PUBLIC HEALTH OFFICIAL. An agent or employee of the city, county,
or state charged with the enforcement of the state or local health laws.



   (C)   Public health regulations. A commercial building, structure,
premises, or part thereof, or facilities therein may not be constructed,
used, designed, or operated in the city for the purpose of engaging in, or
permitting persons to engage in, sexual activities which include high-risk
sexual conduct.



   (D)   Prohibitions. It is unlawful to own, operate, manage, rent,
lease, or exercise control of a commercial building, structure, premises, or
portion or part thereof in the city, that contains:



      (1)   Partitions between subdivisions of a room portion or
part of a building, structure, or premises having an aperture which is
designed or constructed to facilitate sexual activity, including, but not
limited to, vaginal intercourse, and intercourse, or fellatio, between
persons on either side of the partition; and



      (2)   “Booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room or
individual room” as defined herein which have “doors, curtains or portal
partitions” as defined herein unless the booths, stalls, or partitioned
portions of a room or individual room have at least 1 side open to an
adjacent public room so that the area inside is visible to persons in the
adjacent public room as defined herein. Booths, stalls, or partitioned
portions of a room or individual room that are so open to an adjacent public
room must be lighted in a manner that the persons in the area used for
viewing motion picture or other forms of entertainment are visible from the
adjacent public rooms, but such lighting need not be of such intensity as to
prevent the viewing of the motion pictures or other offered entertainment.



   (E)   Exceptions. The regulations set forth in this section do not
apply to premises, buildings, or structures that are lawfully operating and
licensed as hotels, motels, apartment complexes, condominiums, townhomes, or
boarding houses which are subject to other general health and sanitation
requirements under state and local law.



   (F)   Health enforcement powers.



      (1)   In exercising powers conferred by this or any other
section of this code of ordinances relating to communicable diseases, the
Public Health Official is to be guided by the most recent instructions,
opinions, and guidelines of the Center for Disease Control of the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services that relate to the spread of
infectious diseases. In order to ascertain the source of infection and reduce
its spread, the Public Health Official, and persons under the Public Health
Official’s direction and control, may inspect or cause to be inspected, and
to issue orders regarding any commercial building, structure, or premises, or
any part thereof, that may be a site of high-risk sexual conduct.



      (2)   If the Public Health Official determines that a
hazardous site as defined herein exists, the Public Health Official will
declare it to be a public health hazard and public health nuisance and will:



         (a)   Notify the manager, owner, or tenant of the
hazardous site that the Public Health Official has reasonable belief that the
premises, building, or structure is a hazardous site as defined herein;



         (b)   Issue 2 written warnings at least 10 days apart to
the manager, owner, or tenant of the premises stating the specific reasons
for the Public Health Officials opinion that the premises, building, or
structure is a hazardous site as defined herein; and



         (c)   Once such notices and warnings have been issued,
the Public Health Official must proceed as follows:



            1.   After the manager, owner, or tenant of the
premises has been notified in writing as to the basis of the Public Health
Official’s determination, the manager, owner, or tenant will have ten days
from the date of the last warning to request a hearing before the Public
Health Official or the Public Health Official’s appointee for the
determination as to the existence of such hazardous site. If the manager,
owner, or tenant of the premises does not request a hearing within 10 days of
the date of the last warning notice, the Public Health Official will then
cause the premises to be posted with a warning advising the public that the
premises have been declared a hazardous site and the Public Health Official
will cause orders to be issued to the manager, owner, or tenant of the
premises constituting the hazardous site to take specified corrective
measures to prevent high-risk sexual conduct form taking place within the
premises.



            2.   If the manager, owner, or tenant of the
premises requests a hearing, the hearing will be held before the Public
Health Official or the Public Health Official’s appointee at a date not
more than 30 days after demand for a hearing. After considering all evidence,
the Public Health Official or the Public Health Official’s appointee will
make a determination as to whether the premises constitute a hazardous site,
as defined herein and issue a decision based upon all hearing evidence
presented. If the Public Health Official or the Public Health Official’s
appointee makes a determination that the premises constitute a hazardous
site, the Public Health Official will then issue orders to the manager,
owner, or tenant of the premises to take corrective measures to prevent
high-risk sexual conduct from taking place within the premises and cause the
premises to be posted with a warning advising the public that the premises
have been declared a hazardous site.



            3.   If, within 30 days after issuance of the
orders to the manager, owner, or tenant of the hazardous site, the Public
Health Official determines that such corrective measures have not been
undertaken, the Public Health Official may:



               a.   Order the abatement of the hazardous
site as a public nuisance, which may be enforced by mandatory or prohibitory
injunction in a court of competent jurisdiction; or



               b.   Secure a court order for the closure of
the premises constituting the hazardous site until the premises, building, or
structure is in compliance with all provisions of this code of ordinances.



(2013 Code, § 10.78)  (Ord. 511, passed 3-5-1998)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter
for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty that may be imposed for
any crime that is a misdemeanor under this code of ordinances, including
state statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not
more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both. Notwithstanding
this division (A), the city in its discretion, may choose to prosecute any
violation of this chapter as a petty misdemeanor, in which case, the penalty
that may be imposed shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.



      (2)   The costs of prosecution may be added to the fine. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a
violation occurs or continues.



(2013 Code, § 10.99)



   (B)   Any violation of any provision of § 130.06 shall be punished
as a misdemeanor.



(2013 Code, § 10.29)



   (C)   A violation of any of the conditions of a permit under §
130.11 shall be cause for revocation of the permit. Sales without a permit or
sales after the revocation of a permit shall be punishable as a misdemeanor.



(2013 Code, § 10.38)



   (D)   Any violation of § 130.45 involving the operation of a motor
vehicle is a petty misdemeanor and, upon conviction, the violator shall be
punished by a fine of not to exceed $100, plus the costs of prosecution.
Every person who violates any other provision of § 130.45 is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than
$500, plus the costs of prosecution. Each act of violation and each day a
violation occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense.



(2013 Code, § 10.60)



   (E)   A violation of any condition of a permit under § 130.47 shall
be cause for revocation of the permit, Any parade or race conducted without a
permit is in violation of this code of ordinances; and anyone responsible for
organizing, sponsoring, or conducting such a parade or race will be held
punishable under this code of ordinances.



(2013 Code, § 10.63)



   (F)   A person violating any provision of § 130.68, or any person
who removes, destroys, or defaces warnings posted on premises by the Public
Health Official pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(2013 Code, § 10.78)



(Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 108, passed 11-18-1982; Ord. 145, passed
5-24-1984; Ord. 337, passed 7-23-1992; Ord. 357, passed 7-22-1993; Ord. 408,
passed 3-16-1995; Ord. 511, passed 3-5-1998; Ord. 562, passed 11-11-1999;
Ord. 581, passed 10-5-2000; Ord. 599, passed 6-14-2001; Ord. 629, passed
6-13-2002; Ord. 649, passed 12-26-2002; Ord. 693, passed 2-5-2004; Ord. 698,
passed 4-15-2004; Ord. 750, passed 3-30-2006)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   SUBDIVISIONS



      151.   ZONING



CHAPTER 150:  SUBDIVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   150.01   Title, purpose, and interpretation



   150.02   Definitions



   150.03   Subdivision review and requirements



   150.04   Classification of subdivisions



   150.05   Minor subdivisions



   150.06   Major subdivision approval process



   150.07   Pre-application meeting



   150.08   Preliminary plat approval process



   150.09   Final plat approval process



   150.10   Effect of preliminary and final approval



   150.11   Security options; security period, reduction in security,
and the like



   150.12   Submittal requirements for preliminary plat



   150.13   Submittal requirements for final plats



   150.14   Submittal requirements before filing final plat



   150.15   Fees



   150.16   Administration



   150.17   Subdivision regulation amendments



   150.18   Variances



   150.19   Appeals



   150.20   Nonconformities



   150.21   Recording without compliance with this chapter



   150.22   Public notice, neighborhood meetings, posting of signs and
other general rules




Improvements




   150.35   Developer construction improvement duties



   150.36   City may construct improvements



   150.37   Change in who constructs improvements



   150.38   Dedication of public improvements



   150.39   Timing of improvements



   150.40   Security options for improvements constructed by the
developer




Design Criteria




   150.55   Generally



   150.56   Grading



   150.57   Erosion control



   150.58   Storm sewer



   150.59   Sanitary sewer



   150.60   Utilities



   150.61   Street lights



   150.62   Streets and alleys



   150.63   Sidewalks and trails



   150.64   Lots and blocks



   150.65   Parks and dedications



   150.66   Landscaping



 



   150.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 150.01  TITLE, PURPOSE, AND INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Title. This chapter shall be known as, and may be referred to
as the “Subdivision Regulations” or “Subdivision Ordinance”. When
referred to herein it shall be known as “this chapter”.



   (B)   Purpose. This chapter is enacted for the following purposes:



      (1)   To protect and promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the city;



      (2)   To provide for the orderly, economic, and safe
development of land in accordance with the city’s comprehensive plan;



      (3)   To ensure adequate provision of transportation, sanitary
sewers, water, storm drainage, schools, parks, playgrounds, and other public
services and facilities;



      (4)   To promote the availability of housing affordable to
persons and families of all income levels; and



      (5)   To provide uniform application and review processes.



   (C)   Scope.



      (1)   General application. From the effective date of this
chapter, the subdivision of all land within the city shall take place in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, except as provided below.
The establishment of new land boundaries by a registered land survey is
considered the subdivision of land and must be in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   Optional subdivisions.



         (a)   Certain divisions of land may be made without
following the provisions of this chapter; however, the property owner may
elect to follow this chapter in order to obtain the benefits provided herein.



         (b)   This option is available to the following
divisions of land:



            1.   Division of 1 parcel of residentially zoned
land into 2 to 4 parcels, where all resulting parcels will be a minimum of 20
acres in area and 500 feet in width;



            2.   Division of 1 parcel of commercially or
industrially zoned land into 2 to 4 parcels, where all resulting parcels will
be a minimum of 5 acres in area and 300 feet in width;



            3.   Divisions creating cemetery lots;



            4.   Divisions resulting from court orders; and



            5.   Divisions resulting from the adjustment of a
lot line by the relocation of common boundary.



         (c)   If a property owner files an application for an
optional subdivision, then within 10 days after receipt of the application,
the Planner shall certify that the subdivision regulations are optional to
that particular division.



      (3)   Nonconforming subdivisions. Any existing subdivision of
land which was legally established, but is not in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter shall be regarded as nonconforming and may
continue in existence only for such period of time and under such conditions
as is provided for in § 150.20.



   (D)   Application of rules.



      (1)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, general welfare, and sound land
subdivision.



      (2)   Where any provision of this chapter is either more
restrictive or less restrictive than a comparable provision imposed by any
other code, ordinance, statute, or regulation of any kind, the more
restrictive provision, or the provision which imposes a higher standard or
requirement, shall prevail.



      (3)   No land shall be divided, combined, or subdivided in any
manner that is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter unless
otherwise provided by this chapter.



      (4)   No person shall install a new street, alley, or other
public improvement, except in conformity with this chapter.



      (5)   Words or terms defined in this chapter shall have the
meanings assigned to them unless such meaning is clearly contrary to the
intent of this chapter. The present tense shall include the past and future
tenses.



(2013 Code, § 12.01)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Definitions in Ch. 151 are adopted by reference and incorporated as
part of this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein. For
the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEVELOPER. The property owner or the property owner’s designee.



   IMPROVEMENT. The preparation of land for and the installation of
streets, street pavement, utilities, or other public facilities.



   LOT. An area, parcel, or tract of land which was created or is
recognized as a lot under this chapter.



   NONCONFORMITY. Any lot or final plat lawfully existing on the effective
date of this chapter which does not comply with all requirements of this
chapter or any amendments hereto.



   OVERSIZING. Constructing an improvement in a size larger than needed
for a particular development in order to accommodate needs outside the
boundary of the development.



   PARCEL. Any piece of land.



   PLANNER. The Director of Community Development or the Director’s
designee.



   PLAT. The drawing of a subdivision prepared for filing of record
pursuant to M.S. Ch. 505, as it may be amended from time to time.



   SECURITY. A financial guarantee to assure that improvements are
satisfactorily dedicated, constructed, installed, completed, and maintained,
at no cost to the city.



   STREET. A public right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians
and vehicles to abutting properties. A STREET may be of any of the following
types:



      (1)   ARTERIAL STREET. A street principally designed to carry
motor vehicles across, into, or out of the city.



      (2)   COLLECTOR STREET. A street principally designed to carry
motor vehicles from local streets to another COLLECTOR STREET or to an
arterial street.



      (3)   LOCAL STREET. A street principally designed to carry
motor vehicles from individual lots or parcels to a collector street.



   SUBDIVISION. The separation of a parcel under single ownership into 2
or more parcels, the combination of parcels, or the separation of a parcel
under single ownership into 2 or more long-term leasehold interests where the
creation of the leasehold interest necessitates the creation of streets or
alleys for residential, commercial, industrial, or other use.



(2013 Code, § 12.02)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.03  SUBDIVISION REVIEW AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Each subdivision shall establish the number, layout, and
location of lots, blocks, and parcels to be created; location of streets,
utilities, park and drainage facilities; and lands to be dedicated for public
use. Furthermore, any property to be subdivided which abuts a county road or
state highway must be submitted to the highway authority for review.



   (B)   The Highway Department shall be allowed a minimum of 30 days
to conduct its review and provide comments.



(2013 Code, § 12.03)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999; Ord. 617, passed
1-24-2002)



§ 150.04  CLASSIFICATION OF SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   Subdivisions are classified as minor or major.



      (1)   A minor subdivision may be used for making small changes
in lot lines and can be approved administratively.



      (2)   A major subdivision is for more complex changes and
requires several steps.



   (B)   Certain subdivisions may be made without following the
provisions of this chapter, as described in § 150.01(C)(2), but the property
owner may elect to follow this chapter in order to obtain the benefits
provided herein.



(2013 Code, § 12.04)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.05  MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   Definition. The following are minor subdivisions that may be
approved administratively:



      (1)   A lot is being divided into a maximum of 5 lots;



      (2)   A maximum of 5 lots are being combined into 4 or fewer
lots; or



      (3)   Where common boundaries between lots are being relocated.



   (B)   When prohibited. The Planner may not approve a minor
subdivision in the following situations:



      (1)   When the minor subdivision proposes the division of
property zoned for commercial, industrial, business park, or major recreation
use;



      (2)   Where the subdivision includes a change in existing
streets, alleys, water, sanitary or storm sewer, or other public improvements;



      (3)   Where additional right-of-way needs to be dedicated, and
the right-of-way has not previously been deeded to the city;



      (4)   Where easements need to be changed for the subdivision
and the appropriate changes have not been made through vacation and/or
deeding of easements to the city;



      (5)   Where new streets, utilities, or other public
improvements will be needed other than to directly serve the lots created and
to provide a direct connection to an existing and approved system; or



      (6)   Where the proposed minor subdivision involves unusual
elements or policy decisions that the Planner determines require detailed
review.



   (C)   Procedure. A minor subdivision shall be approved in compliance
with the following procedures.



      (1)   The developer shall submit an application along with all
required fees.



      (2)   The developer shall provide a survey or surveys showing
the lot or lots as they exist before the minor subdivision and the proposed
lot or lots. The developer shall provide an accurate legal description of the
proposed lot or lots. All lots created or changed must meet the design
standards and other requirements specified in this chapter upon approval of
the minor subdivision.



      (3)   The developer shall submit proof that any additional
easements required by the city have been granted and that any conflicting
easements have been vacated.



      (4)   The minor subdivision shall meet all requirements
specified in §§ 150.55 through 150.66, as applicable.



      (5)   When the minor subdivision is approved, the Planner will
cause it to be recorded.



(2013 Code, § 12.05)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999; Ord. 608, passed
8-30-2001; Ord. 625, passed 4-25-2002)



§ 150.06  MAJOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL PROCESS.



   Approval of a major subdivision requires approval of a preliminary
plat, then approval of a final plat.



(2013 Code, § 12.06)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.07  PRE-APPLICATION MEETING.



   Prior to submitting an application for preliminary plat approval, the
developer will meet with the Planner or Planner’s designee in a
pre-application meeting. In this meeting general concerns and the general
concept of the proposed subdivision can be discussed.



(2013 Code, § 12.07)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.08  PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL PROCESS.



   (A)   Initial submittal. Prior to submitting the formal application
for preliminary plat review, the developer shall file 5 copies of a
preliminary plat drawing and related documentation with the Planner.



   (B)   Review.



      (1)   Review for compliance with submittal requirements. The
Planner shall review the drawing and documents to ascertain that they meet
all submittal requirements specified in § 150.12. If the drawing and
documents do not meet all submittal requirements identified in § 150.12,
then the developer shall be notified of the items that are missing or
inadequate within 10 working days.



      (2)   Review for compliance with design criteria. Once a
drawing and documents are determined to meet all submittal requirements, the
Planner shall review the drawing and documents for compliance with the design
criteria in §§ 150.55 through 150.66. If the drawing and documents do not
comply with the design criteria in §§ 150.55 through 150.66, then the
developer shall be notified of the items that do not comply.



      (3)   Outside review. Once a drawing and documents are
determined by the Planner to substantially comply with the design criteria,
the developer shall submit 20 copies of the submittal materials for outside
review. The Planner may seek comments on the drawing and documents from
appropriate governmental entities and agencies, utilities, and others.



      (4)   Determination of complete application. Upon receipt of
these 20 copies, the drawing and documents shall be considered a complete
application for a preliminary plat. The Planner shall forward the application
for a preliminary plat to the Planning Commission for consideration.



   (C)   Planning Commission review.



      (1)   Public hearing.



         (a)   A public hearing shall be scheduled before the
Planning Commission on the application for a preliminary plat. Notice of the
time and place of the hearing shall be published in the official newspaper at
least 10 days before the day of the hearing.



         (b)   At the public hearing, all persons interested
shall be given an opportunity to be heard.



      (2)   Planning Commission recommendation.



         (a)   Decision. At the close of the public hearing, upon
discussion and review, the Planning Commission shall recommend approval,
approval with conditions, disapproval of the preliminary plat, shall
otherwise forward the plat for consideration to the City Council, or may
table the matter or continue the public hearing. If disapproval is
recommended, the reasons for disapproval shall be stated.



         (b)   Grounds for decision.



            1.   The Planning Commission shall base its
recommendation on the purposes and requirements of this chapter on comments
received from staff, other governmental entities and agencies, utilities, the
public, and the developer.



            2.   In making its recommendation, the Planning
Commission shall consider the following factors:



               a.   Whether the layout of streets, lots,
utilities, and public improvements, and their relation to the topography of
the land, reflect good planning and development for the city;



               b.    Whether the subdivision preserves the
site’s important existing natural features;



               c.   Whether the proposed plat will
facilitate the use and future development of the adjoining lands;



               d.   Whether the subdivision can be
economically served with streets, public services, and utilities;



               e.    Whether all applicable provisions of
this code of ordinances are met; and



               f.   Whether the subdivision is in
conformance with any official map of the city and the comprehensive plan.



   (D)   City Council review. When the City Council receives a
preliminary plat for consideration with the Planning Commission
recommendation, the City Council shall approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove the preliminary plat based upon the grounds for decision set forth
above and the purposes of this chapter. The City Council may elect to approve
only a portion of a preliminary plat, and disapprove the remainder. The City
Council has final authority to approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove a preliminary plat.



   (E)   Time limitation.



      (1)   Time limit. The City Council shall approve or disapprove
a preliminary plat within 60 days following delivery of a complete
application, unless the city has approved a 60-day extension for good cause
shown. An extension beyond 120 days may only be approved if requested or
agreed to by the developer.



      (2)   Failure to approve within the time limit. If the City
Council fails to approve or disapprove a preliminary plat in accordance with
division (E)(1) above, the preliminary plat shall be deemed approved, and
upon demands the city shall execute a certificate to that effect.



(2013 Code, § 12.08)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.09  FINAL PLAT APPROVAL PROCESS.



   (A)   Based on preliminary plat. After the approval of, or during
review of the preliminary plat, prior to the expiration of the approval
period described in § 150.10, the developer may submit a final plat drawing
and related documentation for all or a part of the land covered in the
preliminary plat. If the final plat is limited to a portion of the
preliminary plat, that portion must conform to all requirements of this
chapter.



   (B)   Initial submittal. Prior to submitting the formal application
for final plat review, the developer shall submit 5 copies of a final plat
drawing and supporting documentation.



   (C)   Review.



      (1)   Review for compliance with submittal requirements. The
Planner shall review the drawing and documents to ascertain that they meet
all submittal requirements specified in § 150.13 and begin review to
determine whether the final plat is in substantial conformity with the
preliminary plat and satisfies any conditions specified in the preliminary
plat. If the drawing and documents do not contain all submittal requirements
identified in § 150.13, then the developer shall be notified in writing of
the items that are missing or inadequate within 10 working days.



      (2)   Review for compliance with conditions. Once the drawing
and documents are determined to meet all submittal requirements, the Planner
shall continue to review the drawing and documents for substantial conformity
with the preliminary plat, conformity with this chapter, and satisfaction of
any conditions specified in the preliminary plat. If the Planner determines
that the drawing and documents are not in substantial conformity with the
preliminary plat or do not satisfy the conditions specified in the
preliminary plat, then the developer shall be notified of the items that are
not in conformity or conditions that have not been met. The developer may
request the Planning Commission to rule on the issue of substantial
conformity. Their ruling shall be final.



      (3)   Outside review. Once the drawing and documents are
determined to substantially conform with the preliminary plat, this chapter,
and to satisfy any conditions specified in the preliminary plat, as
determined by the Planner, the developer shall submit 20 copies as required
by the Planner for outside review. The Planner may seek comments on the
drawing and documents from appropriate governmental entities and agencies,
utilities, and others. If the drawing and documents are not in substantial
conformity with the preliminary plat, do not satisfy the conditions specified
in the preliminary plat, or do not comply with state law or regulation, then
the developer shall be notified of the items that do not comply.



      (4)   Determination of complete application. Once the drawing
and documents meet all submittal requirements, are in substantial conformity
with the preliminary plat, and satisfy all preliminary plat conditions, based
on internal and outside review, the developer shall submit 20 copies of the
revised drawing and documents. Upon receipt of these 20 copies, the drawing
and documents shall be considered a complete application for a final plat.
The Planner shall forward the application for a final plat to the City
Council for consideration.



   (D)   City Council review. The City Council shall review the
application for a final plat for compliance with requirements of this code of
ordinances. The City Council may approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove the final plat. If the City Council determines that the final plat
is not in substantial conformity with the preliminary plat, the City Council
shall disapprove the plat. The City Council may elect to approve only a
portion of a final plat, and disapprove the remainder. The City Council has
final authority to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove a final
plat.



   (E)   Time limitation.



      (1)   Time limit. The City Council shall approve or disapprove
a final plat within 60 days following receipt of a complete application. The
City Council may extend the period an additional 60 days for cause shown.
Written notice of the extension must be provided to the applicant. An
extension of this time period beyond 120 days may be approved if requested by
or agreed to by the developer.



      (2)   Failure to approve within time limit. If the City
Council fails to approve or disapprove a final plat within the 60-day period,
and if the developer has complied with all conditions and requirements, the
final plat shall be deemed approved, and upon demand the city shall execute a
certificate to that effect.



   (F)   Recording.



      (1)   No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall
be made in any final plat of a subdivision or any other approved division
after approval has been given under the provisions of this chapter, except as
required in the conditions set by the City Council or if authorized by the
Planner to correct nonsubstantive errors.



      (2)   After approval of a final plat by the City Council, the
developer shall submit the following to the Planner:



         (a)   Three paper copies of the construction plans;



         (b)   A copy of the subdivision plat drawing on disk in
an electronic format approved by the City Engineer, or shall pay a drafting
fee as specified under the current fee schedule so that the city may secure
its own electronic copy;



         (c)   Copies of any required permits;



         (d)   Evidence of title, as described in § 150.15;



         (e)   The park dedication fee as set forth in § 150.65;



         (f)   Security for improvements as required under §
150.11 and §§ 150.35 through 150.40;



         (g)   A signed developer’s agreement, if required
under § 150.14(C);



         (h)   Trunk sanitary sewer fee and other applicable fees
for public improvements; and



         (i)   A reduced Mylar of the plat at a scale of 400
feet: 1 foot.



      (3)   Five Mylar (or other prints consistent with county
recording standards) copies of the final plat shall be signed by all parties
holding an ownership interest in the property being platted, the Mayor, the
City Attorney, and the City Clerk.



      (4)   The City Clerk shall not sign the final plat until all
conditions of approval have been met, the developer’s agreement (if
required) has been executed, and the City Attorney has approved title.



      (5)   If the plat is not recorded within 30 days after
approval by the City Council, the City Clerk may notify the City Attorney,
who may require additional proof of good title.



      (6)   Each final plat shall be recorded with the County
Recorder/Registrar of Title.



      (7)   After the plat has been recorded, an additional
reproducible Mylar print of the final plat shall be filed with the Planner,
along with 2 paper copies of the final plat.



(2013 Code, § 12.09)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999; Ord. 805, passed
9-11-2008)



§ 150.10  EFFECT OF PRELIMINARY AND FINAL APPROVAL.



   (A)   Approval period. City Council’s approval of a preliminary
plat shall remain in effect for a period of 2 years from the date of
approval. City Council’s approval of a final plat shall remain in effect
for a period of 2 years from the date of approval. Prior to recording of a
plat, the developer may withdraw the plat, in which case City Council’s
approval of the plat is void.



   (B)   Extension of approval. Upon request by the developer, the City
Council may extend the approval period for a preliminary of final plat,
subject to all applicable performance conditions and requirements. A request
for an extension of approval must be filed on or before the expiration date
of the preliminary or final plat. If the approval period has expired, the
City Council may require a new submittal unless substantial physical activity
or investment has occurred in reasonable reliance on the approved plat and
the developer will suffer substantial financial damage as a consequence of a
requirement to submit a new submittal.



   (C)   Automatic extension for preliminary plats. The approval period
for a preliminary plat shall be automatically extended for an additional 12
months each time the City Council approves a final plat for any portion of
the land included in the preliminary plat.



   (D)   Rights during approval periods. During the approval period set
forth in division (A) above, unless the developer and the City Council agree
otherwise, no amendment to a comprehensive plan or other ordinance shall
apply to or affect the use, development density, lot size, lot layout, or
dedication or platting required or permitted by the approved plat.



(2013 Code, § 12.10)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.11  SECURITY OPTIONS; SECURITY PERIOD, REDUCTION IN SECURITY, AND THE
LIKE.



   (A)   Letter of credit. A letter of credit shall be payable to the
city. Letters of credit must be from a state or federally chartered bank or
savings and loan association, insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation, that has an office in the state or a subsidiary of such bank or
savings association with an office in the state.



(2013 Code, § 12.17)



   (B)   Security period.



      (1)   Period. Security shall be for an initial period
estimated by the developer and approved by the City Engineer, and shall be at
least 30 days longer than the time necessary for completion of all
improvements. The developer shall extend or renew the security as necessary
to provide security until all improvements have been completed and accepted
by the City Engineer.



      (2)   Extension or renewal of security. Security shall be
automatically renewable.



      (3)   Completion. Completion of improvements shall occur
within the time frame specified in the signed developer’s agreement.



(2013 Code, § 12.18)



   (C)   Reduction in security.



      (1)   When it may be reduced. Upon completion or partial
completion of the improvements and upon request by the developer, the city
may release all or a portion of the security. In no event shall the security
be reduced below the full amount of any unpaid inspection and administration
costs, plus 100% of the amount that the City Engineer deems necessary to
complete all remaining improvements. In addition to those amounts, 25% of the
original security amount must also be withheld unless the City Engineer
determines that a lesser percentage is sufficient to ensure satisfactory
completion of the remaining improvements.



      (2)   When it may be released. Security may be released in the
following circumstances and when the developer complies with division (C)(3)
below:



         (a)   Security may be released for any improvement which
the City Council has agreed to construct under M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be
amended from time to time;



         (b)   1.   Security may be released for any
improvement for which the developer has provided cash as payment in full for
the developer’s share of the cost of the improvement, at 125%, plus
engineering and administrative costs, which improvement cannot be timely
constructed by the developer, or which improvement the City Council
determines is not appropriate for immediate development due to incompatible
grades, future planning, inadequate or lack of connecting facilities, or
other reasons.



            2.   If the amount of security estimated for
completion of the improvement exceeds the actual costs, the city shall return
any excess to the developer, with interest, upon completion of the
improvement.



         (c)   Security may be released upon written request from
the developer for any improvements when:



            1.   The City Engineer determines that all
required improvements have been satisfactorily completed in accordance with
approved construction plans and specifications and the approved SWPPP;



            2.   The City Engineer determines that all
required improvements have been satisfactorily completed in accordance with
the city design criteria and the city general specifications and standard
detail plates for street and utility construction at the time the plans were
approved;



            3.   SPUC determines that all required
improvements have been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the SPUC
Water Policy Manual at the time the plans were approved;



            4.   The developer submits to the City Engineer a
detailed reproducible drawing, including an electronic form outlined in the
city design criteria, of the improvements showing the details as required by
the city design criteria and Ch. 151 at the time the plans were approved;



            5.   The developer submits sanitary sewer
televising videos for all sanitary sewer improvements associated with the
project; and



            6.   The developer is in compliance with division
(C)(3) below.



      (3)   Security for maintenance.



         (a)   The developer is responsible to provide the city
with a 1-year security in the amount of 60% of the city-approved total public
improvement costs which may include, but are not limited to, the total
street, utility, and park improvement costs.



         (b)   The security must run from the date of final
acceptance of all public improvements. At the time of final acceptance, if
the city determines the approved plans and specifications were not strictly
adhered to or that the work was performed without adequate city inspections,
the developer agrees to increase the length of the security up to a maximum
of 5 years as determined by the City Engineer.



         (c)   The security may be any security listed as an
option in § 150.40 except that a maintenance bond must be provided in place
of a performance bond



(2013 Code, § 12.19)



   (D)   When security may be drawn upon. The city may draw upon the
security whenever it appears that the developer will not comply with the
conditions of the final plat, pay the administrative and inspection fee, or
comply with the requirements of this chapter, including completion of all
improvements prior to expiration of the security. The city shall make
reasonable efforts to notify the developer prior to making any draw.



(Code, § 12.20)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999; Ord. 651, passed 1-16-2003;
Ord. 752, passed 3-30-2006; Ord. 805, passed 9-11-2008)



§ 150.12  SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PRELIMINARY PLANS.



   (A)   Documents required.



      (1)   The preliminary plat shall include the entire land area
owned or controlled by the developer, unless the excluded land is of a size
described as an optional subdivision under § 150.01(C)(2).



      (2)   A developer shall submit the following documents to the
Planner:



         (a)   A completed application form;



         (b)   A general narrative description of the project;



         (c)   Fees as specified in the adopted city fee schedule;



         (d)   A description of any requested variances;



         (e)   A wetland delineation report when applicable;



         (f)   When applicable to the land being subdivided, the
developer shall submit the following documentation:



            1.   Evidence that a county highway permit will be
granted, if the site will have access to a county road;



            2.   A landscape plan meeting the landscaping and
tree preservation requirements of § 151.031; and



            3.   In rural service areas soil percolation
tests, soil borings and sewage treatment design for 2 sites per proposed lot,
conforming to the testing procedures of the city sewage disposal and
treatment code.



         (g)   All required drawings as specified in division (B)
below.



   (B)   Drawings required. In submitting a preliminary plat for
consideration, the developer shall submit the following drawings which are
described in detail below. The number of copies necessary for submittal is to
be determined by the Zoning Administrator and/or the City Engineer:



      (1)   Copies of a drawing of the preliminary plat;



      (2)   Copies of an existing conditions map;



      (3)   Copies of a grading and erosion control plan;



      (4)   Copies of a street and utilities plan;



      (5)   Copies of a stormwater management plan; and



      (6)   Copies of other documentation as deemed appropriate or
necessary by the Planner.



   (C)   All drawings.



      (1)   Each drawing submitted by the developer must be on paper
which does not exceed 36 inches by 22 inches, unless otherwise approved in
advance by the City Engineer. In addition, the developer shall provide 1
paper copy of each drawing on paper which is 11 inches by 17 inches.



      (2)   Each drawing shall contain the following items:



         (a)   A north arrow;



         (b)   A graphic scale within a minimum scale on 1 inch
equals 100 feet for parcels under 20 acres. For parcels larger than 20 acres,
the Planner may authorize a smaller scale; provided, that the plat must be
easily interpreted at that scale. A scale of 1 inch equals 50 feet is
preferred;



         (c)   The date of the original drawing and all
revisions; and



         (d)   Existing and proposed street rights-of-way.



   (D)   Preliminary plat drawing. In addition to the items listed in
division (C) above, a preliminary plat drawing shall contain the following
items:



      (1)   A title block containing the name of the subdivision,
“Shakopee, Minnesota”, and “Preliminary Plat”;



      (2)   The boundary of the subdivision to scale, showing
existing permanent monuments, angles, bearings, and distances;



      (3)   The property lines and property identification (PID)
numbers of all parcels of land within 100 feet of the parcel proposed for
subdivision;



      (4)   The name and address of the developer;



      (5)   The name and address of any design professional involved
in the preparation of the plat, including the engineer, land surveyor,
architect, planner, and the like;



      (6)   A block of zoning information including the following:



         (a)   The current zoning of the land;



         (b)   The total number of buildable lots;



         (c)   The total number of outlots;



         (d)   The total acreage included in the preliminary
plat, in tenths of an acre;



         (e)   The total acreage of street right-of-way, in
tenths of an acre;



         (f)   The total acreage of areas intended to be
dedicated for public use, other than streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, and
utility easements;



         (g)   The total acreage of outlots;



         (h)   The minimum lot depth in the subdivision;



         (i)   The minimum lot depth under Ch. 151; and



         (j)   The minimum lot width in the subdivision at the
building setback.



      (7)   Proposed lot and block numbers;



      (8)   The exterior dimensions of each lot;



      (9)   The area of each lot in square feet;



      (10)   The location and dimensions of any existing or proposed
streets;



      (11)   The proposed street names;



      (12)   The location and dimensions of any existing or proposed
easements, and the type of easement;



      (13)   The location and dimensions of any existing or proposed
sidewalks or trails;



      (14)   The location of any existing structures which are
intended to remain after final plat recording; and



      (15)   Building setback lines.



   (E)   Existing conditions map drawings. In addition to the items
listed in division (C) above, an existing conditions map drawing shall
contain the following items:



      (1)   The location and dimensions of any previously platted
streets;



      (2)   The location and dimensions of driveways or other curb
cuts;



      (3)   A location map of the subject property at a minimum
scale of 1 inch equals 2,000 feet;



      (4)   The property lines and PID numbers of all parcels of
land within 100 feet of the parcel proposed for subdivision;



      (5)   Any existing infrastructure, such as sanitary sewer,
storm sewer, watermains, culverts, or other underground facilities;



      (6)   The location and dimensions of any wetlands;



      (7)   The location and dimensions of any existing easements
and right-of-way;



      (8)   Contours of the land at two-foot intervals;



      (9)   The location and size of all trees which are over 6
inches in diameter, measured at 6 feet off the ground, with all such trees
proposed for removal dearly identified. Trees in a delineated woodland area,
which will not be disturbed, need not be individually identified;



      (10)   The location and perimeter of all floodplains;



      (11)   The location and perimeter of all shoreland areas;



      (12)   The location of any existing wells;



      (13)   The location and dimensions of any known contaminated
soils areas;



      (14)   The location of any existing septic systems;



      (15)   The location and dimensions of any existing foundations
or retaining walls;



      (16)   The location and dimensions of any known fill areas;



      (17)   The location and ordinary high water mark of any lake,
stream, or other watercourse; and



      (18)   The location of any power transmission poles and towers.



   (F)   Grading and erosion control plan. In addition to the items
listed in division (C) above, a grading and erosion control plan drawing
shall contain the following items:



      (1)   Existing contours at two-foot intervals up to 100 feet
off-site, shown by light dashed lines;



      (2)   Proposed contours at two-foot intervals up to 100 feet
off-site, shown by solid lines;



      (3)   Spot and finished elevations at all property corners;



      (4)   Proposed floor elevations;



      (5)   Existing floor elevations for all structures;



      (6)   The lowest final grade elevation for all lots adjacent
to stormwater facilities;



      (7)   Street grade changes and percentage of grade;



      (8)   Ordinary high water (OHW) level of all ponding
facilities, wetlands, lakes, streams, and rivers, all of which also shall be
identified and labeled;



      (9)   Bench mark listing location and elevation;



      (10)   Grading and erosion control information, including the
following:



         (a)   Maximum driveway grade;



         (b)   Maximum ditch grade;



         (c)   Minimum ditch grade;



         (c)   Maximum slope grade;



         (d)   Maximum street grade;



         (e)   Minimum street grade; and



         (f)   Maximum street grade within 50 feet of a street
intersection.



      (11)   Delineation of wetlands on the site;



      (12)   Erosion control features including detail drawings as
required in the erosion control plan, and lot benching details;



      (13)   An erosion control statement as required by the design
criteria;



      (14)   Name, registration number, and signature of the
professional engineer or surveyor, and



      (15)   Storm sewer schematic to 100 feet off-site, showing
both proposed and existing.



   (G)   Street and utilities plan drawing. In addition to the items
listed in division (C) above, a street and utilities plan drawing shall
contain the following items:



      (1)   A sanitary sewer schematic to 100 feet off-site, showing
both proposed and existing, including the following:



         (a)   Rim and invert elevations;



         (b)   Pipe size, grade, and material; and



         (c)   Manhole size and type.



      (2)   Sanitary sewer information, including the following:



         (a)   Maximum length between manholes; and



         (b)   Maximum depth of manhole as measured from the top
of the rim elevation to the sewer invert elevation.



      (3)   Storm sewer schematic to 100 feet off-site, showing both
proposed and existing, including the following:



         (a)   Rim and invert elevations of structures and catch
basins; and



         (b)   Pipe size and material.



      (4)   Storm sewer information, including the following:



         (a)   Maximum length between manholes;



         (b)   Minimum depth of manhole as measured from the top
of the rim elevation to the sewer invert elevation; and



         (c)   Normal and high water elevations for any pond,
shown on the plan view.



      (5)   Typical roadway sections;



      (6)   Drainage and utility easements;



      (7)   Name, registration number, and signature of the
professional engineer;



      (8)   Sanitary sewer profiles;



      (9)   Storm sewer profiles; and



      (10)   Street layout including curb lines.



   (H)   Stormwater management plan drawing. In addition to the items
listed in division (C) above, a stormwater management plan drawing shall
contain the following items:



      (1)   Drainage area map, showing the following:



         (a)   A delineation of existing and proposed drainage
sub-areas, including any larger tract or basin of which the subject is a part;



         (b)   All proposed ponding areas, with the normal and
high water elevations; and



         (c)   Off-site drainage volumes and rates for each
sub-area.



      (2)   Drainage calculations, including the following:



         (a)   Total stormwater runoff from the site and entering
the site;



         (b)   Gross area of the subdivision;



         (c)   National Urban Runoff Program or water quality
pond volume and sediment storage volume; and



         (d)   Pond sizing computations.



      (3)   Existing contours at two-foot intervals up to 100 feet
off-site, shown by light dashed lines;



      (4)   Proposed contours at two-foot intervals up to 100 feet
off-site, shown by solid lines;



      (5)   Normal and high water levels of all ponding facilities,
wetlands, lakes, streams, and rivers, all of which also shall be identified
and labeled;



      (6)   Bench mark listing location and elevation;



      (7)   Delineation of wetlands on the site;



      (8)   Name, registration number, and signature of the
professional engineer;



      (9)   Directional arrows showing lot and site drainage
patterns;



      (10)   A narrative and summary of the stormwater calculations;



      (11)   Emergency overflow routes and elevations from all
ponding areas and wetlands for a 100-year storm;



      (12)   Total pond volume required and available for each pond;



      (13)   National Urban Runoff Program or water quality pond
volume required and available for each pond;



      (14)   Storm sewer schematic to 100 feet off-site, showing
both proposed and existing storm sewers; and



      (15)   A delineation of the floodway, flood fringe, and
floodplain.



(2013 Code, § 12.21)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999; Ord. 710, passed
7-29-2004)



§ 150.13  SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS FOR FINAL PLATS.



   (A)   Documents required. A developer shall submit the following
documents to the Planner;



      (1)   A completed application form;



      (2)   A fee as specified in the fee schedule; and



      (3)   All required drawings and additional documentation
specified below.



   (B)   Drawings required. In submitting a final plat for
consideration, the developer shall submit the following drawings which are
described in detail below, the number of copies necessary for submittal is to
be determined by the Zoning Administrator:



      (1)   Copies of a drawing of the final plat;



      (2)   Copies of a drawing of the area plat;



      (3)   Paper copies and 1 autocad copy of construction plans
for all public improvements;



      (4)   When applicable to the land being subdivided, the
developer shall submit the following documentation:



         (a)   Construction plans for all public improvements,
including, but not limited to, the following:



            1.    Streets, sewer mains, storm drainage
facilities, sidewalks, trails, street lights, and other public improvements
governed by city design criteria; and



            2.   Watermains and other public improvements
governed by city public utilities design criteria.



         (b)   Any required permits or approvals, including, but
not limited to, the following:



            1.   State Department of Transportation permit to
work in the right-of-way;



            2.   County permit to work in the right-of-way;



            3.   State Pollution Control Agency national
pollutant discharge elimination system permit;



            4.   State Pollution Control Agency sanitary sewer
extension permit; and



            5.   City street cut permit for utility
installation.



         (c)   A petition for improvements intended to be
constructed by the city and specially assessed under M.S. Ch. 429, as it may
be amended from time to time, if desired by the developer.



      (5)   Copies of other documentation as deemed appropriate or
necessary by the Planner.



   (C)   All drawings.



      (1)   Each drawing submitted by the developer must be on paper
which is a minimum 11 inches by 17 inches or a maximum of thirty 36 inches by
22 inches, unless otherwise approved in advance by the City Engineer.



      (2)   Each drawing shall contain the following items:



         (a)   A north arrow;



         (b)    A graphic scale with a minimum scale of 1 inch
equals 100 feet for parcels under 20 acres. For parcels larger than 20 acres,
the Planner may authorize a smaller scale; provided, that the plat must be
easily interpreted at that scale. A scale of 1 inch equals 50 feet is
preferred;



         (c)   Proposed lot lines; and



         (d)   Existing and proposed street rights-of-way.



   (D)   Final plat drawing. In addition to the items listed in
division (C) above, a final plat drawing shall be submitted on autocad and
shall contain the following items:



      (1)   A title block containing the name of the subdivision,
“Shakopee, Minnesota”, and “Final Plat”;



      (2)   The legal description of the entire parcel proposed for
final platting;



      (3)   The boundary of the subdivision to scale, showing
angles, bearings, distances, and either showing permanent monuments or a
statement that all monuments will be set within 1 year after recording;



      (4)    A sworn certification by a registered land surveyor,
that the plat is a correct representation of a survey made by that surveyor,
that all distances are correctly shown, that all monuments have been or will
be correctly placed in the ground as shown or stated, and that the outside
boundary lines are correctly designated on the plat;



      (5)   The name and adjacent boundary lines of any adjoining
platted lands;



      (6)   Lot and block numbers;



      (7)   The exterior dimensions of each lot;



      (8)   The location and dimensions of any existing or proposed
streets, alleys, trails, and other public areas;



      (9)   The proposed street names;



      (10)   The location and dimensions of any existing or proposed
permanent easements and the type of easement;



      (11)   A notarized statement by the property owner and any
mortgage holder dedicating all streets, alleys, trails, easements, and other
public areas as follows: “Streets, alleys, trails, easements, and other
public areas shown on this plat are hereby dedicated to the public”;



      (12)   Space for certificates of approval to be filled in by
the signatures of the Mayor, City Attorney, and City Clerk, in the following
form.

 


Approved by the City of Shakopee, Minnesota, this____ day of______, 20__ .



________________
Mayor



ATTEST:

______________________________
City Clerk


 

I certify that I have examined evidence of title for this plat and recommend
this plat for approval.

 


_______________
City Attorney




 



   (E)   Area plat drawing. In addition to the items listed in division
(C) above, an area plat drawing shall contain the following items:



      (1)   The name and address of the developer;



      (2)   The name and address of any design profession involved
in the preparation of the plat (including the engineer, land surveyor,
architect, planner, and the like);



      (3)   The date of the original drawing and all revisions;



      (4)   A block of zoning information including the following:



         (a)   The current zoning of the land;



         (b)   The total number of buildable lots;



         (c)   The total number of outlots;



         (d)   The total acreage included in the final plat, in
tenths of an acre;



         (e)   The total acreage of street right-of-way, in
tenths of an acre;



         (f)   The total acreage of areas intended to be
dedicated for public use, other than streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, and
utility easements;



         (g)   The total acreage of outlots;



         (h)   The minimum lot depth in the subdivision;



         (i)   The minimum lot depth under the zoning ordinance;
and



         (j)   The minimum lot width in the subdivision at the
front building setback.



      (5)   The area of each lot in square feet;



      (6)   The property lines and PID numbers of all parcels of
land within 100 feet of the parcel proposed for subdivision;



      (7)   The location and dimensions of any existing or proposed
temporary easements, and the type of easement;



      (8)   The location and dimensions of any existing or proposed
sidewalks or trails not otherwise shown in an easement;



      (9)   The location of any existing structures which are
intended to remain after final plat recording; and



      (10)   Building setback lines.



   (F)   Common interest community subdivisions. In addition to the
items listed above, in common interest community subdivisions, the developer
shall provide the following:



      (1)   Evidence that perpetual access is provided to each unit;



      (2)   Evidence that a perpetual easement or other access is
provided for utilities to each unit;



      (3)   Evidence that a perpetual easement or other egress is
provided for storm water drainage from each unit; and



      (4)   Evidence that perpetual maintenance of common areas is
provided for.



(2013 Code, § 12.22)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999; Ord. 710, passed
7-29-2004)



§ 150.14  SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS BEFORE FILING FINAL PLAT.



   (A)   Evidence of title. The developer shall submit to the City
Attorney evidence of title to the property. This is required in order to
allow the City Attorney to determine whether the city is acquiring clear
title to any property being dedicated, such as streets, parks, and easements.
Evidence of title can be either an abstract of title continued to date, or a
registered property abstract. In those instances where an abstract of title
or registered property abstract is lost or otherwise not available, the
developer shall submit evidence of title satisfactory to the City Attorney.



   (B)   Reformation of mortgages. If there is an existing mortgage on
the property being subdivided, the developer must submit evidence that the
legal description on any mortgages have been reformed to match lots and
blocks of the plat.



   (C)   Developer’s agreement.



      (1)   If security needs to be provided for any improvements
under § 150.10 and §§ 150.35 through 150.40, the developer shall enter
into a developer’s agreement with the city prior to filing the final plat.
The developer’s agreement shall identify who is constructing each
improvement and identify the security being provided for construction and
maintenance.



      (2)   Conditions imposed by the City Council in its approval
of the final plat may be included in the developer’s agreement, along with
any other appropriate provisions. Any provisions included in an executed
developer’s agreement shall supersede the provisions of applicable portions
of this code of ordinances.



      (3)   The developer’s agreement shall dictate the number and
timing of building permit issuance within the final plat and shall allow for
a hold harmless provision regarding the city, its agents, officers, and
employees.



(2013 Code, § 12.23)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999; Ord. 805, passed
9-11-2008)



§ 150.15  FEES.



   The developer shall pay the city administrative and inspection fees
consistent with the fees established annually by the City Council. These fees
shall be based on a percentage of the estimated cost of the improvements. All
engineering and inspection fees are due prior to inspection, if the final
plat for the property has not been recorded. If the final plat is to be
recorded, then 1/2 of the fees are due prior to recording the final plat, and
the other 1/2 may be included in the security and must be paid prior to the
time of acceptance of the final improvements. Fees shall be based upon the
most recent fees as established yearly by Council for the city.



(2013 Code, § 12.39)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.16  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Enforcing officer. This chapter shall be administered and
enforced by the Planner or Planner’s designee in accordance with its terms.



   (B)   Duties of the Planner. The Planner’s duties shall include
the following:



      (1)   Administer all applications under this chapter;



      (2)   Serve as staff advisor to the Planning Commission and
the City Council;



      (3)   Prepare reports and information for the Planning
Commission and the City Council, and attend their meetings and participate in
their hearings and discussions;



      (4)   Maintain records of all preliminary plats, final plats,
minor subdivisions, variances, appeals, and other matters regulated by this
chapter;



      (5)   Determine that all building permits comply with the
terms of this chapter;



      (6)   Institute appropriate enforcement proceedings and
actions against violators; and



      (7)   Perform such other functions as may be necessary to
enforce and administer this chapter.



   (C)   Notice. Failure to give notice or to give adequate notice of
proceedings under this chapter, when such is required by this chapter, shall
not invalidate any proceedings; provided, that a good faith attempt has been
made to comply with the notice requirement.



   (D)   Fees. The fees required by this chapter shall be those
specified in the most recent fee schedule adopted by the City Council. Fees
are payable at the time a drawing and documents are submitted to initiate a
preliminary or final plat, or upon submission of an application for any other
procedure governed by this chapter. No application shall be deemed to be
complete until the fee has been paid. The fee may be waived by the City
Council in the case of applications filed in the public interest by the
Planning Commission or City Council.



(2013 Code, § 12.40)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.17  SUBDIVISION REGULATION AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Initiation. An amendment to the subdivision regulations may be
initiated only by the City Council or by the Planning Commission. All
amendments shall be consistent with the purposes of this chapter.



   (B)   Criteria for granting a subdivision regulations amendment. The
City Council may approve an amendment to the subdivision regulations
amendment when it finds that 1 or more of the following criteria have been
met:



      (1)   The original subdivision regulations ordinance is in
error;



      (2)   Significant changes in community goals and policies have
taken place;



      (3)   Significant changes in city-wide or neighborhood
development patterns have occurred; or



      (4)   The comprehensive plan requires a different provision.



   (C)   Planning Commission recommendations. The Planning Commission
shall review each proposed amendment to the subdivision regulations, and
submit its recommendation to the City Council.



   (D)   City Council action. After receipt of the recommendation of
the Planning Commission, the City Council shall consider and act on the
amendment.



   (E)   Reapplication. No amendment which is denied wholly or in part
by the City Council shall be resubmitted for a period of 6 months from the
date of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or change of conditions.
Each reapplication shall be considered a new application.



(2013 Code, § 12.41)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.18  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Unusual hardship. The City Council may vary the subdivision
regulations as they apply to specific properties where an unusual hardship
exists on the land or where the City Council has previously granted
variations from this chapter as a part of a separate planned unit development
(PUD) application and review. Prior to Council action, the Planning
Commission shall have reviewed the application and approved, approved with
conditions, or denied the application. Failure of the Planning Commission to
make a decision, after a written request to do so at a specifically
designated meeting, shall constitute a denial.



   (B)   Specific grounds for granting variances.



      (1)   Variances will be granted only when the City Council
finds that exceptional circumstances exist or practical difficulties will
result from strict compliance with the subdivision regulations, or that the
purposes of the subdivision regulations may be served to a greater extent by
an alternative proposal. In determining whether to grant a variance, the City
Council may consider any factor demonstrating that strict compliance with the
subdivision regulations would be unreasonable, impractical, or not feasible
under the particular circumstances.



      (2)   In making its determination, the City Council may
consider any relevant factor, including, but not limited to, the following:



         (a)   The variance will not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of the subdivision regulations;



         (b)   The purposes and intent of this chapter may be
equally served by the alternative proposal;



         (c)   The granting of the variance will not be
detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare, or injurious to other
property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located;



         (d)   The conditions upon which the request for a
variance are based are not generally applicable to other property in the city;



         (e)   The particular physical surroundings, shape, or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved; and



         (f)   The variance will not in any manner vary the
provisions of the zoning ordinance, comprehensive plan, or any official map.



   (C)   Application. An application for a variance shall be filed with
the Planner or Planner’s designee on the appropriate forms stating the
unusual hardship claimed and the specific relief requested.



   (D)   Submission with preliminary plat.



      (1)   Request(s) for a variance under this chapter shall be
submitted with the application for preliminary plat approval.



      (2)   An application submitted independent of a preliminary
plat must meet all submittal requirements for a preliminary plat, except
those waived by the Planner as unnecessary due to the specific nature of the
variance requested.



   (E)   Decision. Upon recommendation by the Planning Commission, the
City Council may grant or deny a variance. Variances may be approved by the
affirmative vote of a simple majority of those present. If the City Council
denies a variance, it shall make a finding and determination that the
conditions required for approval do not exist. No application for a variance
which has been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted for a period of
6 months from the date of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof
of change of conditions.



   (F)   Additional conditions. In granting a variance, the City
Council may impose conditions in order to preserve the health, safety, or
welfare of the community or in order to meet the purposes of this chapter or
the comprehensive plan.



   (G)   Recording. Each variance shall be enumerated in, and thereby
recorded with the final plat resolution in the County Recorder’s office.



   (H)   Term of variance. A variance granted by the City Council shall
expire if the preliminary or final plat to which it relates expires.



   (I)   Violations. No developer shall violate, fail to comply with,
or assist, direct, or permit the violation of the terms or conditions of a
variance. Such violation shall be a violation of the variance and shall
render the variance null and void.



(2013 Code, § 12.42)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.19  APPEALS.



   (A)   Appeals from city staff decision.



      (1)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Planner, the
Planner’s designee, or other city staff person regarding the enforcement of
this chapter, may appeal to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. The appeal
shall specify what error allegedly was made in an order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Planner or other person.



      (2)   The appeal shall be filed in writing with the Planner
within 7 days of the date of decision. Upon receipt of an appeal, the Planner
shall schedule the matter for consideration by the Board. The Board shall
have authority to affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the Planner or
other person. This provision shall not apply in the case of a criminal
prosecution for violation of this chapter.



   (B)   Construction during appeal period. Any developer who obtains a
building permit and starts construction during an appeal period assumes the
risk that the decision may be reversed upon appeal. When an appeal is
received by the city, the developer will be notified of the appeal, unless
the developer filed the appeal.



(2013 Code, § 12.43)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.20  NONCONFORMITIES.



   (A)   Purpose. When a lot or final plat existed on the effective
date of this chapter and no longer fully meets the regulations of this
chapter, such lot or plat will be allowed to develop under carefully
regulated conditions.



   (B)   Development of nonconforming lot or plat. Development of a
nonconforming lot or plat may be permitted upon a finding by the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals of the following:



      (1)   The number and extent of nonconformities will not be
affected or will be reduced in conjunction with the proposed development;



      (2)   The impact of nonconformities upon adjacent property
will not be affected or will be reduced in conjunction with the proposed
development; and



      (3)   The conditions to be imposed by the Board of Adjustment
and Appeals will effect the intent of this section.



   (C)   Nonconformity; eminent domain. When the taking under eminent
domain of a portion of the land upon which there existed a lawful lot or
division of land prior to such taking results in such lot or division of land
becoming unlawful under this chapter, such use is a nonconformity and may be
continued only under the provisions of this chapter.



(2013 Code, § 12.44)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.21  RECORDING WITHOUT COMPLIANCE WITH THIS CHAPTER.



   (A)   Filing of conveyance of land. No conveyance of land to which
these regulations apply shall be filed or recorded with the office of the
County Recorder/Registrar of Title, if the land is described in the
conveyance by metes and bounds or by reference to an unapproved registered
land survey made after April 21, 1961, or to an unapproved plat made after
these regulations become effective, except if the land described:



      (1)   Was a separate parcel of record as of July 25, 1972,
when the city first adopted subdivision regulations;



      (2)   Was the subject of a written agreement to convey entered
into prior to July 25, 1972;



      (3)   Was a separate parcel of not less than 2-1/2 acres in
area and 150 feet in width on January 1,1966;



      (4)   Was a separate parcel of not less than 5 acres in area
and 300 feet in width on July 1, 1980;



      (5)   Is a single parcel of commercial or industrial land of
not less than 5 acres and having a width of not less than 300 feet and its
conveyance does not result in the division of the parcel into 2 or more lots
or parcels, any 1 of which is less than 5 acres in area or 300 feet in width;
or



      (6)   Is a single parcel of residential or agricultural land
not less than 20 acres and having a width of not less than 500 feet and its
conveyance does not result in the division of the parcel into 2 or more lots
or parcels, any 1 of which is less than 20 acres in area or 500 feet in width.



   (B)   Exception. In any case in which compliance with division (A)
above will create an unnecessary hardship and failure to comply does not
interfere with the purpose of the subdivision regulations, the City Council
may waive such compliance by adoption of a resolution to that effect and the
conveyance may then be filed or recorded.



   (C)   Sales of lots from unrecorded plats. It is unlawful to sell,
trade, or otherwise convey any lot as a part of, or in conformity with, any
plat of any subdivision unless the plat has been recorded with the County
Recorder/Registrar of Title.



(2013 Code, § 12.45)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.22  PUBLIC NOTICE, NEIGHBORHOOD MEETINGS, POSTING OF SIGNS AND OTHER
GENERAL RULES.



   Section 151.018 of the City Code applies to all applicable development
approval and permit requests under this chapter.



(Ord. 951, passed 12-20-2016)




IMPROVEMENTS




§ 150.35  DEVELOPER CONSTRUCTION IMPROVEMENT DUTIES.



   (A)   Responsibility. The developer shall construct all improvements
required in a plat, except for specified improvements that the city has
agreed to construct and assess as provided in § 150.36. Before the final
plat is recorded, the developer shall provide for extension of the
improvements described in this chapter to all lots in the areas to be
included in the final plat at no cost to the city.



   (B)   Cost.



      (1)   All required improvements shall be constructed by the
developer at no cost to the city, except for oversizing expenses.



      (2)   The city will pay for oversizing when the oversizing is
done at the specific written request of the city.



      (3)   When an improvement is oversized, the city’s share of
the cost of construction shall be that portion attributable to the
oversizing, and shall be as approved by the City Engineer.



   (C)   Standards. The improvements shall be installed in accordance
with the construction plans approved by the City Engineer and the provisions
of this chapter.



   (D)   Final plat of a part of the preliminary plat area. If the
final plat does not include all land included in the preliminary plat,
temporary improvements may be allowed or required by the City Council on land
included in the preliminary plat, but excluded from the final plat. Temporary
improvements may be required in that area if necessary to protect neighboring
property, to comply with provisions of this code of ordinances, or to assure
the orderly development of the property in the plat.



   (E)   Temporary improvements. The developer shall build and pay all
costs for temporary improvements required by the City Council and shall
maintain all temporary improvements for the period specified by the City
Council. Prior to construction of any temporary improvement, the developer
shall file with the city satisfactory security which shall ensure that the
temporary improvements will be properly constructed, maintained, and removed
and replaced with permanent improvements if necessary.



   (F)   Insurance. When performing work in the public right-of-way,
the developer shall have insurance sufficient to protect the city from any
liability or harm. No construction shall commence until the City Clerk has
received and approved a certificate showing such insurance.



(2013 Code, § 12.11)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.36  CITY MAY CONSTRUCT IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Upon request. A developer may request the city to construct
improvements in a plat and assess the costs of their construction under M.S.
Ch. 429, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Procedures. If the developer wants the city to construct the
improvements, the developer shall comply with the following procedures.



      (1)   Petition. The developer shall submit a petition to the
City Council requesting that the city construct specified improvements, and
waiving all rights to appeal the amount of special assessments which are
assessed as a result of the installation of the improvements.



      (2)   City Council action. The City Council shall consider the
petition, and may, in its sole discretion, choose to accept or reject the
petition.



      (3)   Construction of improvements. If approved by the City
Council, the specified improvements shall be constructed in accordance with
M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended from time to time. The city shall have
sole responsibility for administration of the project and will not be
responsible for meeting any completion dates scheduled by the developer. The
city shall not be responsible for any damages as a result of delays in the
project. If the contract for the project is awarded on a unit price basis,
the city may authorize changes in the contract so as to include additional
units of work at the same unit price, so long as the cost of the additional
work does not exceed 25% of the original contract price. By requesting that
the city construct the improvement, the developer acknowledges that any
changes or additional work required shall be approved by the city.



      (4)   Developer to pay. The developer agrees to pay the
assessments on the following terms and conditions.



         (a)   The developer shall waive and release any and all
objections of every kind to assessments levied by the city for the specified
improvements, including without limitation: objections to procedures and
hearings before the City Council in connection with the improvements and
assessment therefor; objections resulting from failure to fully comply with
any applicable statute; and objections to the amount of any assessment levied
against any property of the developer that is benefitted by the improvements.



         (b)   The developer shall waive and release the right to
appeal the assessment.



         (c)   The developer shall pay the annual installments of
special assessments and taxes when due. The developer may not claim green
acres status on any benefitted land.



      (5)   Early assessment. The developer may request that the
special assessments be levied prior to the final wear course being placed on
streets. The final decision as to when special assessments are levied is at
the sole discretion of the City Council. The cost of the final wear course
may be estimated and included in the early assessment, or it may be levied
after the final wear course is placed on the streets.



      (6)   All costs assessed. The entire cost of installation of
the specified improvements, including any reasonable engineering, legal, and
administrative costs incurred by the city, shall be paid by the developer to
the city as special assessments levied against the benefitted land. The
developer also shall pay any applicable interest.



      (7)   Occupancy permits. No occupancy permit shall be issued
for any lot unless any levied special assessments for that lot have been
paid. If special assessments are pending but not levied, then an occupancy
permit may be issued for a lot only if the developer has agreed in writing to
pay the special assessments when levied. Once the pending assessments are
levied, no further occupancy permits will be issued for any lot in the
subdivision until all special assessments have been paid on the lots which
already have occupancy permits.



      (8)   Security for special assessments. A developer shall
provide security for special assessments under 1 or more of the methods in
this division (B)(8).



         (a)   100% cash deposit.



            1.   Prior to the recording of the final plat, the
developer shall pay to the city in cash a deposit in the sum and amount of
100% of the City Engineer’s estimated total assessment for all such Plan B
Improvements, said amount to be paid upon execution of the developer’s
agreement.



            2.   The cash so paid by the developer to the city
will bear interest for each year at a rate equal to 1% below the average
interest rate (rounded to the nearest quarter percent) on the investments
held by the city on December 31 of the respective year until said deposit,
plus all accrued interest shall be used to pay the remainder of the
assessments due. Any excess in deposits will be returned to the developer.



            3.   If the developer fails to pay any
assessments, interest, or penalty as the same come due, the city may draw on
said deposit for any such amounts not paid. Those assessments as levied shall
be paid by the developer to the city as special assessments levied against
the benefitted land.



         (b)   Letter of credit.



            1.   Prior to the recording of the final plat, the
developer shall submit to the city a certified letter of credit approved by
the City Attorney made payable to the city upon which the city may draw, in
the amount of 100% of the City Engineer’s estimated total assessment for
all such Plan B Improvements; said letter of credit to be submitted upon
execution of the developer’s agreement. If the developer fails to pay any
assessments, interest, or penalty as the same come due, the city may draw on
said letter of credit for any such amounts not paid.



            2.   Those assessments as levied shall be paid by
the developer of a future lot, piece, or parcel owner to the city as special
assessments levied against the benefitted land. The letter of credit shall be
renewed annually. If not renewed, the city shall draw on all of the money in
the existing letter of credit before it expires.



            3.   The letter of credit shall be terminated upon
payment of all assessments due on developer owned lots and may be reduced to
equal the actual amount of assessments due when 75% or more of the
assessments have been paid. Reductions shall be limited to 1 per year.



      (9)   Payment within 10 years. All special assessments must be
paid in full within 10 years from the date the special assessments are
levied. If the special assessments are not paid, the developer will be
personally liable for any unpaid special assessments, plus interest,
collection costs, and attorney’s fees.



      (10)   Easements and right-of-way. The developer must grant or
cause to be granted to the city, at no cost to the city, all permanent or
temporary easements and right-of-way necessary for the installation and
maintenance of the Plan A Improvements.



(2013 Code, § 12.12)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999; Ord. 805, passed
9-11-2008)



§ 150.37  CHANGE IN WHO CONSTRUCTS IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   City to construct improvements. The developer may request that
the city construct some or all of the improvements originally planned to be
constructed by the developer. If the City Council approves, then the
specified improvements shall be constructed by the city as set forth in §
150.36.



   (B)   Developer to construct improvements. The developer may request
that the developer be allowed to construct some or all of the improvements
originally planned to be constructed by the city. If the City Council
approves, then the specified improvements shall be constructed by the
developer as set forth in § 150.35 security shall be provided as described
in this chapter.



(2013 Code, § 12.13)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.38  DEDICATION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Improvements. All public improvements shall be dedicated to
the city free and clear from any encumbrances. Dedication shall become
effective upon written acceptance of the improvement by the City Engineer.



   (B)   Easements. A public easement or right-of-way shall be
dedicated around all public improvements, including streets, roads, sewers,
electric, gas, and water facilities, storm water drainage and holding areas
or ponds, and similar utilities and improvements.



(2013 Code, § 12.14)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.39  TIMING OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Construction timing.



      (1)   Right to proceed with construction.



         (a)   Within the plat or collective land to be platted,
the developer shall not construct site grading improvements or otherwise
disturb the earth nor remove trees until all the following conditions have
been satisfied:



            1.   Preliminary plat approval has been obtained
from the City Council;



            2.   The necessary security and applicable fees
have been received by the city;



            3.   All required grading plans, stormwater
management plans, erosion and sediment control plans, SWPPPs, and
specifications have been approved by the City Engineer or assigns; and



            4.   The City Engineer or assigns has issued a
grading permit.



         (b)   Within the plat or collective land to be platted,
the developer shall not construct street improvements, sanitary sewer
improvements, storm sewer improvements, water distribution system
improvements, other utilities, public or private improvements, nor any
buildings until all the following conditions have been satisfied:



            1.   This agreement has been fully executed by
both parties and filed with the City Clerk;



            2.   The necessary security and all applicable
fees have been received by the city;



            3.   All required plans and specifications have
been approved by the City Engineer and the City Public Utilities Manager; and



            4.   The plat has been recorded with the County
Recorder’s office or Registrar of Title’s office of the county.



      (2)    Acceptance.



         (a)   Grading done prior to the approval of a final plat
are at the developer’s risk.



         (b)   The city may refuse to accept any grading or other
public improvements if the improvements were not inspected by the city at the
time of installation, all engineering and inspection fees were not paid, the
improvements were not constructed according to city design criteria, or
security for maintenance, as described in § 150.11(C)(3), is not provided.



   (B)   Construction required before recording final plat. The City
Council may require that certain public improvements be installed and
dedicated prior to recording the final plat when necessary for the protection
of other property.



   (C)   Construction after recording final plat. If a public
improvement is not constructed, installed, and dedicated prior to recording
the final plat, then security shall be provided to the city to assure the
satisfactory completion of the improvement at no cost to the city.



(2013 Code, § 12.15)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999; Ord. 805, passed
9-11-2008)



§ 150.40  SECURITY OPTIONS FOR IMPROVEMENTS CONSTRUCTED BY THE DEVELOPER.



   (A)   Options for different types of security.



      (1)   The security for improvements shall be in a form
acceptable to the city. The city has approved several options, and the
developer may choose which option or combination of options to utilize.



      (2)   The options are as follows:



         (a)   Cash; or



         (b)   Letter of credit.



      (3)   A letter of credit shall be in a form approved by the
City Attorney.



   (B)   Amount of the security.



      (1)   Improvements. Security shall be provided in an amount
sufficient to satisfactorily complete the construction, installation, and
dedication of all public improvements and erosion control measures, including
all improvements required outside the final plat.



      (2)   Inspection and administration. The security shall
include an amount sufficient to cover 125% of the estimated costs of city
inspection and administration as set forth in the city’s fee schedule.



      (3)   Total. The amount of the security shall equal 125% of
the estimated total cost of the improvements, plus 100% of the estimated
costs of city inspection and administration.



      (4)   Estimate made. The estimate of total cost shall be
submitted by the developer and approved by the City Engineer.



   (C)   Timing. The security shall be provided to the city and
approved prior to recording the final plat.



   (D)   Deferral.



      (1)   The City Council may defer or waive, subject to
appropriate conditions, the construction of any improvement which, in the
City Council’s judgment, is not in the best interests of the public health,
safety, and general welfare, or which is inappropriate due to inadequacy or
lack of connecting improvements. Security will not be deferred.



      (2)   The developer shall provide security to ensure that,
upon demand by the city, any deferred improvement shall be constructed.



   (E)   Improvements excluded from the security. If the developer has
entered into an agreement with the City Public Utilities Commission for
construction of an improvement, and has made satisfactory security
arrangements with City Public Utilities for the improvement, then no security
for the improvement shall be required by the city.



   (F)   Exchange of security. At any time during the period of the
security, the City Attorney may accept a substitution or a substitution of a
letter of credit, escrow, or other approved security agreement.



(2013 Code, § 12.16)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999; Ord. 805, passed
9-11-2008)




DESIGN CRITERIA




§ 150.55  GENERALLY.



   (A)   Purpose. Each subdivision of land needs to blend with and
complement surrounding divisions of land. In order to accomplish this, the
city has established certain design criteria to which all divisions of land
must conform.



   (B)   City design criteria. All public improvements, subdivisions,
and new buildings within new subdivisions shall be designed, constructed, and
installed according to and conform to the following city design criteria.



      (1)   Public infrastructure. The City Engineer has prepared,
and the City Council has adopted, design criteria and specifications for
construction and installation of public improvements.



      (2)   Natural resources corridor. The City Council has adopted
design criteria for protecting natural features and natural functions
associated with specific resources.



(2013 Code, § 12.24)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999; Ord. 798, passed
5-20-2008)



§ 150.56  GRADING.



   All grading for a subdivision shall be done in accordance with the city
design criteria.



(2013 Code, § 12.25)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.57  EROSION CONTROL.



   (A)   Required. Erosion control shall be provided for all land in a
subdivision during construction.



   (B)   Design criteria. All erosion control measures shall be
designed, constructed, installed, and removed in accordance with the city
design criteria.



(2013 Code, § 12.26)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.58  STORM SEWER.



   (A)   Required. Storm sewer or surface water drainage facilities
shall be provided for all land in a subdivision.



   (B)   Design criteria. All storm sewers shall be designed,
constructed, and installed in accordance with the city design criteria.



   (C)   Trunk fees. The developer shall pay to the city trunk storm
sewer fees as established by the City Council.



(2013 Code, § 12.27)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.59  SANITARY SEWER.



   (A)   Required. Sanitary sewer facilities shall be provided for all
developable lots in a subdivision. Private sewer systems or septic systems
shall be allowed only outside the Metropolitan Urban Service Area.



   (B)   Design criteria. All sanitary sewers shall be designed,
constructed, and installed in accordance with the city design criteria.



   (C)   Trunk fees. The developer shall pay to the city trunk sanitary
sewer fees as established by the City Council.



(2013 Code, § 12.28)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.60  UTILITIES.



   (A)   Required. Public water, electric, and gas shall be provided
for all developable lots in a subdivision. Provision for other utilities,
such as telephone and cable television, shall be included in the design of
the subdivision, but are not required to be installed.



   (B)   Design criteria. All utilities shall be designed, constructed,
and installed in accordance with any applicable city design criteria.



(2013 Code, § 12.29)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.61  STREET LIGHTS.



   (A)   Required. Street lights shall be provided in a subdivision as
required in the city design criteria.



   (B)   Design criteria. All street lights shall be designed,
constructed, and installed in accordance with any applicable city design
criteria.



   (C)   Installation of street lighting. The subdivider shall provide
for installation of street lighting and operation for a period of 3 years as
prescribed by the Utilities Manager.



(2013 Code, § 12.30)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.62  STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   (A)   Required. All lots shall abut either a public street or common
property specified for street or driveway use in a common interest community
subdivision.



   (B)   Design criteria. All streets and alleys shall be designed,
constructed, and installed in accordance with the city design criteria.
Rights-of-way shall be dedicated to the city at no cost to the city at the
width specified in the design criteria.



(2013 Code, § 12.31)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.63  SIDEWALKS AND TRAILS.



   (A)   Required. Sidewalks and trails shall be provided where
specified in the city’s sidewalk and trail plans.



   (B)   Design criteria. All sidewalks shall be designed, constructed,
and installed in accordance with the city design criteria.



(2013 Code, § 12.32)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.64  LOTS AND BLOCKS.



   (A)   Lots. All lots shall be of at least the minimum size specified
in Ch. 151.



   (B)   Monuments. Permanent monuments shall be placed in the ground
as required by M.S. Ch. 505, as it may be amended from time to time, prior to
the release of financial security for the completion of public improvements.
Written notice shall be provided to the city certifying that the iron
monuments have been installed.



   (C)   Blocks. Blocks shall be of a size to facilitate neighborhood
development and to provide smooth traffic circulation. Block shapes and
dimensions shall be set in accordance with the city design criteria.



   (D)   Outlots. Lots designated as outlots on the final plat will be
understood to be unbuildable lots for purposes of this chapter and Ch. 111,
and building permits will not be issued to outlots under Ch. 111.



(2013 Code, § 12.33)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999; Ord. 792, passed
4-17-2008; Ord. 805, passed 9-11-2008)



§ 150.65  PARKS AND DEDICATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The City Council recognizes it is essential to the
health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city that the character
and quality of the environment be considered to be of major importance in the
planning and development of the city. In this regard, the manner in which
land is developed and used is of high priority. The presentation of land for
park, playground, public open space purposes, and trails as it relates to the
use and development of land for residential, commercial, and industrial
purposes is essential to the maintaining of a healthful and desirable
environment for all residents of the city. The city must not only provide
these amenities for our citizens today, the city must be mindful of our
future citizens.



      (2)   The City Council should recognize that demand for park,
playground, public open space, and trails within a municipality is directly
related to density and intensity of development permitted and allowed within
any given area. Urban type developments mean greater numbers of people and
higher demands for park, playground, public open space, and trails. To
disregard this principle is to inevitably over-tax existing facilities and
thus diminish the quality of the environment for all residents.



   (B)   Standards for accepting dedication of land for public
purposes. It should be the policy of the city that the following standards
and guidelines for the dedication of land for park, playground, and open
space purposes (or cash contribution in lieu of such dedications) in the
subdividing and developing of land within the city, shall be directly related
to density and intensity of each subdivision and development.



      (1)   As a prerequisite to subdivision approval, subdividers
shall dedicate land for parks, playgrounds, public open spaces, and trails
and/or shall make a cash contribution to the City’s Park Fund and Trail
Fund as provided by this section.



      (2)   Land to be dedicated shall be reasonably suitable for
its intended use and shall be at a location convenient to the people to be
served. Factors used in evaluating the adequacy of the proposed park and
recreation areas shall include size, shape, topography, geology, hydrology,
tree cover, access, and location.



      (3)   The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall recommend
to the Planning Commission and City Council the land dedication and cash
contribution requirements for proposed subdivisions.



      (4)   Changes to the density of plats shall be reviewed by the
Parks and Recreation Advisory Board for reconsideration of park dedication
and cash contribution requirements.



      (5)   When a proposed park, playground, recreational area,
school site, or other public ground has been indicated in the city’s
official map or comprehensive plan and is located in whole or in part within
a proposed plat, it shall be designated as such on the plat and shall be
dedicated to the appropriate governmental unit. If the subdivider elects not
to dedicate an area in excess of the land required hereunder for such
proposed site, the city may consider acquiring the site through purchase or
condemnation.



      (6)   Land conveyed or dedicated to the city shall not be used
in calculating density requirements of the city zoning ordinance, and shall
be in addition to and not in lieu of open space requirements for planned unit
developments.



      (7)   In establishing the amount of land to be dedicated or
preserved or the amount of the cash contribution, the city will give due
consideration to the open space, recreational, or common areas and facilities
proposed by the applicant to be open to the public.



      (8)   The city, upon consideration of the particular type of
development, may require larger or lesser parcels of land to be dedicated if
the city determines that present or future residents would require greater or
lesser land for park and playground purposes.



      (9)   In residential plats, the city shall have a standard of
1 acre of park land for every 75 people. Thus, 1 acre of land shall be
conveyed to the city as an outlot warranty for every 75 people the platted
land could house based on the following population calculations.



 

Apartments, townhouses, condominiums, other multiple-family dwelling units
 
1 person per bedroom


Duplex-twin homes
 
3.0 persons per dwelling unit


Single-family detached dwelling lots
 
3.0 persons per lot



 



      (10)   In plats other than residential, the city hereby finds
that, as a general rule, it requires that an amount of land equal to 10% of
the buildable land proposed to be subdivided be dedicated or reserved to the
public for public use for parks, playgrounds, trails, wetlands, or open
space. “Buildable land” is determined by calculating the gross acreage of
all land in the proposed subdivision in its pre-subdivided condition
excluding wetlands as defined in § 151.002. Should the land to be dedicated
have greater fair market value than the average fair market value in the
plat, the city shall only be authorized to require dedication of an amount of
land equal to 10% of the fair market value of all the property being platted.



      (11)   In lieu of park land dedication, the city may require
an equivalent cash dedication based upon the average fair market value of
undeveloped land that is, or under the city’s adopted comprehensive plan,
may be served by municipal sanitary sewer and water service. The cash
dedication requirement shall be established annually by the City Council.



      (12)   The subdivider will be required to construct all public
trails within the development or adjacent at the time of development.



      (13)   In lieu of trail donation, trail construction, or trail
easement dedication, the city may require a cash donation for the trail
system. The cash dedication requirement shall be established annually by the
City Council. Dedication for trails in the form of cash shall apply only to
residential plats.



      (14)   The city may elect to receive a combination of land and
cash for park use. The city shall determine the amount of land dedication it
requires, and the cash contribution shall be calculated based on the
percentage of unmet land dedication.



      (15)   Planned unit developments with mixed land uses shall
make cash and/or land contributions in accordance with this section based
upon the percentage of land devoted to the various uses.



      (16)   Park and trail cash contributions are to be calculated
based on the fees in place at the time of the final plat approval.



      (17)   The cash contributions for parks and trails shall be
deposited in either the city’s Park Reserve Fund or Multi-Purpose
Pedestrian Fund and shall be used only for acquisition, improvement,
development, or redevelopment of parks and trails.



      (18)   If a subdivider is unwilling or unable to make a
commitment to the city as to the type of building that will be constructed on
lots in the proposed plat, the land and cash contribution will be a
reasonable amount determined by the City Council.



      (19)   Wetland and ponding areas accepted by the city shall
not be considered in the park land and/or cash contribution to the city.



      (20)   When a proposed trail has been indicated in the
city’s official comprehensive plan map, and it is located in whole or in
part within the proposed plat, it should be designated on the plat and should
be dedicated to the city. If the subdivider elects not to dedicate an area in
excess of the land required for a trail, the city may consider acquiring it
through condemnation.



      (21)   Required land dedication and/or payment of fees in lieu
of land dedication shall be required at the time of recording the final plat.



(2013 Code, § 12.34)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999; Ord. 720, passed
2-10-2005; Ord. 749, passed 3-16-2006; Ord. 768, passed 8-24-2006; Am. Ord.
963, passed 7-5-2017)



§ 150.66  LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   Required. Landscaping shall be provided for all land in a
subdivision.



   (B)   Design criteria. Landscaping shall be designed and installed
in accordance with Ch. 151 and city design criteria.



(2013 Code, § 12.35)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A violation of this chapter occurs when:



      (1)   A person performs an act prohibited by or declared
unlawful by this chapter;



      (2)   A person fails to act in accordance with this chapter
when such action is required; and



      (3)   A person knowingly makes or submits any false statement
or document in connection with any application or procedure required by this
chapter.



   (B)   Upon conviction of a violation, such person shall be punished
as for a misdemeanor.



(2013 Code, § 12.47)  (Ord. 557, passed 10-14-1999)



CHAPTER 151:  ZONING



Section




General Provisions




   151.001   Title, purpose, and interpretation



   151.002   Definitions



   151.003   Zoning map



   151.004   Zones



   151.005   Water surface use zoning



   151.006   Administration and enforcement



   151.007   General regulations



   151.008   Planning Commission



   151.009   Zoning ordinance amendments



   151.010   Board of Adjustment and Appeals



   151.011   Conditional use permits



   151.012   Conditional use permit standards for residential zones



   151.013   Conditional use permit standards for business zones



   151.014   Conditional use permit standards for industry zones



   151.015   Variances



   151.016   Appeals



   151.017   Nonconformities



   151.018   Public notice, neighborhood meetings, posting of signs and
other general rules




Zones and Districts




   151.030   Agricultural Preservation Zone (AG)



   151.031   Rural Residential Zone (RR)



   151.032   Sewer Rural Residential Zone (SRR)



   151.033   Low-Density Residential Zone (R-1A)



   151.034   Urban Residential Zone (R-1B)



   151.035   Old Shakopee Residential Zone (R-1C)



   151.036   Medium-Density Residential Zone (R-2)



   151.037   Planned Residential District (PRD)



   151.038   Multiple-Family Residential Zone (R-3)



   151.039   Community Commercial (N-C)



   151.040   Highway Business Zone (B-1)



   151.041   Community Commercial (CC)



   151.042   Office Business Zone (B-2)



   151.043   Central Business Zone (B-3)



   151.044   Major Recreation Zone (MR)



   151.045   Light Industry Zone (I-1)



   151.046   Heavy Industry Zone (I-2)



   151.047   Business Park Zone (BP)



   151.048   Planned Unit Development District



   151.049   Mining Overlay Zone (MN)



   151.050   Old Shakopee Business Overlay Zone (B-1C)



   151.051   High Density Residential Zone (R-4)




Shoreland Overlay Zone (SH)




   151.065   Statutory authorization and policy



   151.066   General provisions and definitions



   151.067   Administration



   151.068   Shoreland classification system and land use districts



   151.069   Zoning and water supply/sanitary provisions



   151.070   Nonconformities



   151.071   Subdivision provisions



   151.072   Planned unit developments (PUDs)



   151.073   Industrial uses on natural environment lakes




Floodplain Overlay Zone (FP)




   151.085   Statutory authorization, findings of fact, and the like



   151.086   General provisions



   151.087   Establishment of zoning district



   151.088   Floodway District



   151.089   Flood Fringe District (FF)



   151.090   Subdivisions



   151.091   Public utilities, railroad, roads, and bridges



   151.092   Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks and
placement of travel trailers and travel vehicles



   151.093   Administration



   151.094   Nonconforming uses




Performance Standards




   151.105   Purpose



   151.106   Exterior storage



   151.107   Refuse



   151.108   Construction material



   151.109   Bulk storage of liquids



   151.110   Grading, filling, and excavations



   151.111   Screening



   151.112   Landscaping requirements



   151.113   Tree preservation regulations



   151.114   Exterior lighting



   151.115   Noise and vibration



   151.116   Smoke and particulate matter



   151.117   Odor



   151.118   Toxic or noxious matter



   151.119   Hazardous materials or waste, infectious waste, and
pollutants



   151.120   Radiation



   151.121   Electromagnetic interference



   151.122   Receive-only satellite dish antennas and other antenna
devices



   151.123   Preservation of surface waters



   151.124   Ground water protection



   151.125   Sight triangles




Parking




   151.140   Purpose



   151.141   General provisions



   151.142   Design standards



   151.143   Required number of parking spaces




Driveways




   151.155   Purpose



   151.156   General provisions



   151.157   Design standards




Loading Facilities




   151.170   Purpose



   151.171   General provisions



   151.172   Design standards



   151.173   Required number of loading spaces




Signs




   151.185   Purpose



   151.186   Definitions



   151.187   Signs not regulated



   151.188   General regulations



   151.189   Commercial, major recreation, industrial, and business
park sign regulations



   151.190   Location of signs



   151.191   Additional traditional town center, traditional commercial
corridor, and contemporary commercial overlay zone signage regulations



   151.192   Additional traditional commercial, contemporary
commercial, and major recreation overlay zone regulation



   151.193   Additional office, business park, and industrial zone sign
regulations



   151.194   Additional residential zone regulations



   151.195   Administration and enforcement



   151.196   Nonconforming signs



   151.197   Sign standards



   151.198   Temporary signs



   151.199   Sign Overlay Districts



   151.200   Effective date




Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS)




   151.210   Purpose



   151.211   Definitions



   151.212   Application process, building permits, fees, and
inspections



   151.213   Permitted, conditionally permitted, and prohibited wind
energy conversion systems (WECS)



   151.214   Performance standards



   151.215   Other applicable standards



 



   151.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 151.001  TITLE, PURPOSE, AND INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Title. This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as
the “zoning ordinance” or the “zoning chapter”. When referred to
herein it shall be known as “this chapter”.



   (B)   Purpose. This chapter is enacted to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare of the city through the following:



      (1)   Encouraging the planned and orderly development of
residential, business, industrial, recreational, and public land;



      (2)   Providing adequate light, air, and convenience of access
to property;



      (3)   Limiting congestion in the public right-of-way;



      (4)   Preventing overcrowding of land and undue concentration
of population and structures;



      (5)   Providing for the compatible integration of land uses
and the most appropriate use of land;



      (6)   Encouraging development in accordance with the city’s
comprehensive plan;



      (7)   Conserving the natural beauty and environmental assets
of the city;



      (8)   Protecting water resources and water quality;



      (9)   Facilitating the provision of water, utilities, and
sewage disposal to property as appropriate;



      (10)   Protecting the population from fire and other hazards
to public safety; and



      (11)   Providing for the administration of this chapter and
amendments to it, defining the powers and duties imposed by this chapter, and
prescribing penalties for violation of its provisions.



   (C)   Scope. From and after the effective date of this chapter, the
use of all land and all structures erected, altered, enlarged, or relocated,
and every use accessory thereto, shall be in conformance with the provisions
of this chapter. Any existing use, structure, lot, or development which was
legally established, but is not in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter, shall be regarded as nonconforming and may continue in existence
only for such period of time and under such conditions as is provided for in
§ 151.017.



   (D)   Application of rules.



      (1)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, general welfare, and sound planning.



      (2)   Where any provision of this chapter is either more
restrictive or less restrictive than a comparable provision imposed by any
other code, ordinance, statute, or regulation of any kind, the more
restrictive provision, or the provision which imposes a higher standard or
requirement, shall prevail.



      (3)   No land shall be used, and no structure shall be
erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, altered, removed, or used, for
any purpose or in any manner which is not in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter.



      (4)   Structures within the public right-of-way are not
covered by the provisions of this chapter except as specifically provided in
this chapter.



      (5)   Words or terms defined in this chapter shall have the
meanings assigned to them unless such meaning is clearly contrary to the
intent of this chapter. The present tense shall include the past and future
tenses.



   (E)   Common procedures. The general provisions of this section
shall apply to all applications for development approval and permit requests
under this chapter, unless otherwise stated.



      (1)   Authority to file applications.



         (a)   General. Applications submitted under this chapter
shall be submitted by the landowner; a person, business, or organization
having rights in contract in the land; their authorized agent; the city
council; the planning commission; or the administrator.



         (b)   Applicant not the owner. If the applicant is not
the owner of the land, the owner's name and contact information must be
included in the application.



      (2)   Neighborhood meetings.



         (a)   General. The purpose of the neighborhood meeting
is to provide an opportunity for informal communication between applicants,
occupants, and owners of nearby properties that may be affected by
development proposals; to educate the occupants and owners about the proposed
development and application; to receive comments and address concerns about
the development proposal; and to resolve conflicts and outstanding issues,
where possible.



         (b)   Neighborhood meeting required. A neighborhood
meeting is required for all applications requiring a public hearing prior to
submission of an application. Upon receiving an application requiring a
public hearing, the administrator shall require an applicant to conduct a
neighborhood meeting prior to a public hearing being scheduled. The Zoning
Administrator or Planner (administrator) may waive this requirement in cases
where there is no adjacent neighborhood that would be impacted by the
application.



         (c)   Applications requiring neighborhood meetings.
Unless a waiver is granted by the administrator, a neighborhood meeting shall
be required to be conducted prior to consideration of the following
applications:



            1.   Map amendment (rezoning);



            2.   Preliminary Plat;



            3.   Conditional Use Permit (CUP);



            4.   Comp Plan Amendments;



            5.   PUD;



            6.   Zoning Text Amendments;



            7.   Variances.



         (d)   Procedure. If a neighborhood meeting is convened,
it should generally comply with the following procedures:



            1.   Day, time and place. The neighborhood meeting
should be held during the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday, at a place that is generally accessible to occupants of property in
close proximity to the land subject to the application. Meetings may be held
at a time and day different from above at the neighborhood's request.
Meetings shall be held at least eight calendar days prior to the scheduled
public hearing. Failure to do so may result in delay or denial of the
application.



            2.   Notification. The applicant shall provide
notification of the neighborhood meeting a minimum of seven business days in
advance of the meeting by first class mail to: all owners and occupants
within 500 feet of the land subject to the application; any neighborhood
organization that represents citizens within that area; the planning staff;
and the review board. The notification shall state the time and place of the
meeting.



            3.   Conduct of meetings. At the neighborhood
meeting, the applicant shall explain the development proposal and
application; answer questions; and, address the ways in which to resolve the
attendees' concerns. Within two days of the meeting, the applicant shall
provide the city a list of those in attendance with a summary of the
attendee's concerns.



      (3)   Public notification for Public Hearings to be held by
the Planning Commission and Board of Adjustment and Appeals.



         (a)   Content of mailed and published notice. All mailed
and published notices for public hearings shall:



            1.   Identify the case log number and the name of
the applicant or the applicant's agent.



            2.   Indicate the date, time and place of the
public hearing, or indicate the earliest date an administrative decision will
be made.



            3.   Describe the site involved by street address,
property identification number (or both) and nearest intersection.



            4.   Identify the current zoning district
designation of the site subject to the application.



            5.   Describe the nature, scope and purpose of the
application or proposal.



            6.   Indicate the date and hours of availability
and describe in which department the application, staff report, and related
materials may be inspected by the public.



            7.   Include a statement describing where
interested members of the public and adjoining property owners may submit
written comments or evidence prior to the public hearing, or an
administrative decision.



            8.   Include a statement that interested members
of the public and adjoining property owners may appear at the public hearing,
be heard, and submit evidence and written comments with respect to the
application.



         (b)   Mailed notice. When the provisions of this chapter
require that written or mailed notice be provided, the administrator shall be
responsible for preparing and mailing the written notice. Notice shall be
mailed to:



            1.   All property owners of the land subject to
the application;



            2.   Surrounding property owners whose address is
known by reference to the latest ad valorem tax records: For applications
subject to a public hearing, all property owners within 500 feet of the land
subject to the application;



            3.   Notice shall be deemed mailed by its deposit
in the United States mail, first class, properly addressed, postage paid. The
administrator shall certify that notice meeting the content requirements was
mailed. A copy of the mailed notice shall be maintained in the office of the
administrator for public inspection during normal business hours.



         (c)   Published notice.



            1.   When the provisions of this chapter require
that notice be published, the administrator shall be responsible for
preparing the content of the notice and publishing the notice in a newspaper
of general circulation in the city. The content and form of the published
notice shall be consistent with the requirements of the Minnesota Code of
Laws.



            2.   The administrator shall prepare a certificate
affirming that published notice has occurred pursuant to the requirements of
this subsection and include a copy of the published notice for the records.



         (d)   Posted notice.



            1.   When the provisions of this chapter require
that notice be posted on the site subject of the application (§
151.001(E)(2)(c)), notice shall comply with the following requirements:



               a.   Notice shall be posted on signs in a
form established by the administrator.



               b.   The signs shall be placed by the
applicant on the property that is subject to the application 15 days prior to
the public hearing along each public street that abuts or transects the
property, at intervals of not more than 500 feet.



               c.   The signs shall be posted in a manner
that ensures visibility from public streets.



            2.   The applicant shall sign and provide to the
administrator a notarized affidavit in a format provided by the city stating
that posted notice has been provided in accordance with the requirements of
this subsection. The affidavit shall be submitted to the administrator prior
to the public hearing for the subject application.



            3.   The applicant shall ensure that the posted
notice is maintained on the property until the completion of the public
hearing on the application.



            4.   The signs shall be removed by the applicant
within five days after the public hearing on the application.



(2013 Code, § 11.01)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994;
Ord. 951, passed 11-15-2016)



§ 151.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY USE. See USE, ACCESSORY.



   ADULT. A person 18 years of age or older.



   ADULT DAY CARE. A program of services provided to functionally impaired
adults for a period of less than 24 hours during the day. ADULT DAY CARE is
intended to maintain functionally impaired adults in the community and to
prevent or delay institutionalization.



   ADULT DAY CARE CENTER. A facility that provides adult day care to
functionally impaired adults on a regular basis for periods of less than 24
hours a day in a setting other than a participant’s home or the residence
of the facility operator.



   AGRICULTURAL USE.



      (1)   The use of land for the growing or production of field
crops, livestock, or livestock products, including, but not limited to, the
following:



         (a)   Field crops such as barley, soy beans, corn, hay,
oats, potatoes, rye, sorghum, and sunflowers;



         (b)   Livestock such as dairy and beef cattle, goats,
horses, ponies, sheep, hogs, poultry, game birds, dogs, deer, rabbits, mink,
and bees; or



         (c)   Livestock products such as milk, butter, cheese,
eggs, meat, fur, and honey.



      (2)   This term does not include the use of land as a
commercial feed lot or for processing any agricultural product.



   AIRPORT or HELIPORT. Any land or structure which is principally used or
intended for use for the landing and takeoffs of aircraft, and any land or
structure accessory thereto.



   ALLEY. A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access
to abutting property.



   AREA IDENTIFICATION SIGN. See SIGN, AREA IDENTIFICATION.



   ASSISTED LIVING HOUSING FACILITY. A housing facility for persons who
need assistance with their daily living needs, including special support
services such as meal preparation, housekeeping, medical care,
transportation, or cognitive needs assistance, including memory care
assistance.



   ATTACHED DWELLING. A building composed of more than 1 dwelling unit
which share common wall(s). The individual dwelling units are designed for
and occupied exclusively by 1 family.



   BASEMENT. A portion of a building located wholly or partially below
grade. For purposes of §§ 151.085 through 151.094 (Floodplain Overlay
Zone), BASEMENT includes any area of a structure, including crawl spaces,
having its floor or base below ground level on all 4 sides, regardless of the
depth of excavation below ground level.



   BED AND BREAKFAST INN. A building in which lodging and meals are
provided for compensation and which is open to the traveling public for a
stay not to exceed 30 days.



   BILLBOARD. See SIGN, ADVERTISING.



   BLUFF. A topographic feature wholly or partially within the Shoreland
Overlay Zone rising at least 25 feet above the ordinary high water level of
the waterbody and having an average grade from the toe of the bluff to a
point at least 25 feet above the ordinary high water level of at least 30%
and which slope drains toward the waterbody. The term does not include any
area which has an average slope of less than 18% over a distance of 50 feet
or more.



   BREWERY. A facility that produces for sale beer, ale, or other
beverages made from malt by fermentation and containing not less than 1/2 of
1% alcohol by volume.



   BREWPUB. A small brewery that operates a restaurant on the same
premises as the brewery, whose malt liquor production per calendar year may
be limited by Minnesota state statute.



   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or
enclosure for persons, animals, or things.



   BUSINESS COMPLEX. A building or group of connected buildings containing
2 or more businesses.



   CHURCH. Any establishment, together with its accessory structures and
uses, in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is
maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public
worship.



   CLASS I RESTAURANT. See RESTAURANT, CLASS I.



   CLASS II RESTAURANT. SeeRESTAURANT, CLASS II.



   CLINIC. Any establishment where human patients are examined or treated
by licensed practitioners not involving overnight stays, For this purpose,
LICENSED PRACTITIONERS includes physicians, dentists, osteopaths,
chiropractors, optometrists, psychologists, therapists, and physical
therapists.



   CLUB. Any establishment operated for social, recreational, or
educational purposes open only to members and not to the general public.



   COMMERCIAL RECREATION.



      (1)   MAJOR. A structure or open space designed, constructed,
and operated by private enterprise for recreational purposes and open to the
general public. The minimum area shall be 150 acres on either 1 lot or
contiguous parcels under 1 ownership, in which 50% of the lot or parcels are
permanently developed. The facility shall abut a street designated in the
comprehensive plan as a principal arterial, minor arterial, or collector
street. Such facilities may include amusement parks, Class A licensed horse
racetracks, and similar enterprises.



      (2)   MINOR.A structure or open space designed, constructed,
and operated by private enterprise for recreational purposes and open to the
general public. The facility must meet the minimum lot size of the zone.
MINOR COMMERCIAL RECREATION FACILITIES shall be all commercial recreation
facilities which do not meet the standards of a major commercial recreation
facility. Such facilities may include bowling alleys, tennis courts,
campgrounds, and similar uses.



   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. See VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL.



   COMMUNICATION SERVICE DEVICE(S)/APPARATUS. Any structure or device used
for the purpose of collecting or radiating electromagnetic waves, including,
but not limited to, directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes,
and satellite dishes, and omni-directional antennas, such as whips.



   COMMUNICATION SERVICES. Licensed commercial wireless communication
services including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), enhanced
specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The compilation of the goals, policy statements,
standards, programs, and maps for guiding the physical, social, and economic
development, both public and private, of the city and its environs, as most
recently adopted by the City Council and approved by the Metropolitan
Council. The term includes any unit or part of such plan and any amendment
thereto.



   CONDITIONAL USE. See USE, CONDITIONAL.



   CORNER LOT. See LOT, CORNER.



   DAY CARE FACILITY. A facility licensed by the state to provide care for
a child outside of the child’s own home for gain or otherwise, on a regular
basis, for any part of a 24-hour day. For this purpose, a CHILD is a person
who is under 18 years of age.



   DETACHED DWELLING. A dwelling unit having open space on all sides.



   DIRECTIONAL SIGN. See SIGN, DIRECTIONAL.



   DISTILLERY. A facility that produces ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of
ethyl, spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or other distilled
spirits, including all dilutions and mixtures thereof, for non- industrial
use.



   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof designed for residential
purposes and providing complete living facilities for 1 family.



   DWELLING, DETACHED. A dwelling unit having open space on all sides.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A dwelling unit which shares 1 or more
common walls, as well, as common ceiling and/or floor with adjoining dwelling
unit(s), which is designed for and occupied exclusively by 1 family, and
which does not have separate access to the outdoors.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A dwelling unit which has open space on all
sides and is designed for and occupied exclusively by 1 family.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED. A dwelling unit sharing 1 or more
common walls with an adjoining dwelling unit, which is designed for and
occupied exclusively by 1 family, and which has separate access to the
outdoors.



   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner of the use of land by the public
or appurtenant to another property for a specific purpose or purposes.



   EXISTING. Any structure or use which was in place or for which a
building permit had been issued, and any lot which had been preliminarily
platted, as of the effective date of this chapter. In order to have an
existing lot for a two-family dwelling, the lot must have 2 sanitary sewer
stubs.



   EXTERIOR STORAGE or OPEN STORAGE. The storage of goods, materials,
equipment, manufactured products, or similar items, not fully enclosed by a
building, on a 24-hour-a-day basis for at least 7 days per year.



   FAMILY. Any number of individuals related by blood, marriage, or
adoption, or up to 4 individuals not so related living together as a single
housekeeping unit.



   FARM WINERY. A winery operated by the owner of a state farm and
producing table, sparkling, or fortified wines from grapes, grape juice,
other fruit bases, or honey with a majority of the ingredients grown or
produced in Minnesota. A FARM WINERY may include a tasting room.



   FENCE. Any partition, structure, wall, or gate erected as a dividing
marker, barrier, or enclosure and located along a property boundary, or
within a lot.



   FLOOD. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the
stage of a wetland or lake which results in the inundation of normally dry
areas.



   FLOOD FREQUENCY. The frequency for which it is expected that a specific
flood state or discharge may be equalled or exceeded.



   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway.
FLOOD FRINGE is synonymous with the term FLOODWAY FRINGE used in the flood
insurance study for the city.



   FLOODPLAIN. The bed of a wetland or lake, or the channel of a
watercourse, and areas adjoining the bed or channel, which have been or
hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.



   FLOOD-PROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding primarily for
the reduction or elimination of flood damages.



   FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of the
watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are
reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge.



   FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls. The
term shall include basements, but not porches, balconies, breezeways, or
attic areas having a head room of less than 7 feet 6 inches.



   FLOOR AREA RATIO. The numerical value obtained through dividing the
floor area of a building by the area of the lot or parcel of land on which
such building is located.



   FREE STANDING SIGN. See SIGN, FREE STANDING.



   FRONTAGE. That boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated
street.



   FRONT LOT LINE. See LOT LINE, FRONT.



   FRONT YARD. See YARD, FRONT.



   FUNCTIONALLY IMPAIRED ADULT. An adult having a condition that includes:



      (1)   Having substantial difficulty in carrying out 1 or more
of the essential major activities of daily living, such as caring for
oneself, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking,
breathing, learning, and working;



      (2)   Having a disorder of thought or mood that significantly
impairs judgment, behavior, capacity to recognize reality, or ability to cope
with the ordinary demands of life; and



      (3)   Requiring support to maintain independence in the
community.



   GARAGE. An accessory building or portion of a principal building, which
is used primarily for storing personal vehicles.



   GOVERNMENT SIGN. See SIGN, GOVERNMENT.



   GROUP FAMILY DAY CARE FACILITY. Any facility licensed by the state to
provide day care for no more than 14 children at any 1 time, including all
children of the care giver when the children are present at the facility. For
this purpose, CHILDREN are persons who are under 18 years of age.



   HEIGHT. For a building, HEIGHT is the vertical distance between the
ground and the top of the cornice of a flat roof, a point on the roof
directly above the highest wall of a shed roof, or one-half the distance
between the lowest eave in the highest roof section and the top of the
highest gable on a pitched or hip roof. For any other structure, HEIGHT shall
be the vertical distance between the ground and the highest point of the
structure. For new construction, the ground level shall be the original or
pre-construction average ground elevation adjoining the structure’s
footprint; for existing construction, the ground level shall be the average
ground elevation of the structure.



   HOME OCCUPATION. Any gainful occupation or profession engaged in by the
occupant of a dwelling at or from the dwelling when carried on within a
dwelling unit or an accessory building.



   HOTEL. A building, other than a bed and breakfast inn, used as a
temporary residence by the traveling public, in which ingress and egress to
and from all rooms is made through an inside lobby.



   ILLUMINATED SIGN. See SIGN, ILLUMINATED.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE PERCENTAGE. The area of any lot covered by material
which is impervious to penetration by water, divided by the total lot area.



   INSTITUTIONAL SIGN. See SIGN, INSTITUTIONAL.



   INTERIOR LOT. See LOT, INTERIOR.



   JUNKYARD. Any area where used, waste, discarded, or salvage materials
are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, patched, disassembled,
or handled; including scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber
products, bottles, and used construction materials, but excluding refuse or
the storage of material in conjunction with construction or a manufacturing
process.



   LANDSCAPING. Plantings such as trees, grass, or shrubs.



   LOADING SPACE. A space accessible from a street, alley, or driveway for
the use of vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.



   LOT. An area, parcel, or tract of land which was created or is
recognized as a lot under Ch. 150.



   LOT AREA. The area of a lot on a horizontal plane bounded by the lot
lines, excluding dedicated rights-of-way.



   LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the junction of, and abutting on 2 or
more intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment
of a continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed 135
degrees.



   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and
the rear lot line.



   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.



   LOT LINE. A line bounding a lot, except that where any portion of a lot
extends into a street, the line of such street shall be the LOT LINE.



   LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary of a lot which abuts a street. In the
case of a corner lot, the term shall mean the shortest dimension abutting a
street. For any lot other than a corner lot which abuts more than 1 street,
all boundaries abutting and parallel to the streets shall be FRONT LOT LINES.



   LOT LINE, REAR. The boundary of a lot which is opposite or most distant
from the front lot line.



   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or
a rear lot line.



   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot
measured parallel to the front lot line and at the building setback line.



   MALT LIQUOR. Any beer, ale, or other beverage made from malt by
fermentation and containing not less than one-half of 1% alcohol by volume.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. Any structure, transportable in 1 or more sections,
which in the traveling mode, is 8 body feet or more in width or 40 body feet
or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and
electrical systems contained therein.



   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.



      (1)   An establishment where the principal use and service is
providing therapeutic massage as defined in Chapter 116 of this code,
including any enterprise, establishment, or operation, whether under control
of an individual or legal entity, providing or offering to provide massage
therapy services within the city for a fee or other consideration paid either
directly or indirectly, that:



         (a)   Has one or more massage therapists employed or
contacted to provide massage therapy services for the massage establishment;
or



         (b)   Is in a fixed location within the city wherein
massage therapy services are provided.



      (2)   Any health or medical facility, office, or clinic
operated by state licensed medical professional(s) or any health or
medical-related business operated by state licensed medical professional(s)
duly licensed under the provisions of M.S. §§ 144.50 through 144.60, as
they may be amended from time to time, which provides therapeutic massage to
its patients, shall not be deemed to be a massage establishment.



   MICRO-DISTILLERY. A facility that produces ethyl alcohol, hydrated
oxide of ethyl, spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or other
distilled spirits, including all dilutions and mixtures thereof, for
non-industrial use not to exceed 40,000 proof-gallons per calendar year.



   MINING. The extraction of sand, gravel, rock, soil, or other material
from a parcel of land in an amount exceeding 1,000 cubic yards, and the
removal of said material from the site with or without processing. The term
MINING shall not include removal of materials in accordance with a building
permit, grading permit, public improvement project, or other project
receiving prior review and approval by the city.



   MOTEL. A building or group of buildings other than a hotel or bed and
breakfast inn used as a temporary residence by the traveling public.



   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A residential structure composed of 3 or more
dwelling units which may share common walls, ceilings, floors, or any
combination thereof. Each dwelling unit shall be designed for and occupied
exclusively by individual families living independently of each other.



   MURAL SIGN. See SIGN, MURAL.



   NAMEPLATE SIGN. See SIGN, NAMEPLATE.



   NONCONFORMITY. Any land, use, or structure lawfully existing on the
effective date of this chapter which does not comply with all the
requirements of this chapter or any amendments hereto governing the zone in
which such land, use, or structure is located.



   NON-RIPARIAN. Not located on the bank of a natural watercourse.



   NOXIOUS MATTER. Matter capable of causing injury to living organisms by
chemical reaction, or capable of causing detrimental effects on the physical
or economic well-being of individuals.



   NURSING HOME. Any institution or facility required to be licensed as
such by the State Commissioner of Health under M. S. Ch. 144A, as it may be
amended from time to time.



   OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building,
wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or other matter in, along,
across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory floodplain
which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water,
either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water.



   OFFICE SHOWROOM. A facility in which the handling of information or the
performing of administrative services is conducted as a principal use;
including services provided to persons both on-site and off-site on a walk-in
or appointment basis. Up to 25% of the gross floor area of the structure may
be used for the display of merchandise and equipment, and its sale to a
customer where delivery of purchased merchandise is made directly to the
ultimate consumer from a warehouse.



   OPAQUE. At least 80% of the view from the opposite side is blocked,
when observed from a point perpendicular to the opaque material, fence, or
wall.



   OPEN SALES LOT. Land devoted to the display of goods for sale, rent,
trade, or advertising purposes, where such goods are not enclosed within a
building, on a 24-hour-a-day basis for at least 7 days per year.



   OPEN STORAGE. See EXTERIOR STORAGE.



   ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL. The boundary of public waters or wetlands at
an elevation delineated by the State Department of Natural Resources as the
highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time
to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where the natural
vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial.
For watercourses, the ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL is the elevation of the top
of the bank of the channel. For reservoirs and flowages, the ORDINARY HIGH
WATER LEVEL is the operating elevation of the normal summer pool.



   OVERLAY ZONE. See ZONE, OVERLAY.



   PARKING SPACE. A suitably surfaced and permanently maintained area on
privately owned property, either within a building or outside.



   PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. Criteria established to control noise, odor,
dust, fumes, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire or explosive hazards,
glare, heat, or other characteristics generated by or inherent in uses of
land or structures.



   PERMITTED USE. See USE, PERMITTED.



   PERSONAL VEHICLE. See VEHICLE, PERSONAL.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A process used to acquire approvals for a
project or development which requires the preparation of plans as specified
herein and, upon approval of said plans by the city, establishes the land use
pattern; the density or intensity of use; yard, lot coverage, landscaping,
building height, and spacing requirements; the architectural character of the
project; pedestrian and vehicular system locations; outdoor storage; loading,
signage, parking, and open space requirements and locations; and such other
requirements as are deemed necessary and appropriate for the area encompassed
by the planned unit development.



   PORTABLE SIGN.See SIGN, PORTABLE.



   POWER GENERATION FACILITY.  A power station, powerhouse, power
generation plant or similar facility, other than a wind energy or solar
energy conversion system or facility, that produces or generates electric
power.



   PRINCIPAL USE. See USE, PRINCIPAL.



   PUBLIC BUILDING. Any structure sheltering or enclosing a governmental
use or activity.



   PUBLIC INFORMATION SIGN. See SIGN, PUBLIC INFORMATION.



   PUBLIC RECREATION. Any use commonly provided for and open to the public
at parks, playgrounds, community centers, or other similar sites owned or
operated by a unit of government for the purpose of providing recreation.



   REACH. A longitudinal segment of a stream or river influenced by a
natural or human-made obstruction.



   REAR LOT LINE. See LOT LINE, REAR.



   REAR YARD. See YARD, REAR.



   RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. Any structure, device, or furnishing used for
recreational purposes which is not larger than 600 square feet or 4,000 cubic
feet including, but not limited to, swing sets and slides, sandboxes, picnic
tables, jungle gyms, and similar items.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. See VEHICLE, RECREATIONAL.



   REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods known
to have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what
can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the
100-year recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous with the term BASE
FLOOD used in the flood insurance study for the city.



   REGULARLY or ON A REGULAR BASIS. The provision of day care services to
1 or more persons for a cumulative total of more than 30 days within a
12-month period. Provision of services for any part of a calendar day shall
constitute provision of service for the entire calendar day.



   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The elevation no lower than 1
foot above the elevation of the regional flood, plus any increases in flood
elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from
designation of a floodway.



   RESIDENTIAL FACILITY. A facility licensed by the state to provide
24-hour-a-day care, supervision, food, lodging, rehabilitation, training,
education, habitation, or treatment outside a person’s own home. For this
purpose, a person is any individual under 18 years of age or an individual
who is 18 years of age or older and who has mental illness, mental
retardation or a related condition, a physical handicap or a functional
impairment, or who is chemically dependent or abuses chemicals.



   RESTAURANT, CLASS I. An establishment serving food to customers while
seated at a counter or table and which does not serve alcoholic beverages or
provide live entertainment.



   RESTAURANT, CLASS II. An establishment serving food to customers which
is not a Class I restaurant.



   RETAIL. The sale of goods or services directly to the ultimate consumer.



   RETAIL CENTER. A commercial area containing 1 or more retail
establishment(s) with a total building area in excess of 50,000 square feet.



   RIPARIAN. Located on the bank of a natural watercourse.



   SALES TRAILERS. A recreational vehicle, modular structure, or other
similar structure used for the purpose of marketing homes, commercial, or
industrial space.



   SANDWICH BOARD SIGN. See SIGN, FREE STANDING.



   SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure and a lot
line, ordinary high water level, or other specified item.



   SHORELAND. Land located within the following distances from public
waters: 1,000 feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond, or
flowage; or 300 feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a
floodplain designated by ordinance on such a river or stream, whichever is
greater. The limits of the SHORELAND may be reduced whenever the waters
involved are bounded by natural topographic divides which extend landward
from the water for lesser distances and when approved by the Commissioner of
the State Department of Natural Resources.



   SIDE LOT LINE. See LOT LINE, SIDE.



   SIDE YARD. See YARD, SIDE.



   SIGN. Any letter, work, symbol, device, poster, picture, statuary,
reading matter, or representation in the nature of an advertisement,
announcement, message, or visual communication whether painted, pasted,
printed, affixed, or constructed which is displayed in view of the general
public for informational or communicative purpose.



   SIGN, ADVERTISING. Any non-governmental sign located outdoors which
advertises or directs attention to a business, profession, product, service,
commodity, entertainment, event, or other activities not necessarily offered,
sold, or rented upon the premises where the sign is located or to which it is
attached.



   SIGN, ALPHA/NUMERIC MONOCHROME. A sign or portion of a sign that can
display electronic non-pictorial text. In the case of gas stations, pricing
boards for gasoline/diesel shall not be counted toward allowable signage area.



   SIGN AREA. The entire area within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of the actual sign surface This excludes any
supports, uprights, or structures on which any sign is supported unless such
supports, uprights, or structures are an integral part of the display or
sign. Where the sign is double-faced, the SIGN AREA shall be calculated by
measuring only 1 of the faces, meaning that the maximum sign area allowed
shall be permitted on each face of the sign. Where the sign has more than 2
sides, all faces shall be limited to the total area permitted on double-faced
signs, meaning that the total sign area allowed will decrease with additional
faces.



   SIGN, AREA IDENTIFICATION. A free standing sign, located at the
entrance to or within the identified premises, which identifies the name of a
neighborhood, residential subdivision, multiple-family residential complex,
shopping center or area, industrial area, office complex, planned unit
development, or any combination of the above, but which does not advertise
any business within the area.



   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. A sign erected on private property for the purpose
of directing vehicular and pedestrian traffic to facilities or functions open
to the general public.



   SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTERS. A sign or portion of a sign that can
electronically display any combination of words, graphics, pictorial text,
and multiple colors. In the case of gas stations, pricing boards for
gasoline/diesel shall not be counted toward allowable signage area.



   SIGN, FLASHING. A directly or indirectly illuminated sign or portion
thereof that exhibits changing light or color effect by any means, so as to
provide intermittent illumination that changes light intensity in sudden
transitory bursts, and creates the illusion of intermittent flashing light by
streaming, graphic bursts, showing movement, or any mode of lighting which
resembles zooming, twinkling, or sparkling.



   SIGN, FREE STANDING. A sign which is placed in the ground and not
affixed to any part of any structure. A FREE STANDING SIGN may be of any of
the following types:



      (1)   FREE STANDING GROUND SIGN. A sign which is mounted on
free standing shafts, posts, or walls which are 7 feet or less in height and
are attached to the ground;



      (2)   FREE STANDING PYLON SIGN. A sign which is mounted on
free standing shafts, posts, or walls which extend more than 7 feet in height
and are attached to the ground; and



      (3)   SANDWICH BOARD SIGN. A sign which has 2 single face
areas that are attached on only 1 end so as to create a triangular stance,
but which is not permanently affixed to the ground.



   SIGN, GOVERNMENT. A sign which is erected by or with the approval of a
governmental unit.



   SIGN, ILLUMINATED. A sign which has an artificial light source directed
upon it or 1 which has an interior light source.



   SIGN, INSTITUTIONAL. A sign or bulletin board which identifies the name
and other characteristics of a public or private institution on the site
where the sign is located.



   SIGN, MURAL. Any mural or pictorial scene painted or attached on the
wall of a structure or painted on a sign board affixed to a wall, and which
has as its primary purpose artistic effect and an ideological or
non-commercial message.



   SIGN, NAMEPLATE. A sign indicating the name of a building, building
occupant, development, project, or any sign which serves as a directory of
building occupants.



   SIGN, PORTABLE. A sign so designed as to be movable from 1 location to
another and which is not permanently attached to the ground or any structure.



   SIGN, PUBLIC INFORMATION. A sign conveying information of general
interest to the public, such as time, temperature, date, atmospheric
conditions, or upcoming civic, community, cultural, social, or athletic
events.



   SIGN, TEMPORARY. Any sign intended to be displayed for a limited period
of time only.



   SIGN, WALL. Any sign which is attached or affixed to the exterior wall
of any building, and projects from the wall 18 inches or less.



   SIGN, WINDOW. A sign attached to, placed upon, or painted on the
interior or exterior of a window or door of a building and which is intended
for viewing from the exterior of such building.



   SILO. A vertical, cylindrical structure, made of reinforced concrete,
steel, timber, or materials which comply with building codes, used for
storing grain, cement, or other materials necessary to the conduct of
operations with a permitted or conditional permitted use in a specified
zoning district.



   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A residential structure designed for and
occupied exclusively by 1 family.



   SMALL BREWERY. A brewery that produces no more than 20,000 barrels of
malt liquor in a calendar year.



   STREET. A public right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians
and vehicles to abutting properties.



   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a
location on, below, or above, the ground, or attached to something having a
location on the ground, including signs and fences.



   SUBDIVISION. The creation of 1 or more lots under the provisions of Ch.
150.



   TAPROOM. An area for the on-sale consumption of malt liquor produced by
the brewer for consumption on the premises of or adjacent to 1 brewery
location owned by the brewer. A TAPROOM may also include sales for
off-premises consumption of malt liquor produced at the brewery location or
adjacent to the TAPROOM and owned by the brewer for off-premises consumption,
packaged subject to M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 7(b), as it may be amended from
time to time, or its successor.



   TASTING ROOM, WINERY/DISTILLERY.  An area for the on-sale consumption
of distilled spirits or wine produced on the premises of, or adjacent to 1
winery or 1 distillery and in common ownership to the producer of the wine or
distilled spirits. The tasting room area may include sales for off-premises
consumption of products produced by the owner of the winery or distillery
location if permissible by state law.



   TAVERN.  An establishment where the primary business is the
on-premises sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages and where the
incidental sale of food for consumption on the premises may also occur.



   TEMPORARY SIGN. See SIGN, TEMPORARY.



   TOE OF THE BLUFF. The lower point of a 50 feet segment with an average
slope exceeding 18%.



   TOP OF THE BLUFF. The higher point of a 50 feet segment with an average
slope exceeding 18%.



   TOWER. Any pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof including
supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masks; intended primarily for
the purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device, or similar
apparatus above grade.



   TOWNHOUSE. A residential structure consisting of 2 or more contiguous
dwelling units, sharing only common walls, each having access through
separate individual entrance/exits adjacent to a lot line, and each having
separate garage/storage areas.



   TWO-FAMILY DWELLING. A residential structure composed of no more than 2
dwelling units which may share common walls, ceilings, floors, or any
combination thereof. Each dwelling unit shall be designed for and occupied
exclusively by individual families living independently of each other.



   USE. The purpose or activity for which the land or structure thereon is
designated, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.



   USE, ACCESSORY. A use or structure subordinate to and serving the
principal use or structure on the same lot and customarily incidental thereto.



   USE, CONDITIONAL. A use which is generally permitted within the zone,
but which requires special review and limitations because if not carefully
located or designed may have a detrimental impact on neighboring properties
or the city.



   USE, INTERIM. A temporary use of property until a particular date,
until the occurrence of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no
longer permit the use.



   USE, PERMITTED. A use which may be lawfully established in a zone
provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and performance
standards of such zone.



   USE, PRINCIPAL. The main use of land or a structure, as distinguished
from a subordinate or accessory use.



   UTILITY SERVICES. Services supplying gas, electric, transportation,
water, sewer, cable, or land line telephone service to the general public.



   UTILITY SERVICE STRUCTURES. Any building or structure necessary for the
operation of public or private utility services.



   VARIANCE. A modification or relaxation of the provisions of this
chapter where it is determined that by reason of special and unusual
circumstances relating to a specific lot, that strict application of this
chapter would cause an undue hardship, or that strict conformity with the
provisions of this chapter would be unreasonable, impractical, or unfeasible
under the circumstances.



   VEHICLE. Any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a street, except devices used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.



   VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL. Any vehicle other than a personal vehicle or
recreational vehicle.



   VEHICLE, PERSONAL. Any self-propelled vehicle designed and used for the
carrying of not more than 15 persons, including the driver, truck with a
rated carrying capacity of 1 ton or less, motorcycle, or motorbike.



   VEHICLE, RECREATIONAL. Any self-propelled vehicle or vehicle propelled
or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle used for recreational purposes,
including, but not limited to, RVs, campers, snowmobiles, trail bikes, or
other all-terrain vehicles, boats, hovercrafts, or motor vehicles licensed
for highway operation which may be used for off-road recreational purposes.



   WALL SIGN. See SIGN, WALL.



   WETLAND. Land transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems
where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is
covered by shallow water, as defined in M.S. § 103G.005, subd. 19, as it may
be amended from time to time.



   WHOLESALE. The sale of goods to an intermediary for resale to another
intermediary or to the ultimate consumer.



   WINDOW SIGN. See SIGN, WINDOW.



   YARD. An open space on a lot surrounding a principal structure, which
is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except by
landscaping or an eave not exceeding 24 inches in width.



   YARD, FRONT. The yard extending the width of the lot from the front lot
line to the building setback line.



   YARD, REAR. The yard extending the width of the lot extending from the
rear lot line to the rear yard setback line.



   YARD, SIDE. The yard extending along the side lot line between the
front and rear yards, extending perpendicularly from the side lot line to the
side yard setback line.



   ZONE. An area or areas within the city for which the regulations and
requirements of this chapter governing uses, lot, and bulk of structures and
premises are uniform.



   ZONE, OVERLAY. A zone whose regulations and requirements are added to
the regulations and requirements of another zone, in order to address
particular topographic or development concerns.



   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The duly appointed person charged with
enforcement of this chapter, or that person’s designee.



(2013 Code, § 11.02) (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979;
Ord. 36, passed 1-17- 1980;  Ord. 35, passed 1-31-1980; Ord. 158, passed
1-31-1985; Ord. 159, passed 2-28-1985; Ord. 206, passed 9-11-1986; Ord. 226,
passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 36, passed 1-17-1989; Ord. 264, passed 5-26-1989; Ord.
275, passed 9-22-1989; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 434, passed
11-30-1995; Ord. 467, passed 12-19-1996; Ord. 474, passed 2-6-1997; Ord. 479,
passed 3-3-1997; Ord. 482, passed 5-15- 1997; Ord. 497, passed 9-4-1997; Ord.
505, passed 1-1-1998; Ord. 520, passed 7-16-1998; Ord. 549, passed 6-3-1999;
Ord. 554, passed 7-6-1999; Ord. 563, passed 11-25-1999; Ord. 609, passed
8-30- 2001;Ord. 703, passed 3-27-2008; Ord. 859, passed 9-6-2012; Ord. 639,
passed 9-12-2002; Ord. 778, passed 5-17-2007; Ord. 808, passed 9-25-2008;
Ord. 865, passed 3-5-2013; Ord. 877, passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 909, passed
8-18-2015; Ord. 922, passed 11-17-2015; Ord. 953, passed 11-20-2016; Ord.
956, passed 2-21-2017)



§ 151.003  ZONING MAP.



   (A)   Adopted. The zoning map, as provided in  TSO Table I, is
appended to this chapter and is hereby adopted by reference as though shown
in all details herein. The boundaries of the zones are established as shown
on the zoning map. The zoning map shall be kept on file in the office of the
Zoning Administrator and shall be referred to as the “zoning map”. The
map and all of the notations, references, and other information shown thereon
shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein. All
subsequent changes in zoning shall be shown on the zoning map.



   (B)   Governs. All property within the city shall have the zoning
designation shown on the zoning map. If there is any discrepancy or
inconsistency between the zoning map and any other map, ordinance, or source
which purports to indicate the zoning of property, the zoning map shall take
precedence.



   (C)   Intention. Zone boundary lines shown on the zoning map are
intended to follow lot lines, the centerlines of streets or alleys, the
centerlines of streets or alleys projected, the centerlines of railroad
rights-of-way, the center of watercourses, or the corporate limits of the
city, unless otherwise indicated. Where a zone boundary line divides a lot
which was in single ownership at the time of enactment of this chapter and
places portions of such lot in 2 or more zones, any portion of such lot
within 50 feet on either side of the dividing zone boundary line may be used
for any use allowed in either zone; provided, however, if any portion of such
lot shall extend beyond the 50 feet limitation, the zone line as shown shall
prevail.



   (D)   Floodplain Overlay Zone. The boundaries of the Floodplain
Overlay Zone shall be determined by scaling distances on the zoning map.
Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of
the zone, or where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field conditions, the Zoning Administrator shall make the
necessary interpretation. All decisions will be based on elevations on the
regional (100-year) flood profile and other available technical data.



   (E)   Interpretation. The Zoning Administrator shall interpret the
zoning map and the exact location of the zone boundary lines by reference to
evidence of the intent of the City Council. Any party aggrieved by an
interpretation of the Zoning Administrator under this section may appeal the
Zoning Administrator’s decision to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals as
outlined in § 151.016.



   (F)   Annexation. The zoning designation of any area annexed to the
city shall remain the same as approved by the governing body with previous
jurisdiction over the annexed area, and shall remain in force until modified
by the City Council. (Zoning map amendments are listed in Table of Special
Ordinances, Table I.)



(2013 Code, § 11.03)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 163, passed
3-28-1985; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994)



§ 151.004  ZONES.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided
into the following zones:



      (1)   Agricultural Preservation (AG);



      (2)   Rural Residential (RR);



      (3)   Low-Density Residential (R-1A);



      (4)   Urban Residential (R-1B);



      (5)   Old Shakopee Residential (R-1C);



      (6)   Medium-Density Residential (R-2);



      (7)   Multiple-Family Residential (R-3);



      (8)   Highway Business (B-1);



      (9)   Office Business (B-2);



      (10)   Central Business (B-3);



      (11)   Major Recreation (MR);



      (12)   Light Industry (I-1);



      (13)   Heavy Industry (I-2);



      (14)   Planned Unit Development Overlay (PUD);



      (15)   Mining Overlay (MIN);



      (16)   Shoreland Overlay (SH);



      (17)   Floodplain Overlay (FP); and



      (18)   Old Shakopee Business Overlay (B-1C).



   (B)   Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary,
reference in this chapter to residential zones includes AG, RR, R-1A, R-1B,
R-1C, R-2, and R-3; reference to business zones includes B-1, B-2, B-3, and
MR; and reference to industry zones includes I-1 and I-2.



(2013 Code, § 11.20)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 204, passed
7-31-1986; Ord. 215, passed 3-12-1987; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994)



§ 151.005  WATER SURFACE USE ZONING.



   (A)   Statutory authorization. As authorized by M.S. §§ 86B.201,
86B.205, and 459.20, as they may be amended from time to time, and Minn.
Rules 6110.3000 through 6110.3800, as now in effect and as hereafter amended,
this section is enacted for the purpose and with the intent to control and
regulate the use of the waters in the city, said bodies of water being
located entirely within the boundaries of the city, to promote it fullest use
and enjoyment by the public in general and the citizens of the city in
particular, to ensure safety for persons and property in connection with the
use of said waters; to harmonize and integrate the varying uses of said
waters; and to promote the general health, safety, and welfare of the
citizens of the city.



   (B)   Definitions. Terms used in this section related to boating are
defined in M.S. § 86B.005, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (C)   Surface zoning of natural environment lakes by restricting
motorized watercraft.



      (1)   The use of motorized watercraft (including, but not
limited to, boats powered by inboard and outboard motors and jet skis) is
prohibited on natural environment lakes.



      (2)   NATURAL ENVIRONMENT LAKES are defined by the Minn.
Rules  6120.3300 and listed in § 151.068(A)(2). As of June 22, 2009 natural
environment lakes include the following lakes within Shakopee: Blue Lake;
Dean Lake; Fisher Lake; Rice Lake; and Lake ID No. 70-0080. This list may be
revised based on adjustments to the city municipal boundaries or
modifications to state regulations defining natural environment lakes.



   (D)   Enforcement. The primary responsibility for enforcement of
this section shall rest with the City Police Department.



   (E)   Exemptions. All authorized resource management, emergency, and
enforcement personnel, while acting in the performance of their assigned
duties are exempt from the foregoing restrictions.



   (F)   Notification. It shall be the responsibility of the city to
provide for adequate notification of the public, which shall include
placement of a sign at each natural environment lake outlining the provisions
of this section, as well as the placement of necessary signs.



(2013 Code, § 11.55)  (Ord. 822, passed 8-6-2009)



§ 151.006  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Enforcing officer. This chapter shall be administered and
enforced by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with its terms, who shall
not permit any construction, use, or change of use which does not conform to
this chapter. The Zoning Administrator may designate such additional persons
as may be necessary or convenient to assist in administering and enforcing
this chapter.



   (B)   Duties of the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning
Administrator’s duties shall include the following:



      (1)   Determine that all building permits comply with the
terms of this chapter;



      (2)   Conduct inspections of buildings and uses of land to
determine compliance with the terms of this chapter;



      (3)   Maintain records of all zoning maps, amendments,
conditional uses permits, variances, appeals, and other matters regulated by
this chapter;



      (4)   Administer all applications under this chapter;



      (5)   Institute appropriate enforcement proceedings and
actions against violators;



      (6)   Serve as staff advisor to the Planning Commission and
the Board of Adjustment and Appeals;



      (7)   Prepare reports and information for the Planning
Commission and the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, and may attend their
meetings and participate in their hearings and discussions, but shall not
vote on any item before the Planning Commission or the Board of Adjustment
and Appeals; and



      (8)   Perform such other functions as may be necessary to
enforce and administer this chapter.



   (C)   Notice. Failure to give notice or to give adequate notice when
such is required by this chapter shall not invalidate any proceeding;
provided, that a good faith attempt has been made to comply with the notice
requirement.



   (D)   Fees. The fees required by this chapter shall be those
specified in the most recent fee schedule adopted by the City Council. Fees
are payable at the time of submission of an application and no application
shall be deemed to be complete until the fee has been paid. The fee may be
waived by the City Council in the case of applications filed in the public
interest by the Planning Commission or City Council.



(2013 Code, § 11.80)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 96, passed
11-11-1982; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994)



§ 151.007  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Development standards.



      (1)   Frontage required. A platted lot or parcel of land shall
not be developed unless it has frontage on a street or has access approved
through a planned unit development.



      (2)   Sewage. A platted lot or parcel of land shall not be
developed unless a safe and adequate sewage treatment system can be installed
to serve any building.



      (3)   Setbacks from streets. On corner lots or other lots
abutting 2 or more streets, the required front yard setback shall be provided
for each side abutting a street. The front yard shall be the side with the
shortest street frontage. In the Rural Residential (RR), Low-Density
Residential (R-1A), Urban Residential (R-1B), and Medium-Density Residential
(R-2) Zones, the required setback shall be reduced by 10  feet in any yard
abutting a street other than the front.



   (B)   Accessory structures.



      (1)   Constructed after principal building. No accessory
structure shall be constructed on any residential lot prior to the
construction of the principal building to which it is accessory,



      (2)   Size.



         (a)   Except in the Agricultural Preservation (AG) Zone,
no accessory structure shall exceed the height of the principal building or
15 feet in a residential zone, whichever is less. In the Low-Density
Residential (R-1A), Urban Residential (R-1B), Old Shakopee Residential
(R-1C), Medium-Density Residential (R-2), and Multiple-family Residential
(R-3) Zones, no accessory building shall exceed 10% of the lot area or exceed
75% of the square footage of the footprint of the principal dwelling,
whichever is less.



         (b)   A conditional use permit is required to exceed the
above size requirements in the Old Shakopee Residential (R-1C) Zone. A
variance procedure is applicable in all other districts.



      (3)   Front yard setback. Each accessory structure shall be
setback at least as far as the principal building on the lot. In the
Agricultural Preservation (AG) and Rural Residential (RR) Zones, no accessory
structure may be located closer to the front lot line than the principal
buildings or 200 feet, whichever is less.



      (4)   Side and rear yard setbacks.



         (a)   An accessory structure shall be setback a minimum
of 5 feet from the side or rear lot line, except in the Old Shakopee
Residential (R1-C) Zoning District, where an accessory structure can be
setback 3 feet on 1 side and 7 feet on the other side.



         (b)   A garage shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet
from the lot line abutting the street or alley where the driveway takes
access.



   (C)   Required yards and open space.



      (1)   No required yard or other open space allocated to one
building shall be used to satisfy yard or open space requirements for any
other building.



      (2)   The following shall not be considered to be
encroachments on yard requirements:



         (a)   Structural or decorative building elements,
provided they do not extend more than 2 feet into a yard;



         (b)   Yard lights and name plate signs;



         (c)   Terraces, steps, and similar structures, which are
setback a minimum of 5  feet from any side lot line and/or 10 feet from the
rear property line; and



         (d)   Decks which do not exceed 5 feet in height from
the ground to the bottom of the floor joists measured at the building wall,
which are setback a minimum of 5 feet from any side lot line and/or 10 feet
from the rear property line, except in the Old Shakopee Residential (R1-C)
Zoning District when the setback from the side lot line is 3 feet on one side
and 7 feet on the other side. Decks located in the Low-Density Residential
(R-1A), Urban Residential (R-1B), Old Shakopee Residential (R-1C), Medium-
Density Residential (R-2) Zoning Districts, and townhouse structures located
in any zoning district, which exceed 5 feet in height, shall be allowed to be
located 10 feet closer to the rear property line than is required by the
design standards of the zoning district in which the deck is located. Double
frontage lots (lots with frontage on 2 parallel streets), shall be excluded
from this provision due to the additional depth required of these lots.



      (3)   Buildings may be excluded from side yard requirements if
party walls are utilized, and the adjacent buildings are planned to be
constructed as an integral structure.



   (D)   Utility services. Utility services and utility service
structures are exempt from the application of this chapter when located
within public easements.



   (E)   Number of buildings per lot. Only one principal building shall
be located on a lot, unless the lot is subject to a planned unit development
or has a conditional use permit for a development containing more than one
principal structure per lot.



   (F)   Project review. Land use applications (including, but not
limited to, conditional use permits, variances, re-zonings, and planned unit
developments) shall be accepted by the city for property that is the subject
of an environmental assessment worksheet (EAW) or environmental impact
statement (EIS), but said land use application shall be incomplete due to the
environmental review and shall not be processed or reviewed by the City
Council, or the city’s boards or commissions, until such time as the EAW or
EIS review process has been completed.



   (G)   Criteria for granting a home occupation.



      (1)   Application for a home occupation shall be made to the
Zoning Administrator.



      (2)   An application, meeting all of the following criteria,
shall be granted approval upon administrative review by the Zoning
Administrator:



         (a)   The activity does not involve warehousing, except
incidental storage of merchandise offered for sale in connection with the
home occupation;



         (b)   The home occupation may be carried on by persons
residing in the dwelling unit and not more than one employee who does not
reside in the dwelling unit;



         (c)   Shall provide off-street parking for the employee;



         (d)   All material or equipment shall be stored within
an enclosed structure;



         (e)   Objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust,
electrical disturbances, odors, heat, glare, or other nuisance factors shall
not be discernible at the property line;



         (f)   The home occupation shall not create excessive
automobile traffic within the neighborhood;



         (g)   Shall not have any receipt or delivery of
merchandise, goods, or supplies except through the U.S. mail, similar parcel
delivery service, or personal vehicles not exceeding one ton; and



         (h)   May have outside off-street parking of no more
than one commercial vehicle or vehicle identified for business purposes, not
to exceed one ton capacity which is used for both personal and business
transportation. The vehicle shall be owned by and registered to an occupant
of the property and parked in a screened location; and



         (i)   Shall meet the zone’s off-street parking
requirements for all vehicles.



   (H)   Temporary family health care dwellings. Temporary family
health care dwellings as defined by Minnesota State Statutes shall be
prohibited in all zoning districts.



(2013 Code, § 11.81)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 106, passed
9-30-1982; Ord. 116, passed 4-14-1983; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 253,
passed 10-14-1988; Ord. 275, passed 9-22-1989; Ord. 282, passed 1-5-1990;
Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 470, passed 1-1-1997; Ord. 494, passed
8-14-1997; Ord. 495, passed 8-14-1997; Ord. 501, passed 9-18-1997; Ord. 518,
passed 7-2-1998; Ord. 643, passed 11-14-2002; Ord. 815, passed 2-26-2009;
Ord. 901, passed 2-17-2015; Ord. 940, passed 8-16-2016; Ord. 950, passed
11-15-2016)



§ 151.008  PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   Powers and duties. The Planning Commission shall provide
assistance to the City Council in the administration of this chapter, and
shall review all matters referred to them, including land acquisitions and
dispositions, and capital improvements. The Planning Commission shall review
and hold public hearings on all applications for official mapping requests,
comprehensive plan amendments, Interim Use Permits, and zoning ordinance
amendments using the criteria set forth in this chapter.



   (B)   Actions. The Planning Commission shall make recommendations to
the City Council on items before it within a reasonable time or such time as
shall be prescribed by statute or ordinance. Failure by the Planning
Commission to make a recommendation within the required period shall be
deemed to be a denial if the delay is appealed by the applicant. The Planning
Commission may condition its recommendation in order to effect the intent of
this ordinance. The Planning Commission shall accompany its recommendation to
deny an application with a statement of its findings regarding the matter.



   (C)   City Council review. The City Council may adopt, modify, or
reject the recommendation of the Planning Commission by vote of a simple
majority of those present, unless otherwise required by statute or this
chapter.



   (D)   Land acquisitions, dispositions, and capital improvements.



      (1)   Prior to the acquisition or disposition of a
publicly-owned interest in real property within the city, or the
authorization of any capital improvement, the Planning Commission shall
review the proposed acquisition, disposition, or capital improvement for
compliance with the comprehensive plan. This requirement applies to proposed
acquisition, dispositions, and capital improvements by the city or a special
district or agency thereof, or any other political subdivision which has
jurisdiction within the city.



      (2)   The Planning Commission shall report its findings in
writing to the appropriate city, district, agency, or political subdivision
within 45 days. Failure of the Planning Commission to report on the proposal
within 45 days, or such other period as may be designated by the City
Council, shall be deemed an approval. The City Council may dispense with the
requirements of this division (D) when, in its judgment, it finds that the
proposal has no relationship to the comprehensive plan.



   (E)   Official maps.



      (1)   For the purpose of carrying out the policies of the
major thoroughfare plan and the community facilities plan, the Planning
Commission may recommend to the City Council a proposed official map covering
all or a part of the city. The official map shall identify land needed for
future public uses. The City Council may, after holding a public hearing,
adopt and amend the official map by ordinance.



      (2)   A notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing
shall be published in the official newspaper at least 10 days prior to the
date of the hearing. The official map or maps shall be prepared in sufficient
detail to permit the establishment of the future acquisition lines on the
ground. The accuracy of the future acquisition lines shall be attested to by
a registered land surveyor. After adoption, a copy of the official map, or
sections thereof with a copy of the adopting ordinance attached, shall be
filed with the County Recorder.



   (F)   Comprehensive plan.



      (1)   The Planning Commission may recommend to the City
Council the adoption and amendment from time to time of a comprehensive plan.
The comprehensive plan may be prepared and adopted in sections, each of which
relates to a major subject of the plan or to a major geographical section of
the city. The City Council may propose the comprehensive plan and amendments
to it, by resolution submitted to the Planning Commission. Before adopting
the comprehensive plan or any section or amendment of the plan, the Planning
Commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon.



      (2)   A notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing
shall be published once in the official newspaper of the city at least 10
days before the day of the hearing. A proposed comprehensive plan or an
amendment to it may not be acted upon by the City Council until it has
received the recommendation of the Planning Commission or until 60 days have
elapsed from the date an amendment proposed by the City Council has been
submitted to the Planning Commission for its recommendation. The City Council
may, by resolution by a two-thirds vote of all its members, adopt and amend
the comprehensive plan or portion thereof.



(2013 Code, § 11.82)  (Ord. 251, passed 8-26-1988; Ord. 337, passed
7-23-1992; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 953, passed 12-20-2016)



§ 151.009  ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Initiation. An amendment to the zoning ordinance may be
initiated by the City Council, by the Planning Commission, or by application
from an affected property owner. Amendments may be in the form of changes to
the text of the zoning ordinance or changes to the zoning map. All amendments
shall promote the public health, safety, and welfare and be consistent with
the comprehensive plan.



   (B)   Criteria for granting a zoning ordinance amendment.



      (1)   The City Council may grant a zoning ordinance amendment
when it finds that one or more of the following criteria exists:



         (a)   The original zoning ordinance is in error;



         (b)   Significant changes in community goals and
policies have taken place;



         (c)   Significant changes in city-wide or neighborhood
development patterns have occurred; or



         (d)   The comprehensive plan requires a different
provision.



      (2)   An amendment involving a planned unit development or a
Floodplain Overlay Zone also must meet the criteria set forth below for that
zone.



   (C)   Application for changed to zoning map.



      (1)   An application for a change to the zoning map may be
made by the owner of the property and shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator on forms provided by the city.



      (2)   The application shall be accompanied by the following:



         (a)   A map or plat of the property and the land within
350 feet thereof;



         (b)   A list of the names and addresses of the owners of
all properties located wholly or partially within 350 feet of the property as
such appear on the records of the County Recorder;



         (c)   Evidence of ownership or an interest in the
property;



         (d)   When the request is for the addition or deletion
of an overlay zone, the Zoning Administrator may request that the applicant
deposit an additional amount up to $1,000 for planning, engineering,
administrative, and legal expenses incurred by the city for the review and
processing of the application, if the Zoning Administrator anticipates that
the application will cause the city to incur such expenses. Any portion of
the supplemental deposit which is not used to reimburse the city will be
refunded to the applicant;



         (e)   If the request is inconsistent with the
comprehensive plan, the application must be accompanied by an application for
an amendment to the comprehensive plan;



         (f)   If the request is to add or delete a planned unit
development, or to add land to or delete land from the Floodplain Overlay
Zone, the additional application information set forth below must be
submitted; and



         (g)   Such other information as may be required by the
city.



   (D)   Public hearing.



      (1)   Hearing required. No zoning amendment shall be adopted
until a public hearing has been held by the Planning Commission or City
Council. A notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be
published in the official newspaper at least 10 days prior to the date of the
hearing. Where an amendment involves changes in the boundaries of any zone or
the addition or deletion of an overlay zone, a similar notice shall be mailed
at least 10 days before the day of the hearing to each owner of property
situated wholly or partly within 350 feet of the property to which the
amendment relates. When considering the addition of a Mining Overlay Zone,
written notice of the public hearing shall be sent to property owners of
record within one-half mile of the property in question.



      (2)   Recommendation to City Council. The Planning Commission
shall submit its recommendation regarding the re-zoning application to the
City Council within 60 days following the public hearing, unless an extension
is agreed to in writing by the applicant. If no recommendation is transmitted
by the Planning Commission within 60 days, the City Council may take action
without a Planning Commission recommendation.



      (3)   Shoreland and Floodplain Overlay Zones. The Commissioner
of the Department of Natural Resources shall be given written notice all
hearings to consider an amendment to the text or map of the Shoreland or
Floodplain Overlay Zone at least 10 days before the day of the hearing. The
notice shall include a draft of the ordinance amendment.



   (E)   City Council action.



      (1)   Generally. After receipt of the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, or after 60 days from the receipt of application without
a Planning Commission recommendation, the City Council shall consider and act
on the amendment. The City Council shall mail a copy of its decision to any
applicant other than the City Council or the Planning Commission. If the City
Council fails to make a decision within 120 days, the amendment shall be
deemed to have been denied. The City Council may adopt an amendment to this
chapter upon an affirmative vote of the number of City Councilmembers that is
required by M.S. § 462.357, subd. 2(b), as it may be amended from time to
time.



      (2)   Shoreland Overlay Zone. A copy of any approved zoning
amendment affecting land within the Shoreland Overlay Zone shall be sent to
the Commissioner of the State Department of Natural Resources within 10 days
after final action or approval.



   (F)   Reapplication. No amendment which is denied wholly or in part
by the City Council shall be resubmitted for a period of 6 months from the
date of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or change of conditions.



   (G)   Amendment to the comprehensive plan. Any amendment to the
zoning map granted by the City Council shall automatically amend the
comprehensive plan.



   (H)   Special provisions for Floodplain Overlay Zones. In addition
to the criteria required for any change to the zoning map, all of the
following criteria must be found to exist for before the Floodplain Overlay
Zone can be removed from any land:



      (1)   Any one of the following conditions is satisfied:



         (a)   The original map was in error;



         (b)   The area has been filled to or above the elevation
of the regional flood and is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain; or



         (c)   The Commissioner of the Department of Natural
Resources has granted a special exception to this rule because the
Commissioner determined that, through other measures, lands are adequately
protected for the intended use.



      (2)   The amendment has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources; and



      (3)   The amendment meets the Federal Emergency Management
Agency technical conditions and criteria and has received the approval of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.



(2013 Code, § 11.83)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 246, passed
6-17-1988; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 480, passed 4-24-1997; Ord. 638,
passed 9-19-2002; Ord. 907, passed 6-16-2015)



§ 151.010  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS.



   (A)   Powers and duties. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall
have the following powers and duties:



      (1)   To hear requests for conditional use permits which are
not closely related to a land use application requiring consideration by the
Planning Commission and City Council;



      (2)   To hear requests for variances which are not closely
related to a land use application requiring consideration by the Planning
Commission and City Council;



      (3)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made
by the Zoning Administrator or any other person in the enforcement of this
chapter;



      (4)   To hear and decide requests for expansion of an existing
use or structure, reconstruction of a partially destroyed structure,
construction of a new structure, or other intensification of a Type B
nonconformity, as set forth in § 151.017;



      (5)   To hear requests for shared parking plans, cooperative
parking plans, and shared driveways; and



      (6)   To hear and decide appeals brought by persons aggrieved
by a decision of city staff regarding the placement or removal of items
within a city easement or sight triangle area or by city staff’s denial of
a fence permit or decision to require removal of a garden fence.



   (B)   Procedures.



      (1)   The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall conduct a
public hearing on all conditional use permits, variances, and appeals before
it. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the official newspaper
once at least 10 days before the hearing.



      (2)   Any matter involving a variance also shall require
mailed notice at least 10 days before the hearing to the applicant and the
owners of all property located wholly or partially within 350 feet of the
property for which the variance is requested. The Board shall, within a
reasonable time, make a decision regarding any matter before it by adopting
findings and shall serve a copy of its decision upon the applicant by mail.



   (C)   Combined parking facilities. The Board of Adjustment and
Appeals shall review applications for shared parking plans and cooperative
parking plans for compliance with the requirements of §§ 151.140 through
151.143. The Board shall approve a shared parking plan or a cooperative
parking plan when it finds that such parking plan provides sufficient parking
to meet the intent of this chapter, and is not detrimental to the owners and
occupants of the surrounding property.



   (D)   Shared driveways. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall
review applications for shared driveways, except when said plans are part of
the platting process, for compliance with the requirements of §§ 151.155
through 151.157. When said plans are part of the platting process, the
Planning Commission shall review the application for compliance. The Board
shall approve a shared driveway when it finds that the application meets the
intent of this chapter and is not detrimental to the owners and occupants of
the affected property.



(2013 Code, § 11.84)  (Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 506, passed
12-2-1997; Ord. 678, passed 8-28-2003; Ord. 780, passed 6-14-2007)



§ 151.011  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.



   (A)   Criterial for granting conditional use permits. In granting a
conditional use permit, the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall consider
the effect of the proposed use upon the health, safety, and general welfare
of the occupants of surrounding lands and the city as a whole. The Board of
Adjustment and Appeals shall not grant a conditional use permit without
making the following findings:



      (1)   The use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment
of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already
permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the
immediate vicinity;



      (2)   The establishment of the conditional use will not impede
the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding vacant
property for uses allowed in the area;



      (3)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and other
necessary facilities have been or will be provided;



      (4)   The use is consistent with the purposes of the zone in
which the applicant intends to locate the proposed use; and



      (5)   The use is not in conflict with the comprehensive plan.



   (B)   Application. Application for a conditional use permit shall be
made to the Zoning Administrator on forms provided by the city and shall be
accompanied by the following:



      (1)   The legal description of the property;



      (2)   A list of the names and addresses of the owners of all
properties situated wholly or partially within 350 feet of the property as
such appear on the records of the County Recorder, or such larger area as
specified in the applicable conditional use permit provisions;



      (3)   Evidence of ownership or an interest in the property;



      (4)   The fee;



      (5)   A plat or map of the property which shows, at a minimum,
all lot lines, existing and proposed structures, driveways, and parking
spaces; and



      (6)   A list of any variances requested with the conditional
use permit. All variance requests shall be reviewed as part of the
conditional use permit process but shall be subject to the criteria for
granting variances as outlined in section § 151.015(B).



   (C)   Public hearing.



      (1)   Generally. After receipt of a completed application, a
date shall be set for a public hearing before the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals. Not less than 10 days prior to the public hearing, notice shall be
published in the official newspaper and sent by mail to the applicant and to
the owners of all properties located wholly or partially within 350 feet, as
reflected in the records of the County Recorder.



      (2)   Shoreland and Floodplain Overlay Zones. The Commissioner
of the Department of Natural Resources shall be given written notice of all
hearings to consider a conditional use permit in the Shoreland Overlay Zone
or in the Floodplain Overlay Zone at least 10 days before the day of the
hearing.



   (D)   Decision.



      (1)   Generally. Following the hearing or any continuance
which is not appealed by the applicant, the Board of Adjustment and Appeals
shall make a decision on the request for a conditional use permit.
Conditional use permits may be approved by the affirmative vote of a simple
majority of those present. If the Board denies a conditional use permit, it
shall make a finding and determination that the conditions required for
approval do not exist. All decisions by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals
are final subject to appeal to the City Council.



      (2)   Shoreland and Floodplain Overlay Zones. A copy of any
approved conditional use permit affecting land within the Shoreland Overlay
Zone or within the Floodplain Overlay Zone shall be sent to the Commissioner
of the Department of Natural Resources within 10 days after final action or
approval.



   (E)   Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals regarding a conditional use permit may have such
decision reviewed by the City Council if a request for review is submitted to
the Zoning Administrator within 10 days of the date of the decision. The
appeal shall be in writing and shall include a statement of the alleged
errors or omissions of the Board.



   (F)   Additional conditions. In granting a conditional use permit or
altering an existing conditional use permit, the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals or the City Council may impose conditions in addition to those
specified in this chapter in order to preserve the health, safety, or welfare
of the community or in order to implement the purposes of this chapter or the
comprehensive plan.



   (G)   Amendment; reapplication. A request for an amended conditional
use permit shall be administered in a manner similar to that required for a
new conditional use permit. An amendment shall include requests for any
change in the terms or conditions of the conditional use permit. If an
application for a conditional use permit is denied, no application for the
same or essentially the same conditional use permit shall be resubmitted for
a period of 6 months from the date of denial.



   (H)   Recording. A copy of the conditional use permit shall be filed
by the city with the County Recorder. The permit shall contain a legal
description of the property.



   (I)   Term. A conditional use permit shall remain in effect for so
long as the conditions agreed upon are observed. A conditional use permit
shall become void if it is not used within one year of the date of final
action by the city. A conditional use permit shall expire if normal operation
of the use has been discontinued for 6 or more months. Time shall be
calculated as beginning on the day following the last day in which the use
was in normal operation, or following the date of final city action, and
shall run continuously thereafter.



   (J)   Revocation. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals may review
conditional use permits periodically and may revoke a permit upon violation
of any condition of the permit, requirement of this chapter, or violation of
state or federal law or regulation, if it is discovered after approval of the
conditional use permit that the Board’s decision was based at least in part
on fraudulent information. The Board may revoke the conditional use permit,
modify the conditions, or impose additional conditions to ensure compliance
with this chapter.



   (K)   Construction during appeal period. Any applicant who obtains a
building permit and starts construction after the decision of the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals, but prior to the termination of the appeal period,
assumes the risk that the decision may be reversed upon appeal. When an
appeal is received by the city, the applicant will be notified of the appeal
and informed of the date of the City Council meeting at which it will be
heard.



   (L)   Violations. No person shall violate, fail to comply with, or
assist, direct, or permit the violation of the terms or conditions of a
conditional use permit.



   (M)   Special provisions in the Floodplain Overlay Zone.



      (1)   Criteria. In the Floodplain Overlay Zone, the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals shall not grant a conditional use permit without
considering the following factors:



         (a)   The danger to life and property due to increased
flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments;



         (b)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other
lands or downstream to the injury of others or that they may block bridges,
culverts, or other hydraulic structures;



         (c)   Proposed water and sewer systems, and the ability
of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions;



         (d)   The susceptibility of the proposed use, any
structures, and their contents to flood damage, and the effect of such damage
on the individual owner;



         (e)   The importance to the city of the services
provided by the proposed use;



         (f)   The need for a waterfront location;



         (g)   The availability of alternative locations not
subject to flooding for the proposed use;



         (h)   The compatibility of the proposed use with
existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future;



         (i)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area;



         (j)   The safety of access to the property in times of
flood for emergency and other vehicles;



         (k)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of
rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and



         (l)   Other factors relevant to the purposes of this
chapter.



      (2)   Application.



         (a)   In addition to the requirements above, application
for a conditional use permit in the Floodplain Overlay Zone shall be
accompanied by information sufficient to allow the city to determine the
regulatory flood protection elevation, and whether the proposed use is in the
floodway or the flood fringe area.



         (b)   Such information may include the following:



            1.   A typical valley cross-section showing the
channel of the stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the
channel, cross-sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development,
and high water information;



            2.   A plans drawn to scale showing elevations or
contours of the ground, existing and proposed structures, fill, or storage of
materials; location and elevations of streets; existing land uses and
vegetation upstream and downstream; and soil type; and



            3.   A profile showing the slope of the bottom of
the channel or flow line of the stream for at least 500 feet in either
direction from the proposed development.



      (3)   Evaluation of proposed project. In the information
submitted to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, the Zoning Administrator
shall include an evaluation of the proposed project in relation to flood
heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood damage to the use, and the
adequacy of the plans for protection.



      (4)   Determination.



         (a)   The city shall determine whether the proposed use
is in the floodway or flood fringe area, and determine the regulatory flood
protection elevation.



         (b)   This determination includes the following:



            1.   An estimation of the peak discharge of the
regional flood;



            2.   A calculation of the water surface profile of
the regional flood based upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and
overbank areas; and



            3.   A computation of the floodway necessary to
convey or store the regional flood without increasing flood stages more than
one-half of one foot. A lesser stage increase than one-half of one foot shall
be required if, as a result of the additional stage increase, greater flood
damages would result. An equal degree of encroachment on both sides of the
stream within the reach shall be assumed in computing floodway boundaries. An
“equal degree of encroachment” is a method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that floodplain areas on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.



      (5)   Presentation of determinations to Planning Commission
and City Council. The Zoning Administrator shall present these technical
determinations to the Planning Commission and the City Council. The City
Council shall accept the technical evaluation and the recommended floodway or
flood fringe area boundary, or deny the permit application. The City Council,
prior to official action, may submit the application and all supporting data
and analysis to the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Department of
Natural Resources.



   (N)   Interim use permits.



      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of the interim use permit
application process is to:



         (a)   Ensure sufficient information is provided by the
applicant;



         (b)   Ensure interim uses comply with city code
requirements;



         (c)   Ensure temporary uses remain temporary in nature;



         (d)   Ensure appropriate conditions are attached to
enhance compatibility with surrounding uses; and



         (e)   Ensure interim use permit applications are
processed in a manner consistent with state statutes.



         (f)   Interim use permits may be used for the temporary
establishment of any use listed in any zoning district as a permitted or
conditional use.



      (2)   Initiation. An interim use permit application must be
initiated by the owner of land upon which the interim use is proposed or by
the City Council. If an interim use permit application is denied, an
applicant may not submit a subsequent interim use permit application for the
same use on the same site until one year has passed since the denial.



      (3)   Public hearing. After receipt of a completed
application, a date shall be set for a public hearing before the Planning
Commission. Not less than ten days prior to the public hearing, notice shall
be published in the official newspaper and sent by mail to the applicant and
of the owners of all properties located wholly or partially within 500 feet,
as reflected in the records of the County Recorder.



      (4)   Review and approval. Interim use permit applications
must be reviewed by the Planning Commission for a recommendation to the City
Council.



      (5)   Conditions of approval. The entities empowered to review
and take action on a given interim use permit application has the authority
to attach conditions of approval to that application.



      (6)   Findings. The following findings must be made prior to
the approval of an interim use permit:



         (a)   The proposed use will not delay permanent
development of the site;



         (b)   The proposed use will not adversely impact
implementation of the Comprehensive Plan or adopted plan for the area;



         (c)   The proposed use will not be in conflict with any
provisions of the city code on an ongoing basis;



         (d)   The proposed use will not be injurious to the
surrounding neighborhood or otherwise harm the public health, safety and
welfare;



         (e)   The date or event that will terminate the use has
been identified with certainty; and



         (f)   The property on which the use is situated has no
open enforcement orders and there are no nuisance characteristics associated
with the property or its current use.



         (g)   Permission of the use will not impose additional
costs on the public if it is necessary for the public to take the property in
the future.



         (h)   The user agrees to any conditions that the
governing body deems appropriate for permission of the use.



      (7)   Expiration and termination. An interim use permit
expires and the interim use must terminate at the earlier of:



         (a)   The expiration date established by the City
Council at the time of approval, but in no event more than two years from the
date of approval;



         (b)   The occurrence of any event identified in the
interim use permit for the termination of the use; or



         (c)   Upon an amendment of the city code that no longer
allows the interim use.



         (d)   Unused interim use permits expire six months after
approval if the proposed use has not commenced or a complete building permit
application for a structure to support the interim use has not been submitted
to the city for review. A land owner may apply to the Zoning Administrator
for no more than one time extension of up to six months for an unused interim
use permit.



         (e)   Interim use permits expire if the interim use
ceases operation for a continuous period of one year or longer.



      (8)   Suspension or revocation. The City Council may suspend
or revoke an interim use permit upon the failure of the permittee, owner,
operator, tenant or user to comply with the provisions of this code, the laws
of the state or any condition established at the time of approval of the
interim use permit. A suspension or revocation of an interim use permit must
be preceded by written notice to the permittee and a hearing. The notice must
provide at least ten days' notice of the time and place of the hearing and
must state the nature of the charges against the permittee. The notice must
be mailed to the permittee at the most recent address listed on the
application. The hearing of a contested case is held by the City Council.



      (9)   Standards.



         (a)   Term. The term of an interim use permit must not
exceed two years with a review after the first year.



         (b)   Re-application. An interim use permit is subject
to an annual review, but upon application for a time extension of the same
use on the same site, succeeding interim use permits may be approved for up
to one year each if the Planning Commission and City Council makes the
findings set forth in subsection (G) above in the affirmative and also finds
that all previous conditions of approval have been satisfied and that the use
meets all code requirements or has received appropriate variances from those
requirements.



      (10)   Content. Interim use permit applications must include
the following information, unless exempted by the Zoning Administrator:



         (a)   An application form signed by the property
owner(s) or authorized representative;



         (b)   A list of the names and addresses of owners of all
properties situated wholly or partially within 500 feet of the property as
such appear on the records of the County Record, or such larger area as
specified in the applicable conditional use provisions.



         (c)   The required application fee.



         (d)   Written documentation that includes:



            1.   A complete description of the use;



            2.   Schedule for commencement and cessation of
the use;



            3.   Size of the facility accommodating the use
including the number of seats, students, customers and the like;



            4.   Hours and dates of operation;



            5.   Anticipated employment;



            6.   Floor plan and/or site plan;



         (e)   If applicable due to site or building
modifications, a separate but associated final site and building plan
application or final development plan application; and



         (f)   Any special studies requested. The City Engineer
or the Zoning Administrator may request special studies when there is
evidence that the proposed use may negatively impact public infrastructure,
the environment or adjacent land uses. Such studies may include, but are not
limited to, traffic, environmental, storm water management, wetland, and
utility studies.



(2013 Code, § 11.85)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 35, passed
1-31-1980; Ord. 96, passed 11-11-1982; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 377,
passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 538, passed 2-18-1999; Ord. 953, passed 12-20-2016) 
Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.012  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONES.



   (A)   Purpose. It is the intent of the city in establishing general
and specific criteria for conditional uses that such uses be subject to
careful evaluation to ensure that their location and design are consistent
with the standards, purposes, and procedures of this chapter and the
comprehensive plan, and do not have a detrimental impact on neighboring
properties. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals may impose conditions on such
uses in order to ensure compliance or to effect the purpose of this chapter.



   (B)   Specific standards for Residential/Business/Industrial Zones.
In addition to the standards specified in § 151.011, the Board of Adjustment
and Appeals will consider the specific standards contained in this division
(B) when deciding whether a conditional use permit should be granted.



      (1)   Accessory structures over the specified size in the Old
Shakopee Residential (R-1C) Zone.



         (a)   Shall meet all setback requirements for accessory
structures;



         (b)   Shall not exceed the total square footage of the
principal structure;



         (c)   Shall not be used for any commercial or leased
storage use;



         (d)   Shall not impede or alter the natural drainage
flow;



         (e)   Shall not increase runoff to neighboring
properties;



         (f)   Shall provide a survey showing spot elevations and
location of all structures both existing and proposed;



         (g)   Shall provide a scaled elevation of the proposed
structure; and



         (h)   Architecture and exterior materials must be
compatible with the principal structure and neighboring properties.



      (2)   Agricultural research facilities.



         (a)   Shall provide evidence that the research
facility’s work will not present a hazard to plants or animals on adjacent
properties;



         (b)   Shall screen all exterior storage from any
adjacent residential uses; and



         (c)   Shall landscape all structures and parking
facilities.



      (3)   Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics.



         (a)   Shall not be located on a lot or parcel of land
adjacent to any Low-Density Residential (R-1A), Urban Residential (R-1B), or
Old Shakopee Residential (R-1C) Zone;



         (b)   Shall submit a plan for the disposal of all wastes;



         (c)   Shall have all animals attended and leashed during
exercise runs; and



         (d)   Shall landscape all structures and parking
facilities.



      (4)   Bed and breakfast inns.



         (a)   Shall meet all requirements of the State
Department of Health;



         (b)   If providing meals, shall serve them only to
guests renting a room;



         (c)   Shall provide off-street parking which is screened
in accordance with §§ 151.105 through 151.125;



         (d)   Shall be the residence of the owner or operator;
and



         (e)   Shall landscape all structures and parking
facilities.



      (5)   Boathouses.



         (a)   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation;



         (b)   Shall not contain sanitary facilities;



         (c)   Shall be setback a minimum of 10 feet from the
ordinary high water level;



         (d)   Shall not occupy an area greater than 250 square
feet;



         (e)   Shall be constructed or screened to reduce
visibility from public waters and adjacent shorelands through the use of
vegetation, topography, color, or increased setback, assuming summer leaf-on
conditions; and



         (f)   If located on shorelands adjacent to recreational
development waterbodies, shall not occupy an area greater than 400 square
feet. The width of the structure shall not exceed 20 feet as measured
parallel to the shoreline.



      (6)   Cemeteries



         (a)   Shall have a minimum lot size of 5 acres;



         (b)   Shall be located adjacent to an arterial or
collector street as identified in the comprehensive plan; and



         (c)   Shall be screened to a height of 3 feet.



      (7)   Churches and other places of worship.



         (a)   Shall be located adjacent to an arterial or
collector street as identified in the comprehensive plan;



         (b)   Shall have parking facilities setback 15 feet from
residential property;



         (c)   Shall screen parking facilities adjacent to
residential property with a berm and/or landscaping to a minimum height of 3
feet; and



         (d)   Shall have an impervious surface percent of no
more than 70%, and the remainder of the site shall be landscaped.



      (8)   Commercial feed lots.



         (a)   Shall be a minimum of 1,320 feet from any
residential zone other than Agricultural Preservation (AG); and



         (b)   Shall comply with all requirements of the State
Pollution Control Agency with regard to the disposal of waste.



      (9)   Commercial recreation, minor.



         (a)   Shall be located adjacent to an arterial or
collector street as identified in the comprehensive plan;



         (b)   Shall have all buildings setback 50 feet from all
property lines; and



         (c)   Shall landscape all structures and parking
facilities.



      (10)   Day care facilities serving 13 through 16 persons.



         (a)   Shall not have any external building changes or
improvements which alter the original character of the house;



         (b)   Shall have drop-off and pick-up areas located
outside of the public right-of-way, and designed to enhance vehicular and
pedestrian safely;



         (c)   Shall have outdoor play areas located and designed
to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent residential uses; and



         (d)   Shall be on a site served by public water and
sanitary sewer.



      (11)   Developments containing more than one principal
structure per lot.



         (a)   Shall be on a lot that meets all design standards
and public improvement requirements prescribed by Ch. 150;



         (b)    Shall be designed and placed to facilitate
ingress, egress, and overall circulation, both for the development as a whole
and for the individual buildings and structures within the development; and



         (c)   Shall consist of structures that are owned,
maintained, and operated under unified control in accordance with a plan
which contain provisions providing for the enforcement thereof.



      (12)   Flood fringe storage of materials or equipment. Flood
fringe storage of materials or equipment below the regulatory flood
protection elevation, if, in time of flooding, the materials or equipment are
buoyant, shall submit a plan for removal of the materials and equipment from
the area within the time available after a flood warning.



      (13)   Floodway area structures accessory to a permitted or
conditional use.



         (a)   Shall not cause any increase in the stage of a
100-year or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach
or reaches affected;



         (b)   Shall not be designed for human habitation;



         (c)   Shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of flood waters.
Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis
parallel to the direction of flood flow. So far as practicable, structures
shall be placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of
adjoining structures; and



         (d)   1.   Shall be elevated on fill or structurally
dry-flood-proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood-proofing
classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an accessory
structure may be flood-proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 flood-proofing
classification in the State Building Code provided the accessory structure
constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed 500 square feet in size,
and for a detached garage, the detached garage must be used solely for
parking of vehicles and limited storage.



            2.   All flood-proofed accessory structures must
meet the following additional standards, as appropriate:



               a.   The structure must be adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure
and shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls;
and



               b.    Any mechanical and utility equipment
in the structure must be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation or properly flood-proofed.



      (14)   Floodway area placement of fill.



         (a)   Shall not cause any increase in the stage of a
100-year or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach
or reaches affected;



         (b)   Shall not include spoil from dredging, or sand and
gravel mining operations, unless a long-term site development plan is
submitted which includes an erosion and sedimentation prevention element; and



         (c)   Shall be protected from erosion by vegetative
cover, mulching, riprap, or other acceptable method.



      (15)   Floodway area storage yards for equipment, machinery,
or materials.



         (a)   Shall not cause any increase in the stage of a
100-year or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach
or reaches affected;



         (b)   Shall not include any material that, in time of
flooding, is flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal,
or plant life; and



         (c)   Shall be limited to materials or equipment which
is readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood
warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals.



      (16)   Floodway area uses. Floodway area uses include the
following:



         (a)   Mining and storage of sand, gravel, and other
mined materials;



         (b)   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and
water control structures;



         (c)   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission
lines, and pipelines; and



         (d)   Campgrounds with facilities for recreational
vehicles; and other uses similar to those permitted, shall not cause any
increase in the stage of a 100-year or regional flood or cause an increase in
flood damages in the reach or reaches affected.



      (17)   Floodway area structural works. Floodway area
structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes, and floodwalls
constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual
structures and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect agricultural
crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the ten-year
frequency flood event:



         (a)   Shall be subject to the provisions of M.S. Ch.
103G, as it may be amended from time to time, if they will change the course,
current, or cross-section of protected wetlands or public waters;



         (b)   Shall be prohibited if they are community-wide
structural works for flood control intended to remove areas from the
regulatory floodplain; and



         (c)   Shall not cause an increase to the 100-year or
regional flood. The technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or
storage loss on both sides of a stream.



      (18)   Funeral homes.



         (a)   The structure shall be of an architectural style
which is compatible with any adjacent residential use; and



         (b)   Shall landscape all structures and parking
facilities.



      (19)   Hospitals or clinics.



         (a)   Shall not be located on a lot or parcel of land
adjacent to any Low-Density Residential (R-1A) or Urban Residential (R-1B)
Zone;



         (b)   Shall be located adjacent to an arterial or
collector street as identified in the comprehensive plan;



         (c)   Shall have parking facilities setback 15 feet from
streets and nonresidential property, and 25 feet from residential property;



         (d)   Shall have an impervious surface percent of no
more than 70%, and the remainder of the site shall be suitably landscaped; and



         (e)   Shall not have any emergency vehicle access
adjacent to or located across a street from any residential use.



      (20)   Kennels.



         (a)   Shall submit a plan for the disposal of all waste;



         (b)   Shall have all animals attended and leashed during
exercise runs; and



         (c)   Shall landscape all structures and parking
facilities.



      (21)   Mining.



         (a)   Shall provide the city with the exact legal
description and acreage of area to be mined;



         (b)   Shall provide the city with an aerial photograph
of the site prior to any mining;



         (c)   Shall provide the city with the following maps of
the entire site and all areas within 500 feet of the site, drawn at a scale
of one inch to 100 feet:



            1.   Map A - existing conditions to include:



               a.   Contour lines at two-foot intervals;



               b.   Existing vegetation;



               c.   Existing drainage and permanent water
areas;



               d.   Existing structures;



               e.   Existing wells; and



               f.   Cross-sectional views from each
direction.



            2.   Map B - proposed operations to include:



               a.   Structures to be erected;



               b.   Location of sites to be mined showing
the maximum depth of proposed excavation;



               c.   Location of tailings deposits showing
maximum height of deposits;



               d.   Location of machinery to be used in the
mining operation;



               e.   Location of storage of mined materials,
showing height of storage deposits;



               f.   Location of parking facilities;



               g.   Location of storage of explosives;



               h.   Erosion and sediment control structures;



               i.   Location of proposed wells, and the
depth to the water table;



               j.   Location of proposed washing operations;



               k.   A mining quantities table showing the
quantity and type of materials expected to be mined in each phase and each
year; and



               l.   Cross-sectional views of the site
during each phase from each direction;



            3.   Map C - end use plan to include:



               a.   Final grade of proposed site showing
elevations and contour lines at two-foot intervals;



               b.   Location and species of vegetation to
be replanted;



               c.   Location and nature of any structures
to be erected in relation to the end use plan; and



               d.   Cross-sectional views of the site after
final grading.



         (d)   Shall provide the city with a full and adequate
description of all phases of the proposed operation to include an estimate of
duration of the mining operation;



         (e)   Shall provide a dust control plan detailing the
methods proposed for controlling dust, application rates, and time frames,
and volumes of water to be used;



         (f)   Shall pave or gravel all roads which are within
450 feet of any other zone to minimize dust conditions;



         (g)   Shall provide a noise control plan showing all
occupied structures within 1,000 feet of the mining site, existing noise
contours in 5 Db intervals, and noise contours anticipated during operations
for each phase;



         (h)   Shall provide a vibration control plan;



         (i)   Shall provide a landscape plan prepared by or
under the supervision of a landscape architect showing material types, common
and botanical names, sizes, number, and location of proposed plantings;



         (j)   Shall provide lighting and signage plans showing
the type, height, and location of all exterior lighting and signs;



         (k)   Shall provide a stormwater management plan showing
the stormwater contour lines and drainage patterns prior to, during, and
after mining, stormwater runoff calculations, and indicating that the State
Pollution Control Agency’s Best Management Practices shall be followed;



         (l)   Shall provide a traffic analysis prepared by a
professional engineer showing the following:



            1.   Existing traffic volumes on affected streets;



            2.   Anticipated traffic volumes on affected
streets;



            3.   Anticipated trip generation for each phase or
operations change;



            4.   Morning and afternoon peak hour traffic
volumes at all driveways into the site;



            5.   Recommended traffic improvements both on and
off the site; and



            6.   Recommended traffic management actions,
including truck routing.



         (m)   Shall complete an environmental assessment
worksheet;



         (n)   If adjacent to a residential zone or within 300
feet of 2 or more residential structures, shall be bound by the following
standards:



            1.   Where water collects to a depth of one and
one-half feet or more, for at least one month, and occupies an area of 700
square feet or more, all access to such water shall be barred by a fence or
other barrier at least 4 feet in height; and



            2.   Where slopes occur that are steeper than
one-foot vertical to 3 feet horizontal, for a period of one month or more,
all access to such slopes shall be barred by a fence or other barrier at
least 4 feet in height.



         (o)   Shall screen the mining site from adjacent
residential or business uses. The mining site also shall be screened from any
street within 500 feet. The screening shall be a minimum of 8 feet in height
and planted with a fast growing species. Existing trees and ground cover
along street frontage shall be preserved, maintained, and supplemented for
the depth of the street yard setback, except where traffic safety requires
cutting and trimming;



         (p)   Shall cut or trim weeds and any other unsightly or
noxious vegetation as may be necessary to preserve a reasonably neat
appearance and to prevent seeding on adjoining property;



         (q)   Shall not interfere with surface water drainage
beyond the boundaries of the mining operation. The mining operation shall not
adversely affect the quality of surface or sub-surface water resources.
Surface water originating outside and passing through the mining site shall,
at its point of departure from the mining site, be of equal quality to or
better quality than the water at the point where it enters the mining site.
The mining operator shall perform any water treatment necessary to comply
with this provision;



         (r)   Shall conduct all operations between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Shorter hours may be established in the conditional
use permit;



         (s)   For a gravel mine, shall have a maximum area
without ground cover or being mined at one time not to exceed 20 acres; and



         (t)   Immediately after operations have ceased, shall be
restored in compliance with the following:



            1.   Within a period of 3 months after the
termination of a mining operation, or within 3 months after abandonment of
such operation for a period of 6 months, all mining structures shall be
dismantled and removed by, and at the expense of, the mining operator last
operating such structures;



            2.   The peaks and depressions of the area shall
be graded and backfilled to a surface which will result in gently rolling
topography in substantial conformity to the land area immediately surrounding
the mining site, and which will minimize erosion due to rainfall. No finished
slope shall exceed 18% in grade; and



            3.   a.   Restored areas shall be sodded or
surfaced with soil of a quality at least equal to the topsoil of land areas
immediately surrounding the mining site, and to a depth of at least 6 inches,
or a greater depth if recommended by the County Soil and Water Conservation
District. Such required topsoil shall be planted with legumes and grasses.
Trees and shrubs also may be planted, but not as a substitute for legumes and
grasses. Such planting shall be done in conformity with State Pollution
Control Agency’s Best Management Practices to adequately retard soil
erosion.



               b.   Excavations completed to a water
producing depth need not be backfilled if the water depth is at least 10
feet, and if banks shall be sloped to a water line at a slope no greater than
3 feet horizontal to one-foot vertical. The finished grade shall be such that
it will not adversely affect the surrounding land or future development of
the site upon which mining operations have been conducted. The finished plan
shall restore the mining site to a condition whereby it can be utilized for
the type of land use proposed to occupy the site after mining operations
cease.



      (22)   Multiple-family dwellings containing up to 6 units.



         (a)   Shall have a minimum lot size of 24,000 square
feet;



         (b)   Shall screen parking facilities to a minimum
height of 3 feet;



         (c)   The structure shall be of an architectural style
which is compatible with any adjacent residential use; and



         (d)   Shall landscape all structures and parking
facilities.



      (23)   Nursing homes.



         (a)   Shall be located adjacent to an arterial or
collector street as identified in the comprehensive plan, or otherwise
located so that access can be provided without conducting significant traffic
on local residential streets;



         (b)   Shall have parking facilities setback 15 feet from
streets and nonresidential property, and 25 feet from residential property;
and



         (c)   Shall have an impervious surface percent of no
more than 60%, and the remainder of the site shall be suitably landscaped.



      (24)   Public or private schools. Public or private schools
having a course of instruction approved by the State Department of Education
for students enrolled in K through grade 12, or any portion thereof:



         (a)   Shall be located adjacent to an arterial or
collector street as identified in the comprehensive plan, or otherwise
located so that access can be provided without conducting significant traffic
on local residential streets;



         (b)   Shall have all buildings setback 50 feet from all
property lines;



         (c)   Shall have parking facilities setback 15 feet from
streets and nonresidential property, and 25 feet from residential property;



         (d)   Shall have bus drop-off and pick-up areas located
outside of the public right-of-way, and designed to enhance vehicular and
pedestrian safely;



         (e)   Shall have recreational areas designed for group
sports activities setback 25 feet from residential property, with adequate
screening to protect neighboring properties from noise and adverse visual
impacts;



         (f)   Shall not have any lighted playing fields unless
the visual impact on residential areas can be substantially mitigated; and



         (g)   Shall have an impervious surface percent of no
more than 60%, and the remainder of the site shall be suitably landscaped.



      (25)   Relocated structures.



         (a)   Shall have a moving permit from the city under §
111.07.



         (b)   Prior to moving, shall have given cash, a
cashier’s check, or letter of credit as a financial guarantee to the city
to ensure completion of all work. The financial guarantee shall be in an
amount equal to the Building Official’s estimate of the cost to bring the
structure into compliance with the Building Code;



         (c)    Shall meet all requirements of the Building Code
within 6 months after moving; and



         (d)   If the structure is not in full compliance with
the Building Code after 6 months after moving, the city, in its sole
discretion, may draw on the financial guarantee and take whatever steps it
deems necessary to bring the relocated structure into compliance with the
Building Code. In the event the city draws on the financial guarantee, 10% of
the total guarantee shall be paid to the city as its administrative fee.



      (26)   Residential facilities. Residential facilities serving
7 through 16 persons:



         (a)   Shall not have any external building changes or
improvements which alter the original character of the house; any new
structure shall be of an architectural style which is compatible with
adjacent residential uses;



         (b)    Shall have adequate off-street parking based on
the number of employees, visitors, and residents who will be driving, which
parking shall be screened from view from residential uses; and



         (c)   Shall be served by public water and sanitary sewer.



      (27)   Retail sales of nursery and garden supplies.



         (a)   Shall have adequate off-street parking based on
the usual number of employees and customers per day;



         (b)   Shall have immediate removal and sanitary disposal
of dead or diseased plant materials; and



         (c)   Shall have no overnight storage of equipment used
for planting or transplanting landscaping materials.



      (28)   Riding academies.



         (a)   Shall submit a plan for the disposal of all waste;



         (b)   Shall have a maximum of one horse per acre; and



         (c)   Shall landscape all structures and parking
facilities.



      (29)   Seasonal produce stands. Seasonal produce stands when
the principal use of the property is agricultural:



         (a)   Any goods sold shall be the product of the
specific farm or garden;



         (b)   The stand shall be setback 15 feet from any street
right-of-way; and



         (c)   Adequate parking facilities shall be provided in
order to prevent a traffic hazard.



      (30)   Structures over the specified height.



         (a)   Shall submit a map showing shading patterns
created by the over height structure; and



         (b)   Shall be setback from each property line a
distance equal to half the structure height.



      (31)   Utility service structures. All utility service
structures except water towers and electrical substations shall be subject to
the following:



         (a)   Shall be less than 400 square feet in area;



         (b)   Shall be less than 15 feet in height;



         (c)   May only be used to provide weather protection for
utility equipment; and



         (d)   Shall be designed, placed, and landscaped as
necessary to assure that it blends in with the neighboring uses, and is
unobtrusive.



      (32)   Wind energy conversation system or windmills.



         (a)   Shall be setback from the nearest property line a
distance equal to the height of the tower, plus one-half the diameter of the
rotor;



         (b)   Shall be certified by a professional engineer as
being of a design adequate for the atmospheric conditions of the Twin Cities;



         (c)   Shall be equipped with overspeed or similar
controls designed to prevent disintegration of the rotor in high winds; and



         (d)   Shall comply with all building and electrical code
requirements of the city, the noise regulations of the State Pollution
Control Agency, and the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications
Commission and Federal Aviation Administration.



      (33)   Assisted living housing facility.



         (a)   Up to 20%of the facility’s units may be
independent living units;



         (b)   Only the independent living units shall be
considered for purposes of calculating the maximum density;



         (c)   The facility shall take access from an arterial or
collector street as identified in the city’s transportation plan;



         (d)   The facility must have a minimum 50 feet structure
setback from all property lines;



         (e)   Parking facilities shall be setback 25 feet from
property lines;



         (f)   The site shall be limited to a maximum impervious
surface percentage of 60%;



         (g)   Parking facilities shall be screened with a berm
and/or landscaping to a minimum height of 3 feet;



         (h)   The facility must comply with all applicable
federal, state, and local regulations pertaining to facilities that provide
assisted living services, including, but not limited to, the regulations
contained in M.S. Ch. 144G, as it may be amended from time to time; and



         (i)   The building design and materials must meet the
minimum requirements as specified in § 151.108(B).



(2013 Code, § 11.86)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 93, passed
5-27-1982; Ord. 97, passed 7-15-1982; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 377,
passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 470, passed 1-1-1997; Ord. 501, passed 9-18-1997; Ord.
689, passed 11-27-2003; Ord. 697, passed 3-11-2004; Ord. 865, passed
3-5-2013)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.013  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT STANDARDS FOR BUSINESS ZONES.



   (A)   Purpose. It is the intent of the city in establishing general
and specific criteria for conditional uses that such uses be subject to
careful evaluation to ensure that their location and design are consistent
with the standards, purposes, and procedures of this chapter and the
comprehensive plan, and do not have a detrimental impact on neighboring
properties. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals may impose conditions on such
uses in order to ensure compliance or to effect the purpose of this chapter.



   (B)   Specific standards for Residential/Business/Industrial Zones.
In addition to the standards specified in § 151.011, the Board of Adjustment
and Appeals will consider the specific standards contained in this division
(B) when deciding whether a conditional use permit should be granted.



      (1)   Administrative, executive, and professional offices.



         (a)   Shall be an integral part of a permitted principal
use; and



         (b)   Shall display no signage visible from off-site.



      (2)   Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics. Animal
hospitals and veterinary clinics shall not be located on a lot or parcel of
land adjacent to any Low-Density Residential (R-1A), Urban Residential
(R-1B), or Old Shakopee Residential (R-1C) Zone;



      (3)   Bed and breakfast inns.



         (a)   Shall meet all requirements of the State
Department of Health;



         (b)   If providing meals, shall serve them only to
guests renting a room;



         (c)   Shall provide off-street parking which is screened
in accordance with §§ 151.105 through 151.125 ; and



         (d)   Shall be the residence of the owner or operator.



      (4)   Boathouses.



         (a)   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation;



         (b)   Shall not contain sanitary facilities;



         (c)   Shall be setback a minimum of 10 feet from the
ordinary high water level;



         (d)   Shall not occupy an area greater than 250 square
feet;



         (e)   Shall be constructed or screened to reduce
visibility from public waters and adjacent shorelands through the use of
vegetation, topography, color, or increased setback, assuming summer leaf-on
conditions; and



         (f)   If located on shorelands adjacent to recreational
development waterbodies, shall not occupy an area greater than 400 square
feet. The width of the structure shall not exceed 20 feet as measured
parallel to the shoreline.



      (5)   Bus terminals and taxi stands.



         (a)   Shall be located adjacent to an arterial street as
identified in the comprehensive plan; and



         (b)   May not be located on a lot or parcel of land
adjacent to any Rural Residential (RR), Low-Density Residential (R-1 A),
Urban Residential (R-1B), or Old Shakopee residential (R-1 C) Zone.



      (6)   Car washes.



         (a)   Shall be located adjacent to an arterial street as
identified in the comprehensive plan;



         (b)   Shall be screened from view from residential zones;



         (c)   Shall utilize a water conservation or recovery
system; and



         (d)   Shall provide stacking for at least 3 vehicles per
aisle. The required stacking shall not interfere with internal circulation
patterns or with designated parking facilities, and shall not be located in
any public right-of-way, private access easement, or within the required
parking setback.



      (7)   Churches and other places of worship.



         (a)   Shall be located adjacent to an arterial or
collector street as identified in the comprehensive plan;



         (b)   Shall have parking facilities setback 15 feet from
residential property;



         (c)   Shall screen parking facilities adjacent to
residential property with a berm and/or landscaping to a minimum height of 3
feet; and



         (d)   Shall have an impervious surface percent of no
more than 70%, and the remainder of the site shall be landscaped.



      (8)   Commercial recreation, major or minor.



         (a)   Shall be located adjacent to an arterial or
collector street as identified in the comprehensive plan; and



         (b)   Shall have all parking screened from adjacent
residential zones.



      (9)   Commercial recreation, minor, but limited to health and
athletic facilities.



         (a)   Shall limit hours of operation between 6:00 a.m.
and 11:00 p.m.;



         (b)   The structure shall be of an architectural style
which is compatible with neighboring structures; and



         (c)   Shall have no facilities outside a building.



      (10)   Day care facilities.



         (a)   Shall have drop-off and pick-up areas located
outside of the public right-of-way, and designed to enhance vehicular and
pedestrian safely; and



         (b)   Shall have outdoor play areas located and designed
to mitigate visual and noise impacts on adjoining residential uses.



      (11)   Developments containing more than one principal
structure per lot.



         (a)   Shall be on a lot that meets all design standards
and public improvement requirements prescribed by Ch. 150;



         (b)   Shall be designed and placed to facilitate
ingress, egress, and overall circulation, both for the development as a whole
and for the individual buildings and structures within the development; and



         (c)   Shall consist of structures that are owned,
maintained, and operated under unified control in accordance with a plan
which contain provisions providing for the enforcement thereof.



      (12)   Flood fringe storage of materials or equipment. Flood
fringe storage of materials or equipment below the regulatory flood
protection elevation, if, in time of flooding, the materials or equipment are
buoyant, shall submit a plan for removal of the materials and equipment from
the area within the time available after a flood warning;



      (13)   Floodway area structures accessory to a permitted or
conditional use.



         (a)   Shall not cause any increase in the stage of a
100-year or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach
or reaches affected;



         (b)   Shall not be designed for human habitation;



         (c)   Shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of flood waters.
Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis
parallel to the direction of flood flow. So far as practicable, structures
shall be placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of
adjoining structures; and



         (d)   Shall be elevated on fill or structurally dry
flood-proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood-proofing
classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an accessory
structure may be flood-proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 flood-proofing
classification in the State Building Code, provided the accessory structure
constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed 500 square feet in size,
and for a detached garage, the detached garage must be used solely for
parking of vehicles and limited storage. All flood-proofed accessory
structures must meet the following additional standards, as appropriate:



            1.   The structure must be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure and shall
be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls; and



            2.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in the
structure must be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation or properly flood-proofed.



      (14)   Floodway area placement of fill.



         (a)   Shall not cause any increase in the stage of a
100-year or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach
or reaches affected;



         (b)   Shall not include spoil from dredging, or sand and
gravel mining operations, unless a long-term site development plan is
submitted which includes an erosion and sedimentation prevention element; and



         (c)   Shall be protected from erosion by vegetative
cover, mulching, riprap, or other acceptable method.



      (15)   Floodway area storage yards for equipment, machinery,
or materials.



         (a)   Shall not cause any increase in the stage of a
100-year or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach
or reaches affected;



         (b)   Shall not include any material that, in time of
flooding, is flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal,
or plant life; and



         (c)   Shall be limited to materials or equipment which
is readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood
warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals.



      (16)   Floodway area uses. Floodway area uses include the
following:



         (a)   Mining and storage of sand, gravel, and other
mined materials;



         (b)   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and
water control structures;



         (c)   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission
lines, and pipelines;



         (d)   Campgrounds with facilities for recreational
vehicles; and



         (e)   Other uses similar to those permitted, shall not
cause any increase in the stage of a 100-year or regional flood or cause an
increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected.



      (17)   Floodway area structural works. Floodway area
structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes, and floodwalls
constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual
structures, and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect agricultural
crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the ten-year
frequency flood event:



         (a)   Shall be subject to the provisions of M.S. Ch.
103G, as it may be amended from time to time, if they will change the course,
current, or cross-section of protected wetlands or public waters;



         (b)   Shall be prohibited if they are community-wide
structural works for flood control intended to remove areas from the
regulatory floodplain; and



         (c)   Shall not cause an increase to the 100-year or
regional flood. The technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or
storage loss on both sides of a stream.



      (18)   Funeral homes.



         (a)   The structure shall be of an architectural style
which is compatible with any adjacent residential use; and



         (b)   Shall landscape all structures and parking
facilities



      (19)   Gas stations.



         (a)   Shall be screened from any adjacent residential
zone;



         (b)   Shall not store any vehicles which are unlicensed
and inoperable on the premises, except in appropriately designed and screened
storage areas;



         (c)   Shall conduct all repair, assembly, disassembly,
and maintenance of vehicles within a building, except minor maintenance such
as tire inflation, adding oil, and wiper replacement;



         (d)   Shall not have a public address system which is
audible from any residential property;



         (e)   Shall provide stacking for gas pumps for at least
one car beyond the pump island in each direction in which access can be
gained to the pump. The required stacking shall not interfere with internal
circulation patterns or with designated parking facilities, and shall not be
located in any public right-of-way, private access easement, or within the
required parking setback;



         (f)   Shall not sell, store, or display any used
vehicles; and



         (g)   May have a canopy which projects up to 10 feet
into the required front or rear yard setback. The setback shall be maintained
clear of all obstructions up to a height of 13 feet. The canopy shall have a
maximum vertical thickness of 3 feet. The canopy shall have a maximum height
of 18 feet.



      (20)   Health and athletic facilities.



         (a)   Shall limit hours of operation between 6:00 a.m.
and 11:00 p.m.;



         (b)   The structure shall be of an architectural style
which is compatible with neighboring structures; and



         (c)   Shall have no facilities outside a building.



      (21)   Horse care uses including boarding, training, showing,
grooming, and veterinary clinic facilities.



         (a)   Shall not be located on a lot or parcel of land
adjacent to any Low-Density Residential (R-1A), Urban Residential (R-1B), or
Old Shakopee Residential (R-1C) Zone; and



         (b)   Shall submit a plan for the disposal of all wastes.



      (22)   Hospitals.



         (a)   Shall not be located on a lot or parcel of land
adjacent to any Low-Density Residential (R-1A) or Urban Residential (R-1B)
Zone;



         (b)   Shall have direct access to a collector or
arterial street as identified in the comprehensive plan;



         (c)   Shall have parking facilities setback 15 feet from
streets and nonresidential property, and 25 feet from residential property;



         (d)   Shall have an impervious surface percent of no
more than 70%, and the remainder of the site shall be suitably landscaped; and



         (e)   Shall not have any emergency vehicle access
adjacent to or located across a street from any residential use.



      (23)   Hotels and motels. Hotels and motels shall not be
located on a lot or parcel of land adjacent to any Low-Density Residential
(R-1A), Urban Residential (R-1B), or Old Shakopee residential (R-1C) Zone.



      (24)   Hotels, motels, and conference centers.



         (a)   Shall be screened from any adjacent residential
zone;



         (b)   The structure shall be of an architectural style
which is compatible with neighboring structures;



         (c)   Shall not increase traffic congestion on streets;
and



         (d)   Shall have direct access to a collector or
arterial street as identified in the comprehensive plan.



      (25)   Housing serving handicapped persons. Housing serving
handicapped persons shall have a floor area ratio (FAR) not exceeding 60.



      (26)   Multiple-family housing:



         (a)   Shall screen all parking to a height of 3 feet;



         (b)   The structure shall be of an architectural style
which is compatible with neighboring structures; and



         (c)   Shall have a minimum lot size of 24,000 square
feet.



      (27)   Open sales lots or any use having exterior storage of
goods for sale.



         (a)   Shall be screened from any adjacent residential
zone;



         (b)   Shall not have a public address system which is
audible from any residential property;



         (c)   Shall be kept neat and orderly;



         (d)   Shall not have any uses in any required front,
side, or rear yard setback, or in any required parking area; and



         (e)   Shall not block any sidewalk.



      (28)   Parking facilities open to the public. Parking
facilities open to the public shall not be located adjacent to any
Low-Density Residential (R-1A), Urban Residential (R-1B), or Old Shakopee
Residential (R-1C) Zone.



      (29)   Pet day care and boarding facilities.



         (a)   Shall not be located on property adjacent to
properties that are either existing residential uses or which are zoned for
residential use, and shall be at least 300 feet from residentially used or
zoned properties;



         (b)   All animals shall be housed or boarded indoors,
and the facility shall not have outdoor boarding or confinement areas;



         (c)   All wastes shall be properly stored in either the
principal building or in an attached enclosure that is constructed of
materials consistent with those of the principal structure, including a top;
and



         (d)   If outdoor exercise facilities are provided, they
shall not be on public property (whether easement, park, right-of-way, or
otherwise).



      (30)   Printing or publishing facilities. Printing or
publishing facilities shall not have any loading spaces located adjacent to
any residential zone. All loading spaces shall be screened from any adjacent
residential use, business use, and street.



      (31)   Private lodges and clubs.



         (a)   Shall be located on an arterial or collector
street as identified in the comprehensive plan;



         (b)   If serving liquor, shall not be located on a lot
or parcel of land adjacent to any Low- Density Residential (R-1A), Urban
Residential (R-1B), or Old Shakopee Residential (R-1C) Zone; and



         (c)   Shall have all parking screened from any adjacent
residential zone.



      (32)   Relocated structures.



         (a)   Shall have a moving permit from the city under §
111.07;



         (b)   Prior to moving, shall have given cash, a
cashier’s check, or letter of credit as a financial guarantee to the city
to ensure completion of all work. The financial guarantee shall be in an
amount equal to the Building Official’s estimate of the cost to bring the
structure into compliance with the Building Code;



         (c)   Shall meet all requirements of the Building Code
within 6 months after moving; and



         (d)   If the structure is not in full compliance with
the Building Code after 6 months after moving, the city, in its sole
discretion, may draw on the financial guarantee and take whatever steps it
deems necessary to bring the relocated structure into compliance with the
Building Code. In the event the city draws on the financial guarantee, 10% of
the total guarantee shall be paid to the city as its administrative fee.



      (33)   Restaurants. Restaurants, Class I or Class II,
contained within a principal structure, and oriented toward serving employees
or those working in the immediate area:



         (a)   Shall not exceed 15% of the gross floor area or
3,000 square feet, whichever is less; and



         (b)   Shall not increase traffic congestion on streets.



      (34)   Restaurants, Class I and II that have an outdoor patio
or congregation area that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m. and
where the nearest point of the property on which the restaurant is located is
less than 100 feet from the nearest point of the property where a residential
use is located.



         (a)   All patios and congregation areas are subject to
the city's noise regulations;



         (b)   Any lights on the patios and congregation areas
are subject to the city's regulations pertaining to illumination standards at
the property line;



         (c)   Exterior congregation areas which serve alcohol
shall physically delineate the exterior area which alcohol is to be served. 
This delineation shall clearly define the space, with a clear access and
exit.  Delineation examples shall include, but not be limited to: grade
changes, material changes, decking, or planters;



         (d)   The entry to the outdoor patio or congregation
areas is to be compact and contiguous with the structure; and



         (e)   Exterior congregation areas that utilize
pedestrian areas, such as a public or private sidewalk or walkway, shall
maintain a clear 4 foot path for pedestrian walkway.  Alleys shall not be
considered pedestrian thoroughfares.



      (35)   Retail uses generally associated with a permitted use.



         (a)   Shall not require or result in any exterior
building modifications, such as loading spaces, separate entrances,
freestanding signs, or overnight parking of commercial vehicles;



         (b)   Shall be contained within a principal structure
and oriented toward serving employees or customers of the permitted use or
uses in the immediate area;



         (c)   Shall not exceed 25% of the gross floor area of
the principal structure;



         (d)   Shall have no outside storage or display or
accessory structures; and



         (e)   Shall submit a sign plan.



      (36)   Retail uses and entertainment facilities.



         (a)   Shall be an integral part of a permitted principal
use;



         (b)   Shall have no entrance, except from within the
principal building;



         (c)   Shall display no external signage except on the
first floor of the building; and



         (d)   Shall occupy no more than 25% of the ground floor
area.



      (37)   Self-storage facilities.



         (a)   Shall limit its hours of operation between 7:00
a.m. and 10.00 p.m.;



         (b)   Shall submit a lighting plan; and



         (c)   Shall have all storage buildings separated by
sufficient space for 2 lanes of traffic.



      (38)   Storage, assembly, or servicing incidental to a
permitted use.



         (a)   Shall have no exterior storage;



         (b)   Shall screen any loading spaces;



         (c)   Shall not have any driveways or parking of trucks
located within any front, side, or rear yard setback adjacent to any
residential zone; and



         (d)   Shall not exceed 25% of the gross floor area of
the principal structure.



      (39)   Structures over the specified height.



         (a)   Shall submit a map showing shading patterns
created by the over height structure; and



         (b)   Shall be setback from each property line a
distance equal to half the structure height.



      (40)   Taverns.  All taverns having an outdoor patio or
congregation area that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m. and
where the nearest point of the property on which the tavern is located is
less than 100 feet from the nearest point of the property where a residential
use is located.



         (a)   All patios and congregation areas are subject to
the city's noise regulations;



         (b)   Any lights on the patios and congregation areas
are subject to the city's regulations pertaining to illumination standards at
the property line;



         (c)   Exterior congregation areas which serve alcohol
shall physically delineate the exterior area which alcohol is to be served.
This delineation shall clearly define the space, with a clear access and
exit. Delineation examples shall include, but not be limited to: grade
changes, material changes, decking, or planters;



         (d)   The entry to the outdoor patio or congregation
areas is to be compact and contiguous with the structure; and



         (e)   Exterior congregation areas that utilize
pedestrian areas, such as a public or private sidewalk or walkway, shall
maintain a clear 4 foot path for pedestrian walkway. Alleys shall not be
considered pedestrian thoroughfares.



      (41)   Theaters. Theaters shall be permitted only when it can
be demonstrated through a traffic plan that vehicular ingress and egress may
be accomplished without inducing undue traffic problems on areas streets.



      (42)   Drive-through windows. Uses having a drive-up or
drive-through window:



         (a)   Shall be screened to a height of 6 feet from any
adjacent residential zone;



         (b)   Shall not have a public address system which is
audible from any residential property; and



         (c)   Shall provide stacking for at least 6 vehicles per
aisle. The required stacking shall not interfere with internal circulation
patterns or with designated parking facilities, and shall not be located in
any public right-of-way, private access easement, or within the required
parking setback.



      (43)   Utility service structures. All utility service
structures except water towers and electrical substations shall be subject to
the following:



         (a)   Shall be less than 400 square feet in area;



         (b)   Shall be less than 15 feet in height;



         (c)   May be used only to provide weather protection for
utility equipment; and



         (d)   Shall be designed, placed, and landscaped as
necessary to assure that it blends in with the neighboring uses, and is
unobtrusive.



      (44)   Vehicle sales, service, or repair.



         (a)   Shall not store any vehicles which are unlicensed
and inoperative for more than 7 days, except in appropriately designed and
screened storage areas;



         (b)   Shall conduct all repair, assembly, disassembly,
or maintenance of vehicles within a building, except for minor maintenance
such as tire inflation, adding oil, and wiper replacement;



         (c)   Shall not have any outside storage or display
except of vehicles for sale or rent;



         (d)   Shall not have a public address system which is
audible from any residential property;



         (e)   Shall screen all storage areas;



         (f)   Shall screen all display areas adjacent to a
residential zone;



         (g)   Shall apply the parking setback to all areas where
vehicles are located;



         (h)   Shall maintain a landscaped buffer 100 feet wide
from any residential zone; and



         (i)   All motor vehicle dealers shall be licensed by the
state.



      (45)   Vehicle rental facilities.



         (a)   Shall conduct all maintenance, repair, and washing
of vehicles within a building;



         (b)   Shall screen all rental car parking areas from
adjacent residential properties;



         (c)   Shall apply the parking setback to all areas where
vehicles are located; and



         (d)   Rental vehicles must not take up required customer
and employee parking spaces.



      (46)   Wholesale and assembly operations.



         (a)   Shall not have any loading spaces located adjacent
to any residential zone; and



         (b)   Shall screen all loading spaces from any
residential zone.



      (47)   Farm wineries.



         (a)    Waste products must be disposed of in a timely
manner and in such a way to reduce odors;



         (b)   Outdoor seating areas are to operate no later than
10:00 p.m.; and



         (c)   The operator must supply the Planning Department
with annual production reports.



      (48)   Micro-distilleries.



         (a)   Waste products must be disposed of in a timely
manner and in such a way to reduce odors;



         (b)   Outdoor seating areas are to operate no later than
10:00 p.m.; and



         (c)   The operator must supply the Planning Department
with annual production reports.



      (49)   Small breweries.



         (a)   Waste products must be disposed of in a timely
manner and in such a way to reduce odors; and



         (b)   The operator must supply the Planning Department
with annual production reports.



      (50)   Taprooms.



         (a)   On- or off-premises sales require a liquor
license; and



         (b)   Outdoor seating areas are to operate no later than
10:00 p.m.



      (51)   Tasting rooms, winery, distillery.



         (a)   On- or off-premises sales require a liquor
license; and



         (b)   Outdoor seating areas are to operate no later than
10:00 p.m.



      (52)   Massage establishment.



         (a)   Are allowed only in the B-1 and B-3 zone;



         (b)   Operation and operators must meet all the
requirements in city code Ch. 116 prior to application;



         (c)   Windows and doors facing the primary street
address must be transparent and allow visibility into the establishment,
except for signage as permitted by the city sign code; and



         (d)   Can be evoked for any violation of city code Ch.
116.



(2013 Code, § 11.87)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 93, passed
5-27-1982; Ord. 97, passed 7-15-1982; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 377,
passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 420, passed 7-27-1995; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995;
Ord. 546, passed 5-6-1999; Ord. 554, passed 7-6-1999; Ord. 689, passed
11-27-2003; Ord. 708, passed 7-29-2004; Ord. 736, passed 9-8-2005; Ord. 877,
passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 915, passed 9-1-2015; Ord. 934, passed 6-21-2016; Ord.
956, passed 2-21-2017)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.014  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT STANDARDS FOR INDUSTRY ZONES.



   (A)   Purpose. It is the intent of the city in establishing general
and specific criteria for conditional uses that such uses be subject to
careful evaluation to ensure that their location and design are consistent
with the standards, purposes, and procedures of this chapter and the
comprehensive plan, and do not have a detrimental impact on neighboring
properties. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals may impose conditions on such
uses in order to ensure compliance or to effect the purpose of this chapter.



   (B)   Specific standards for Residential/Business/Industrial Zones.
In addition to the standards specified in § 151.011, the Board of Adjustment
and Appeals will consider the specific standards contained in this division
(B) when deciding whether a conditional use permit should be granted.



      (1)   Airports and heliports.



         (a)   Shall establish and utilize approach and departure
routes over nonresidential areas to the maximum extent possible;



         (b)   Shall not be located on a lot or parcel of land
within 500 feet of any residential zone; and



         (c)   Shall have a dust free landing strip or pad.



      (2)   Boathouses.



         (a)   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation;



         (b)   Shall not contain sanitary facilities;



         (c)   Shall be setback a minimum of 10 feet from the
ordinary high water level;



         (d)   Shall not occupy an area greater than 250 square
feet;



         (e)   Shall be constructed or screened to reduce
visibility from public waters and adjacent shorelands through the use of
vegetation, topography, color, or increased setback, assuming summer leaf-on
conditions; and



         (f)   If located on shorelands adjacent to recreational
development waterbodies, shall not occupy an area greater than 400 square
feet. The width of the structure shall not exceed 20 feet as measured
parallel to the shoreline.



      (3)   Commercial vehicle rental facilities.



         (a)   Shall not wash any vehicle except within a
building;



         (b)   Shall not repair or maintain any vehicle on-site,
except in an enclosed structure;



         (c)   Shall have all outside parking facilities at least
100 feet from any residential zone; and



         (d)   Shall screen all outside parking facilities from
any adjacent residential zone.



      (4)   Concrete or asphalt plants. Concrete or asphalt plants
shall not be located closer than 500 feet to any residential zone.



      (5)   Day care facilities.



         (a)   Shall have drop-off and pick-up areas located
outside of the public right-of-way, and designed to enhance vehicular and
pedestrian safely;



         (b)   Shall have outdoor play areas located and designed
to mitigate visual and noise impacts on adjoining residential uses; and



         (c)   Shall submit a traffic plan which addresses
industrial traffic flow with respect to the day care operation.



      (6)   Developments. Developments containing more than one
principal structure per lot:



         (a)   Shall be designed and placed to facilitate
ingress, egress, and overall circulation, both for the development as a whole
and for the individual buildings and structures within the development; and



         (b)   Shall consist of structures that are owned,
maintained, and operated under unified control in accordance with a plan
which contain provisions providing for the enforcement thereof.



      (7)   Exterior storage.



         (a)    Shall be screened from all public right-of-way
and residentially-zoned land, with an opaque fence, wall, or berm not to
exceed 8 feet in height, constructed of new materials, and maintained in good
condition;



         (b)   Shall have a maximum area equal to the combined
footprint of the principal and accessory buildings;



         (c)   Shall not be located closer than 300 feet to any
residential zone; and



         (d)   Shall be surfaced entirely with asphalt, concrete,
or Class 5 aggregate.



      (8)   Flood fringe storage of materials. Flood fringe storage
of materials or equipment below the regulatory flood protection elevation,
if, in time of flooding, the materials or equipment are buoyant, shall submit
a plan for removal of the materials and equipment from the area within the
time available after a flood warning.



      (9)   Floodway area structures. Floodway area structures
accessory to a permitted or conditional use:



         (a)   Shall not cause any increase in the stage of a
100-year or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach
or reaches affected;



         (b)   Shall not be designed for human habitation;



         (c)   Shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of flood waters.
Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis
parallel to the direction of flood flow. So far as practicable, structures
shall be placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of
adjoining structures; and



         (d)   1.   Shall be elevated on fill or structurally
dry flood-proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood-proofing
classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an accessory
structure may be flood-proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 flood-proofing
classification in the State Building Code; provided the accessory structure
constitutes a minimal investment does not exceed 500 square feet in size, and
for a detached garage, the detached garage must be used solely for parking of
vehicles and limited storage.



            2.   All flood-proofed accessory structures must
meet the following additional standards, as appropriate:



               a.   The structure must be adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure
and shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls;
and



               b.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in
the structure must be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation or properly flood-proofed.



      (10)   Floodway area placement of fill.



         (a)   Shall not cause any increase in the stage of a
100-year or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach
or reaches affected;



         (b)   Shall not include spoil from dredging, or sand and
gravel mining operations, unless a long-term site development plan is
submitted which includes an erosion and sedimentation prevention element; and



         (c)   Shall be protected from erosion by vegetative
cover, mulching, riprap, or other acceptable method.



      (11)   Floodway area storage yards for equipment, machinery,
or materials.



         (a)   Shall not cause any increase in the stage of a
100-year or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach
or reaches affected;



         (b)   Shall not include any material that, in time of
flooding, is flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal,
or plant life; and



         (c)   Shall be limited to materials or equipment which
is readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood
warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals.



      (12)   Floodway area uses. Floodway area uses include the
following:



         (a)   Mining and storage of sand, gravel, and other
mined materials;



         (b)   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and
water-control structures;



         (c)   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission
lines, and pipelines;



         (d)   Campgrounds with facilities for recreational
vehicles; and



         (e)   Other uses similar to those permitted, shall not
cause any increase in the stage of a 100-year or regional flood or cause an
increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected.



      (13)   Floodway area structural works. Floodway area
structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes, and floodwalls
constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual
structures, and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect agricultural
crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the ten-year
frequency flood event:



         (a)   Shall be subject to the provisions of M.S. Ch.
103G, as it may be amended from time to time, if they will change the course,
current, or cross-section of protected wetlands or public waters;



         (b)   Shall be prohibited if they are community-wide
structural works for flood control intended to remove areas from the
regulatory floodplain; and



         (c)   Shall not cause an increase to the 100-year or
regional flood. The technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or
storage loss on both sides of a stream.



      (14)   Grain elevators.



         (a)   Shall have all loading spaces located at least 300
feet from any residential zone; and



         (b)   Shall provide a safety plan satisfactory to the
Fire Chief to be followed in the event of fire or explosion.



      (15)   Industrial or technical training schools.



         (a)   Shall not have any overnight outside storage of
vehicles undergoing maintenance; and



         (b)   Shall have any structures constructed on-site for
training purposes dismantled or removed within a reasonable period of time
following completion of the training.



      (16)   Junkyards.



         (a)   Shall be completely screened on all sides, with an
opaque fence or wall 8 feet or more in height, constructed of new materials,
maintained in good condition, and screened additionally with suitable
planting;



         (b)   Shall not be located closer than 1,000 feet to
existing state and federal roads, nor closer than 100 feet to any street; and



         (c)   Shall not be located on a lot or parcel of land
closer than 300 feet to any residential zone.



      (17)   Landscaping services and contractors.



         (a)   Shall promptly remove any diseased or dead plant
materials, and dispose of them in a sanitary manner;



         (b)   Shall store all equipment at least 100 feet from
any residential zone; and



         (c)   Shall screen all equipment from any adjacent
residential zone.



      (18)   Manufacturing, fabrication, and the like within an
enclosed building. Manufacturing, fabrication, processing, and assembly
conducted entirely with an enclosed building, except those involving a
project that fits within one of the Mandatory EIS Categories under Minn.
Rules 4410.4400:



         (a)   Shall meet all federal, state, and city health
code requirements;



         (b)   Shall meet all federal, state, and city
environmental code requirements;



         (c)   Shall not begin operation until any applicable
environmental review, including an environmental assessment worksheet or an
environmental impact statement is completed and all mitigation measures
incorporated into the use. Any construction prior to the completion of the
environmental review and incorporation of all mitigation measures is at the
applicant’s risk;



         (d)   Shall provide the city with information regarding
the nature and location of all explosive materials, and keep such information
current;



         (e)   Shall not require isolation from residential or
business uses;



         (f)   Shall be buffered, if necessary, to protect
adjacent uses; and



         (g)   Shall not cause a public nuisance such as noise,
odor, smoke, dust, dirt, vibration, or heat, or attract insects.



      (19)   Manufacturing, fabrication, and the like generally.
Manufacturing, fabrication, processing, assembly, and storage operations, and
research laboratories, that fit within one of the Mandatory EIS Categories
under Minn. Rules 4410.4400:



         (a)   Shall meet all federal, state, and city health
code requirements;



         (b)   Shall meet all federal, state, and city
environmental code requirements;



         (c)   Shall not begin operation until the environmental
impact statement is completed and all mitigation measures incorporated into
the use. Any construction prior to the completion of the environmental impact
statement and incorporation of all mitigation measures is at the
applicant’s risk; and



         (d)   Shall provide the city with information regarding
the nature and location of all explosive materials and keep such information
current.



      (20)   Mining.



         (a)   Shall provide the city with the exact legal
description and acreage of area to be mined;



         (b)   Shall provide the city with an aerial photograph
of the site prior to any mining;



         (c)   Shall provide the city with the following maps of
the entire site and all areas within 500 feet of the site, drawn at a scale
of one inch to 100 feet:



            1.   Map A - existing conditions to include:



               a.   Contour lines at two-foot intervals;



               b.   Existing vegetation;



               c.   Existing drainage and permanent water
areas;



               d.   Existing structures;



               e.   Existing wells; and



               f.   Cross-sectional views from each
direction;



            2.   Map B - proposed operations to include:



               a.   Structures to be erected;



               b.   Location of sites to be mined showing
the maximum depth of proposed excavation;



               c.   Location of tailings deposits showing
maximum height of deposits;



               d.   Location of machinery to be used in the
mining operation;



               e.   Location of storage of mined materials,
showing height of storage deposits;



               f.   Location of parking facilities;



               g.   Location of storage of explosives;



               h.   Erosion and sediment control structures;



               i.   Location of proposed wells and the
depth to the water table;



               j.   Location of proposed washing operations;



               k.   A mining quantities table showing the
quantity and type of materials expected to be mined in each phase and each
year; and



               l.   Cross-sectional views of the site
during each phase from each direction;



            3.   Map C - end use plan to include:



               a.   Final grade of proposed site showing
elevations and contour lines at two-foot intervals;



               b.   Location and species of vegetation to
be replanted;



               c.   Location and nature of any structures
to be erected in relation to the end use plan; and



               d.   Cross-sectional views of the site after
final grading.



         (d)   Shall provide the city with a full and adequate
description of all phases of the proposed operation to include an estimate of
duration of the mining operation;



         (e)   Shall provide a dust control plan detailing the
methods proposed for controlling dust, application rates and time frames, and
volumes of water to be used;



         (f)   Shall pave or gravel all roads which are within
450 feet of any other zone to minimize dust conditions;



         (g)   Shall provide a noise control plan showing all
occupied structures within 1,000 feet of the mining site, existing noise
contours in 5 Db intervals, and noise contours anticipated during operations
for each phase;



         (h)   Shall provide a vibration control plan;



         (i)   Shall provide a landscape plan prepared by or
under the supervision of a landscape architect showing material types; common
and botanical names; sizes, number, and location of proposed plantings;



         (j)   Shall provide lighting and signage plans showing
the type, height, and location of all exterior lighting and signs;



         (k)   Shall provide a stormwater management plan showing
the stormwater contour lines and drainage patterns prior to, during, and
after mining, stormwater runoff calculations, and indicating that the State
Pollution Control Agency’s Best Management Practices shall be followed;



         (l)   Shall provide a traffic analysis prepared by a
professional engineer showing the following:



            1.   Existing traffic volumes on affected streets;



            2.   Anticipated traffic volumes on affected
streets;



            3.   Anticipated trip generation for each phase or
operations change;



            4.   Morning and afternoon peak hour traffic
volumes at all driveways into the site;



            5.   Recommended traffic improvements both on and
off the site; and



            6.   Recommended traffic management actions,
including truck routing.



         (m)   Shall complete an environmental assessment
worksheet;



         (n)   If adjacent to a residential zone or within 300
feet of 2 or more residential structures, shall be bound by the following
standards:



            1.   Where water collects to a depth of one and
one-half feet or more, for at least one month, and occupies an area of 700
square feet or more, all access to such water shall be barred by a fence or
other barrier at least 4 feet in height; and



            2.   Where slopes occur that are steeper than
one-foot vertical to 3 feet horizontal, for a period of one month or more,
all access to such slopes shall be barred by a fence or other barrier at
least 4 feet in height.



         (o)   Shall screen the mining site from adjacent
residential or business uses. The mining site also shall be screened from any
street within 500 feet. The screening shall be a minimum of 8 feet in height
and planted with a fast growing species. Existing trees and ground cover
along street frontage shall be preserved, maintained, and supplemented for
the depth of the street yard setback, except where traffic safety requires
cutting and trimming;



         (p)   Shall cut or trim weeds and any other unsightly or
noxious vegetation as may be necessary to preserve a reasonably neat
appearance and to prevent seeding on adjoining property;



         (q)   Shall not interfere with surface water drainage
beyond the boundaries of the mining operation. The mining operation shall not
adversely affect the quality of surface or sub-surface water resources.
Surface water originating outside and passing through the mining site shall,
at its point of departure from the mining site, be of equal quality to or
better quality than the water at the point where it enters the mining site.
The mining operator shall perform any water treatment necessary to comply
with this provision;



         (r)   Shall conduct all operations between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Shorter hours may be established in the conditional
use permit;



         (s)   For a gravel mine, shall have a maximum area
without ground cover or being mined at one time not to exceed 20 acres; and



         (t)   Immediately after operations have ceased, shall be
restored in compliance with the following:



            1.   Within a period of 3 months after the
termination of a mining operation, or within 3 months after abandonment of
such operation for a period of 6 months, all mining structures shall be
dismantled and removed by, and at the expense of, the mining operator last
operating such structures;



            2.   The peaks and depressions of the area shall
be graded and backfilled to a surface which will result in gently roiling
topography in substantial conformity to the land area immediately surrounding
the mining site, and which will minimize erosion due to rainfall. No finished
slope shall exceed 18% in grade; and



            3.   Restored areas shall be sodded or surfaced
with soil of a quality at least equal to the topsoil of land areas
immediately surrounding the mining site, and to a depth of at least 6 inches,
or a greater depth if recommended by the County Soil and Water Conservation
District. Such required topsoil shall be planted with legumes and grasses.
Trees and shrubs also may be planted, but not as a substitute for legumes and
grasses. Such planting shall be done in conformity with State Pollution
Control Agency’s Best Management Practices to adequately retard soil
erosion. Excavations completed to a water producing depth need not be
backfilled if the water depth is at least 10 feet, and if banks shall be
sloped to a water line at a slope no greater than a 3 feet horizontal to
one-foot vertical. The finished grade shall be such that it will not
adversely affect the surrounding land or future development of the site upon
which mining operations have been conducted. The finished plan shall restore
the mining site to a condition whereby it can be utilized for the type of
land use proposed to occupy the site after mining operations cease.



      (21)   Recycling or composting facilities.



         (a)   Shall conduct all operations either within a
building or at least 500 feet from any residential or business zone;



         (b)   Shall not collect more material on-site than can
be processed within a 60-day period; and



         (c)   Shall promptly remove from the site all material
which has been processed.



      (22)   Relocated structures.



         (a)   Shall have a moving permit from the city under §
111.07;



         (b)   Prior to moving, shall have given cash, a
cashier’s check, or letter of credit as a financial guarantee to the city
to ensure completion of all work. The financial guarantee shall be in an
amount equal to the Building Official’s estimate of the cost to bring the
structure into compliance with the Building Code;



         (c)   Shall meet all requirements of the Building Code
within 6 months after moving; and



         (d)   If the structure is not in full compliance with
the Building Code after 6 months after moving, the city, in its sole
discretion, may draw on the financial guarantee and take whatever steps it
deems necessary to bring the relocated structure into compliance with the
Building Code. In the event the city draws on the financial guarantee, 10% of
the total guarantee shall be paid to the city as its administrative fee.



      (23)   Residences for security personnel.



         (a)   Shall not exceed one dwelling per principal use;



         (b)   Shall be used only by a resident security guard
and the guard’s family, and shall not be available for rent to the public;
and



         (c)   May not exceed 1,000 square feet of living space.



      (24)   Restaurants. Restaurants, Class I or Class II,
contained within a principal structure and oriented toward serving employees
or those working in the immediate area:



         (a)   Shall not exceed 15% of the gross floor area or
3,000 square feet, whichever is less; and



         (b)   Shall not increase traffic congestion on streets.



      (25)   Retails sales. Retail sales of products manufactured,
fabricated, assembled, or stored on-site:



         (a)   Shall sell products only within the principal
structure;



         (b)   Shall limit the area devoted to display and sale
of the products to no more than 15% of the principal structure or 2,000
square feet within the principal structure, whichever is less;



         (c)   Shall not require or result in exterior building
modifications;



         (d)   Shall have no outside storage or display or
accessory structures; and



         (e)   Shall submit a sign plan.



      (26)   Self-storage facilities.



         (a)   Shall not allow maintenance of any vehicles
on-site, except within a building;



         (b)   Shall have a security system adequate to limit
access to persons renting a storage site; and



         (c)   Shall screen all storage.



      (27)   Structures over the specified height.



         (a)   Shall submit a map showing shading patterns
created by the over height  and structure; and



         (b)   Shall be setback from each property line a
distance equal to half the structure height.



      (28)   Vehicle repair.



         (a)   Shall not store any vehicles which are unlicensed
or inoperative for more than 7 days;



         (b)   Shall screen all storage areas; and



         (c)   Shall not be located on a lot or parcel of land
within 200 feet of any residential zone.



      (29)   Taprooms.



         (a)   Taproom and retail areas must not exceed 25% of
the floor area of the brewery operation;



         (b)   On- or off-premises sales require a liquor
license; and



         (c)   Outdoor seating areas are to operate no later than
10:00 p.m.



      (30)   Tasting rooms, winery, and distillery.



         (a)   Tasting rooms and retail areas must not exceed 25%
of the floor area of the operation;



         (b)   On- or off-premises sales require a liquor
license; and



         (c)   Outdoor seating areas are to operate no later than
10:00 p.m.



(2013 Code, § 11.88)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 93, passed
5-27-1982; Ord. 97, passed 7-15-1982; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 377,
passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 429, passed 11-2-1995; Ord. 689, passed 11-27-2003;
Ord. 877, passed 12-3-2013)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.015  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Variance jurisdiction. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals
shall have jurisdiction over any variance which is not closely related to a
land use application requiring consideration by the Planning Commission and
City Council. Any variance which is closely related to such a land use
application shall be under the jurisdiction of the Planning Commission and
City Council.



   (B)   Criteria for granting variances. A variance from the
requirements of the zoning ordinance may be granted where the following
circumstances are found to exist:



      (1)   (a)   When the application for the variance
establishes that there are practical difficulties in complying with the
official control.



         (b)   Practical difficulties means the following:



            1.   The property owner proposes to use the
property in a reasonable manner not permitted by an official control;



            2.   The plight of the landowner is due to
circumstances unique to the property;



            3.   The circumstances were not created by the
landowner;



            4.   The variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the locality; and



            5.   The problems extend beyond economic
considerations. Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical
difficulties.



      (2)   It has been demonstrated that a variance as requested
will be in harmony with the general purposes and intent of the chapter and
when the variance as requested is consistent with the comprehensive plan;



      (3)   The request is not for a use variance;



      (4)   Conditions to be imposed by the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals must be directly related to and must bear a rough proportionality to
the impact created by the variance; and



      (5)   Variances in the Floodplain Overlay Zone also shall meet
the following criteria:



         (a)   No variance shall have the effect of allowing a
lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection
elevation for the particular area;



         (b)   The Board shall submit to the Commissioner of the
State Department of Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed
variance sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive at
least 10 days’ notice of the hearing;



         (c)   A copy of all decisions granting variances shall
be forwarded to the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources
within 10 days of such action; and



         (d)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the
applicant for a variance that the issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance and that such construction below the 100-year or regional
flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be
maintained with a record of all variance actions. The city shall maintain a
record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance,
and report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted
to the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program.



   (C)   Application. An application for a variance shall be filed with
the Zoning Administrator on the appropriate forms stating the undue hardship
claimed. The application must be accompanied by the following:



      (1)   A site plan at a scale large enough for clarity showing
the following information:



         (a)   Location and dimensions of lots, buildings,
driveways, and off-street parking spaces;



         (b)   Distances between buildings and front, side, and
rear lot lines; principal buildings and accessory structures; principal
buildings and accessory structures on adjacent lots;



         (c)   Location of signs, easements, underground
utilities, septic tanks, tile fields, and water wells; and



         (d)   Any additional information as reasonably may be
required by the Zoning Administrator.



      (2)   A list of the names and addresses of the owners of all
properties located wholly or partially within 350 feet of the property, as
such appear on the records of the County Recorder;



      (3)   Evidence of ownership or an interest in the property;



      (4)   The fee; and



      (5)   Such other information as may be required by the city.



   (D)   Public hearing.



      (1)   Generally. Upon receipt of a completed application, a
date shall be set for a public hearing before the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals. Property owners within 350 feet of the property for which a variance
is requested shall be notified by mail of the proposed variance at least 10
days prior to the public hearing. Published notice of hearing also shall be
given at least 10 days before the hearing in the official newspaper.



      (2)   Shoreland Overlay Zone. The Commissioner of the
Department of Natural Resources shall be given written notice all hearings to
consider a variance in the Shoreland Overlay Zone at least 10 days before the
day of the hearing.



   (E)   Decision.



      (1)   Generally. Following the public hearing, the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals shall decide the matter before it. Variances may be
approved by the affirmative vote of a simple majority of those present. If
the Board denies a variance, it shall make a finding and determination that
the conditions required for approval do not exist. No application for a
variance which has been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted for a
period of 6 months from the date of denial, except on grounds of new evidence
or proof of change of conditions. All decisions by the Board of Adjustment
and Appeals are final subject to appeal to the City Council.



      (2)   Shoreland Overlay Zone. A copy of any approved variance
affecting land within the Shoreland Overlay Zone shall be sent to the
Commissioner of the State Department of Natural Resources within 10 days
after approval. When a variance has been approved despite the
Commissioner’s recommendation of denial, the copy of the final action shall
be accompanied by a summary of the public record and testimony regarding the
matter and the findings of fact and conclusions which support the issuance of
the variance.



   (F)   Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals regarding a variance may have such decision reviewed
by the City Council if a request for review is submitted to the Zoning
Administrator within 10 days of the date of the decision. The appeal shall be
in writing and shall include a statement of the alleged errors or omissions
of the Board.



   (G)   Additional conditions. In granting a variance, the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals or City Council may impose conditions in order to
preserve the health, safety, or welfare of the community or in order to
implement the purposes of this chapter or the comprehensive plan.



   (H)   Recording. A copy of the variance shall be maintained in the
city’s records and shall also be required to be recorded at the County
Recorder’s office or the County Registrar of Titles office.



   (I)   Term of variance. Any variance granted by the city shall run
with the land unless within one year of the date of approval no building
permit has been issued or substantial work performed on the project, in which
case the variance shall be null and void. The Board may extend the period for
construction upon finding that the interest of the owners of neighboring
properties will not be adversely affected by such extension.



   (J)   Specific project. A variance shall be valid only for the
project for which it was granted. Construction of any project shall be in
substantial compliance with the building plans and specifications reviewed
and approved by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals or the City Council.



   (K)   Construction during appeal period. Any applicant who obtains a
building permit and starts construction upon the decision of the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals prior to the termination of the appeal period, assumes
the risk that the decision may be reversed upon appeal. When an appeal is
received by the city, the applicant will be notified of the appeal and
informed of the date of the City Council meeting at which it will be heard.



   (L)   Violations. No person shall violate, fail to comply with, or
assist, direct, or permit the violation of the terms or conditions of a
variance. Such violation shall be a violation of the variance and shall
render the variance null and void.



(2013 Code, § 11.89)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 35, passed
1-31-1980; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 694,
passed 2-5-2004; Ord. 847, passed 6-30-2011)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.016  APPEALS.



   (A)   Appeals from city staff decisions. Any person aggrieved by a
decision of the Zoning Administrator or other person regarding the
enforcement of this chapter, may appeal to the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals. The appeal shall specify what error allegedly was made in an order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator or
other person. The appeal shall be filed in writing with the Zoning
Administrator within 7 days of the date of decision. Upon receipt of an
appeal, the Zoning Administrator shall schedule the matter for consideration
by the Board. The Board shall have authority to affirm, modify, or reverse
the decision of the Zoning Administrator or other person. This provision
shall not apply in the case of a criminal prosecution for violation of this
chapter.



   (B)   Appeals from decision of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals may
appeal the decision to the City Council. The appeal must be submitted in
writing to the Zoning Administrator within 10 days of the date of the
decision and shall include a statement of the alleged errors or omissions of
the Board. Upon appeal, the City Council shall consider the request within 90
days unless an extended period is agreed upon by the parties.



   (C)   Construction during appeal period. Any applicant who obtains a
building permit and starts construction after the decision of the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals, but prior to the termination of the appeal period,
assumes the risk that the decision may be reversed upon appeal. When an
appeal is received by the city, the applicant will be notified of the appeal
and informed of the date of the City Council meeting at which it will be
heard.



(2013 Code, § 11.90)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 246, passed
6-17-1988; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994)



§ 151.017  NONCONFORMITIES.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   It is recognized that there are structures and uses of
land which were lawful when established but which do not now comply with all
applicable provisions of this chapter. While nonconformities may not be
summarily terminated, it is the purpose and intent of this chapter to
discourage the survival of Type A nonconformities and such uses are hereby
declared to be incompatible with this chapter and with the comprehensive
plan. It is further the purpose and intent of this chapter to discourage the
enlargement, expansion, or extension of any Type A nonconformity or any
increase of the impact of such nonconformity on adjoining property.



      (2)   It is also recognized that there are Type B
nonconformities in which the uses continue to be permissible but which are
operated on sites or in structures which do not fully meet the development
standards of this chapter. It is the intent of this chapter to distinguish
between uses which are not permitted and those in which development standards
or other incidents of development are not in full compliance with this
chapter. Type A nonconformities will be discouraged and not allowed to
expand, while Type B nonconformities will be allowed to continue in existence
and expand under carefully regulated conditions.



   (B)   Types of nonconformities. This chapter recognizes the
following 2 types of nonconformities:



      (1)   Type A nonconformities shall include land and structures
which are devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter.



      (2)   Type B nonconformities shall include developed land
which is devoted to a use permitted by this chapter, but where the site or
structure is not in compliance with some other provision of this chapter,
such as the design standards applicable within that zone.



      (3)   Undeveloped parcels of land which are not in compliance
with some provision of this chapter or any other relevant provision of this
code of ordinances, such as the design standards applicable within that zone,
shall not be considered nonconformities. It is further the intent of this
chapter to allow development to occur on these parcels while acknowledging
any variation from existing standards of this code of ordinances.



   (C)   Regulation of Type A nonconformities. Type A nonconformities
shall be regulated in accordance with the following.



      (1)   No such use shall be expanded, enlarged, to use more
land area, intensified, replaced, structurally changed, or relocated, except
to make it a permitted use. Normal maintenance and non-structural repairs
shall be excepted from this prohibition.



      (2)   No nonconformity shall be resumed if normal operation of
the use has been discontinued for a period of 6 or more months. Time shall be
calculated as beginning on the date following the last day in which the use
was in normal operation and shall run continuously thereafter.



      (3)   (a)   Full utilization of the nonconformity shall not
be resumed if the amount of land or floor area dedicated to the use is
lessened or if the intensity of the use is in any manner diminished for a
period of 6 or more months. Time shall be calculated as beginning on the day
following the last day in which the nonconformity was in full operation and
shall run continuously thereafter.



         (b)   Following the expiration of 6 months, the
nonconformity may be used only in the manner or to the extent used during the
preceding 6 months.



         (c)   For the purposes of this division (C)(3),
intensity of use shall include, but not be limited to, hours of operation,
traffic, noise, exterior storage, signs, exterior lighting, types of goods or
services offered, odors, and number of employees.



      (4)   Removal or destruction of a nonconformity to the extent
of more than 50% of its estimated market value, excluding land, as determined
by the assessor, shall terminate the right to continue the nonconformity.



      (5)   Notwithstanding the prohibitions contained in divisions
(C)(1) through (C)(4) above and (C)(6) below, if approved by the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals, a nonconformity may be changed to another
nonconformity of less intensity. In all instances, the applicant has the
burden of proof regarding the relative intensities of uses.



      (6)   If a nonconformity is superseded or replaced by a
permitted use, the nonconforming status of the premises and any rights which
arise under the provisions of this section shall terminate.



      (7)   In the Floodplain Overlay Zone, the cost of any
structural alterations or additions to any nonconforming structure over the
life of the structure shall not exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure. The cost of all structural alterations and additions constructed
since the adoption of the zoning ordinance must be calculated into today’s
current cost of all previous and proposed alterations and additions which
exceeds 50% of the current market value of the structure, then the structure
must be brought into conformity with the provisions of §§ 151.085 through
151.094, Floodplain Overlay Zone (FP).



   (D)   Regulation of Type B nonconformities. Type B nonconformities
shall be regulated in accordance with the following.



      (1)   Expansion of an existing use or structure,
reconstruction of a partially destroyed structure, construction of a new
structure, or other intensification of a Type B nonconformity may be
permitted upon a finding by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals of the
following:



         (a)   The number and extent of nonconformities will not
be increased in conjunction with the proposed construction or intensification;



         (b)   The impact of nonconformities upon adjacent
property will not be increased in conjunction with the proposed construction
or intensification; and



         (c)   The conditions to be imposed by the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals will effect the intent of this section.



      (2)   Unless a building permit has been applied for within 180
days of removal or destruction of a Type B nonconformity, a Type B
nonconformity which is destroyed to the extent of more than 50% of its market
value at the time of loss shall be replaced only in compliance with the
standards of the applicable zone. A Type B nonconformity destroyed to the
extent of less than 50% of market value at the time of loss may be rebuilt to
previously existing dimensions. In reviewing a permit for any Type B
nonconformity which has been partially destroyed, the city shall seek to make
the development conform as closely to the requirements of this chapter as is
reasonably practical.



      (3)   (a)   In the Floodplain Overlay Zone, the cost of any
structural alterations or additions to any nonconforming structure over the
life of the structure shall not exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure.



         (b)   The cost of all structural alterations and
additions constructed since the adoption of the zoning ordinance must be
calculated into today’s current cost which will include all costs such as
construction, materials, and labor.



         (c)   If the current cost of all previous and proposed
alterations and additions exceeds 50% of the current market value of the
structure, then the structure must be brought into conformity with the
provisions of §§ 151.085 through 151.094, Floodplain Overlay Zone (FP).



   (E)   Nonconformity; eminent domain. When the taking under eminent
domain of a portion of the land upon which there existed a lawful use prior
to such taking results in such use becoming unlawful under this chapter, such
use is a nonconformity and may be continued only under the provisions of this
chapter.



(2013 Code, § 11.91)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 377, passed
7-7-1994; Ord. 412, passed 4-27-1995)



§ 151.018  PUBLIC NOTICE, NEIGHBORHOOD MEETINGS, POSTING OF SIGNS AND OTHER
GENERAL RULES.



   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to all applications for
development approvals and permit requests under this chapter and Chapter 150,
unless otherwise stated.



   (B)   Authority to file applications.



      (1)   Applications submitted under this chapter or Chapter 150
may be submitted by the landowner: a person, business, or organization having
rights in contract in the land or their authorized agents; the city council;
the planning commission: or the city administrator.



      (2)   If the applicant is not the owner of the land, the
owner's name and contact information must be included in the application.



   (C)   Neighborhood meeting.



      (1)   A neighborhood meeting is required for the following
types of applications if the application also requires a public hearing
before either the Planning Commission or the Board of Adjustments and Appeals:



         (a)   Map amendment (rezoning);



         (b)   Preliminary Plat;



         (c)   Conditional Use Permit not related to a
single-family home;



         (d)   Comp Plan Amendment;



         (e)   PUD;



         (f)   Zoning Text Amendment;



         (g)   Variance not related to a single-family home.



      (2)   An applicant must conduct the neighborhood meeting
before a public hearing is held by the Planning Commission or the Board of
Adjustments and Appeals. The Zoning Administrator may waive this requirement
in cases where there is no adjacent neighborhood that would be impacted by
the application or where the scope of the project has only a minimal impact
on the neighborhood.



      (3)   The purpose of the neighborhood meeting is to provide an
opportunity for informal communication between applicants, occupants, and
owners of nearby properties that might be affected by development proposals;
to educate the nearby occupants and owners about the proposed development and
application; to receive comments and address concerns about the development
proposal; and to resolve conflicts and outstanding issues, where possible.



      (4)   If a neighborhood meeting is required, it should comply
with the following procedures:



         (a)   The neighborhood meeting should be held during the
hours of 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, at a place that is
generally accessible to occupants of property in close proximity to the land
subject to the application. Meetings may be held at a time and day different
from the above at the neighborhood's request. Meetings shall be held at least
eight calendar days before the scheduled public hearing. Failure to do so can
result in delay or denial of the application.



         (b)   The applicant shall provide notification of the
neighborhood meeting at least seven business days before the date of the
meeting by first class mail to: all owners and occupants within 500 feet of
the land subject to the application and any neighborhood organization that
represents residents within that area. The notification shall state the date,
time and place of the meeting.



         (c)   At the neighborhood meeting, the applicant shall
explain the development proposal and application; answer questions; and,
address the ways in which to resolve the attendees' concerns. Within two days
after the meeting, the applicant shall provide the Zoning Administrator with
a list of the attendees and a summary of their concerns.



   (D)   Public notification for public hearings.



      (1)   All mailed and published notices for public hearings
shall:



         (a)   Identify the city's case log number and the name
of the applicant or the applicant's agent.



         (b)   Indicate the date, time and place of the public
hearing.



         (c)   Describe the site involved by street address,
property identification number (or both) and nearest intersection.



         (d)   Identify the current zoning district designation
of the site subject to the application.



         (e)   Describe the nature, scope and purpose of the
application or proposal.



         (f)   Indicate the date and hours of availability and
describe in which city department the application, staff report, and related
materials may be inspected by the public.



         (g)   Include a statement describing where interested
members of the public and property owners may submit written comments or
evidence before the public hearing.



         (h)   Include a statement that interested members of the
public and property owners may appear at the public hearing, be heard, and
submit evidence and written comments with respect to the application.



      (2)   When an application requires mailed notice, the Zoning
Administrator shall be responsible for preparing and mailing the written
notice at city expense. Notice shall be mailed to:



         (a)   All property owners of the land subject to the
application.



         (b)   All property owners and occupants within 500 feet
of the land subject to the application whose address is known by reference to
the latest ad valorem property tax records.



      (3)   Notice shall be mailed by its deposit in the United
States mail first class, properly addressed, postage paid. The Zoning
Administrator shall acknowledge at the public hearing that the required
notice of the hearing was mailed. A copy of the mailed notice shall be
maintained by the zoning city administrator for public inspection during
normal business hours.



      (4)   When an application requires that notice be published,
the Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for preparing the content of
the notice and publishing the notice in the city's official newspaper. The
content and form of the published notice shall be consistent with the
requirements of the applicable provisions in state law. The Zoning
Administrator shall prepare a certificate acknowledging that published notice
has occurred pursuant to the requirements of this subsection and include a
copy of the published notice in the city's records.



   (E)   Posted notice.



      (1)   Posted notice on the site that is the subject of the
application is required for any application for which a neighborhood meeting
is required.



      (2)   The posted notice shall comply with the following
requirements:



         (a)   Notice shall be posted on signs in a form
established by the Zoning Administrator.



         (b)   The signs shall be placed by the applicant on the
property that is subject to the application at least 15 days before the
public hearing along each public street that abuts or transects the property,
at intervals of not more than 500 feet.



         (c)   The signs shall be posted in a manner that ensures
visibility from public streets.



      (3)   The applicant shall provide the Zoning Administrator
with a notarized affidavit in a format provided by the city stating that
posted notice has been provided in accordance with the requirements of this
subsection. The affidavit shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator
before the public hearing.



      (4)   The applicant shall ensure that the posted notice is
maintained on the property until the completion of the public hearing.



      (5)   The signs shall be removed by the applicant within five
days after the public hearing.



   (F)   The failure to give posted, mailed, or published notice as
required by this section or defects in any notice or irregularities in the
neighborhood meeting shall not invalidate the proceedings if a bona fide
attempt to comply with the requirements of this section has been made.



(Ord. 951, passed 12-20-2016)




ZONES AND DISTRICTS




§ 151.030  AGRICULTURAL PRESERVATION ZONE (AG).



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Agricultural Preservation Zone is
to preserve and promote agriculture in the unsewered areas of the city which
are suitable for such use, to prevent scattered and leap-frog non-farm
growth, and to prevent premature expenditures for such public services as
roads, sewer, water, and police and fire protection.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within the Agricultural Preservation Zone, no
structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:



      (1)   Agricultural uses;



      (2)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (3)   Forestry and nursery uses;



      (4)   Seasonal produce stands;



      (5)   Riding academies;



      (6)   Utility services;



      (7)   Utility service structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall not be a water tower or electrical
substation or a building constructed to house sanitary lift station controls;



         (b)   Shall be 20 feet or less in height;



         (c)   May be used only to provide weather protection for
utility equipment;



         (d)   Shall be designed, placed, and landscaped as
necessary to assure that it blends with the neighboring uses, and is
unobtrusive; and



         (e)   Shall comply with all applicable design standards.



      (8)   Public recreation;



      (9)   Public buildings;



      (10)   Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons;



      (11)   Adult day care centers as permitted uses, subject to
the following conditions. The adult day care center shall:



         (a)   Serve 12 or fewer persons;



         (b)   Provide proof of an adequate water and sewer
system if not served by municipal utilities;



         (c)   Have outdoor leisure/recreation areas located and
designated to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas;



         (d)   1.   The total indoor space available for use
by participants must equal at least 40 square feet for each day care
participant and each day care staff member present at the center. When a
center is located in a multi-functional organization if the required space
available for use by participants is maintained while the center is operating.



            2.   In determining the square footage of usable
indoor space available, a center must not count:



               a.   Hallways, stairways, closets, offices,
restrooms, and utility and storage areas;



               b.   More than 25% of the space occupied by
the furniture or equipment used by participants or staff; or



               c.   In a multi-functional organization, any
space occupied by persons associated with the multi-functional organization
while participants are using common space.



         (e)   Comply with all other state licensing requirements.



      (12)   Group family day care facilities serving 14 or fewer
children;



      (13)   Residential facilities serving 6 or fewer persons; or



      (14)   Relocated structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall obtain a moving permit from the city under
§ 111.07;



         (b)   Prior to moving, the applicant shall have given
cash, a cashier’s check, or letter of credit as a financial guarantee to
the city to ensure completion of all work. The financial guarantee shall be
in an amount equal to the Building Official’s estimate of the cost to bring
the structure into compliance with the Building Code;



         (c)   The structure shall meet all requirements of the
Building Code within 6 months after moving;



         (d)   If the structure is not in full compliance with
the Building Code after 6 months of moving, the city, in its sole discretion,
may draw on the financial guarantee and take whatever steps it deems
necessary to bring the relocated structure into compliance with the Building
Code. In the event the city draws on the financial guarantee, 10% of the
total guarantee shall be paid to the city as its administrative fee;



         (e)   The applicant shall provide the Building
Department with all plan review comments and inspection records from Building
Codes and STDS Division and from the city of origin where constructed;



         (f)   An approved county highway moving permit will be
required for the moving of the structure;



         (g)   The structure shall be required to meet all
setbacks, design, and performance standards specified in this code of
ordinances, unless otherwise approved; and



         (h)   Repair of any damage to city streets as a result
of relocating the structure shall be paid for by the applicant.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Within the Agricultural Preservation Zone,
no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by
conditional use permit:



      (1)   Commercial feedlots, which include yards, lots, pens,
buildings, or other areas or structures used for the confined feeding of
livestock or other animals for food, fur, pleasure, or resale purposes;



      (2)   Retail sales of nursery and garden supplies;



      (3)   Cemeteries;



      (4)   Churches and other places of worship;



      (5)   Agricultural research facilities, which are facilities
specifically operated for the purpose of conducting research in the
production of agricultural crops, including research aimed at developing
plant varieties. This term specifically excludes research regarding the
development or research of soil conditioners, fertilizers, or other chemical
additives placed in or on the soil or for the experimental raising of animals;



      (6)   Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics;



      (7)   Kennel;  kennel is any premises in which more than 2
domestic animals, over 6 months of age, are boarded, bred, or offered for
sale;



      (8)   Public or private schools having a course of instruction
approved by the State Department of Education for students enrolled in K
through grade 12, or any portion thereof;



      (9)   Commercial recreation, minor;



      (10)   Day care facilities serving 13 through 16 persons;



      (11)   Adult day care centers as conditional use, subject to
the following conditions. The adult day care centers shall:



         (a)   Serve 12 or more persons;



         (b)   Provide proof of an adequate water and sewer
system if not served by municipal utilities;



         (c)   Have outdoor leisure/recreation areas located and
designed to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas;



         (d)   1.   The total indoor space available for use
by participants must equal at least 40 square feet for each day care
participant and each day care staff member present at the center. When a
center is located in a multi-functional organization, the center may share a
common space with the multi- functional organization if the required space
available for use by participants is maintained while the center is operating.



            2.   In determining the square footage of usable
indoor space available, a center must not count:



               a.   Hallways, stairways, closets, offices,
restrooms, and utility and storage areas;



               b.   More than 25% of the space occupied by
the furniture or equipment used by participants or staff; or



               c.   In a multi-functional organization, any
space occupied by persons associated with the multi-functional organization
while participants are using common space.



         (e)   Provide proof of state, federal, and other
governmental licensing agency approval; and



         (f)   Comply with all other state licensing requirements;



      (12)   Residential facilities serving from 7 through 16
persons;



      (13)   Wind energy conversion systems or windmills;



      (14)   Structures over 2-1/2 stories or 35 feet in height;



      (15)   Developments containing more than one principal
structure per lot;



      (16)   Utility structures which do not meet the standard
conditions under the permitted uses; or



      (17)   Other uses similar to those permitted by this division
(C), upon a determination by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, may be
allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Within the Agricultural Preservation
Zone the following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Machinery, structures, and silos necessary to the
conduct of agricultural operations;



      (2)   Garages;



      (3)   Fences;



      (4)   Recreational equipment;



      (5)   Stables;



      (6)   Swimming pools;



      (7)   Solar equipment;



      (8)   Tennis courts;



      (9)   Receive-only satellite dish antennas, antenna devices,
or communication service devices/apparatus (excluding towers) if located on
utility service structures or public buildings;



      (10)   Home occupations contingent upon approval of a home
occupation permit; or



      (11)   Other accessory uses, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.



   (E)   Design standards. Within the Agricultural Preservation Zone,
no land shall be used, and no structure shall be constructed or used, except
in conformance with the following requirements:



      (1)   Maximum density: One dwelling per forty 40 acres; and



      (2)   Lot specifications.



         (a)   1.   Minimum lot width: 1,000 feet; and



            2.   Minimum lot depth: 1,000 feet.



         (b)   1.   Minimum front yard setback: 100 feet;



            2.   Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet; and



            3.   Minimum rear yard setback: 40 feet.



         (c)   Maximum height: 35 feet. Grain elevators, barns,
silos, and elevator lags may exceed this limitation without a conditional use
permit.



   (F)   Additional requirements.



      (1)   All dwellings shall have a depth of at least 20 feet for
at least 50% of their width. All dwellings shall have a width of at least 20
feet for at least 50% of their depth.



      (2)   All dwellings shall have a permanent foundation in
conformance with the State Building Code.



(2013 Code, § 11.22)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 264, passed
5-26-1989; Ord. 279, passed 12-1-1989; Ord. 304, passed 11-7-1991; Ord. 377,
passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 435, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 482, passed 5-15-1997;
Ord. 501, passed 9-18-1997; Ord. 528, passed 10-29-1998; Ord. 549, passed
6-3-1999; Ord. 572, passed 7-27-2000; Ord. 741, passed 12-1-2005; Ord. 793,
passed 3-27-2008; Ord. 903, passed 3-17-2015)



§ 151.031  RURAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE (RR).



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Rural Residential Zone is to allow
low-density residential development in areas which are not served by
municipal urban services.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within the Rural Residential Zone, no
structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (2)   Agricultural uses;



      (3)   Forestry and nursery uses;



      (4)   Utility services;



      (5)   Utility service structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall not be a water tower or electrical
substation or a building constructed to house sanitary lift station controls;



         (b)   Shall be 20 feet or less in height;



         (c)   May be used only to provide weather protection for
utility equipment;



         (d)   Shall be designed, placed, and landscaped as
necessary to assure that it blends with the neighboring uses, and is
unobtrusive; and



         (e)   Shall comply with all applicable design standards.



      (6)   Public recreation;



      (7)   Public buildings;



      (8)   Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons;



      (9)   Adult day care centers as permitted uses, subject to the
following conditions. The adult day care center shall:



         (a)   Serve 12 or fewer persons;



         (b)   Provide proof of an adequate water and sewer
system if not served by municipal utilities;



         (c)   Have outdoor leisure/recreation areas located and
designated to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas;



         (d)   1.   The total indoor space available for use
by participants must equal at least 40 square feet for each day care
participant and each day care staff member present at the center. When a
center is located in a multi-functional organization if the required space
available for use by participants is maintained while the center is operating.



            2.   In determining the square footage of usable
indoor space available, a center must not count:



               a.   Hallways, stairways, closets, offices,
restrooms, and utility and storage areas;



               b.   More than 25% of the space occupied by
the furniture or equipment used by participants or staff; or



               c.   In a multi-functional organization, any
space occupied by persons associated with the multi-functional organization
while participants are using common space.



         (e)   Comply with all other state licensing requirements.



      (10)   Group family day care facilities serving 14 or fewer
children;



      (11)   Residential facilities serving 6 or fewer persons; or



      (12)   Relocated structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall obtain a moving permit from the city under
§ 111.07;



         (b)   Prior to moving, the applicant shall have given
cash, a cashier’s check, or letter of credit as a financial guarantee to
the city to ensure completion of all work. The financial guarantee shall be
in an amount equal to the Building Official’s estimate of the cost to bring
the structure into compliance with the Building Code;



         (c)   The structure shall meet all requirements of the
Building Code within 6 months after moving;



         (d)   If the structure is not in full compliance with
the Building Code after 6 months of moving, the city, in its sole discretion,
may draw on the financial guarantee and take whatever steps it deems
necessary to bring the relocated structure into compliance with the Building
Code. In the event the city draws on the financial guarantee, 10% of the
total guarantee shall be paid to the city as its administrative fee;



         (e)   The applicant shall provide the Building
Department with all plan review comments and inspection records from Building
Codes and STDS Division and from the city of origin where constructed;



         (f)   An approved county highway moving permit will be
required for the moving of the structure;



         (g)   The structure shall be required to meet all
setbacks, design, and performance standards specified in this code of
ordinances, unless otherwise approved; and



         (h)   Repair of any damage to city streets as a result
of relocating the structure shall be paid for by the applicant.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Within the Rural Residential Zone, no
structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by conditional
use permit:



      (1)   Churches and other places of worship;



      (2)   Cemeteries;



      (3)   Commercial recreation, minor;



      (4)   Seasonal produce stands when the principal use of the
property is agricultural;



      (5)   Public or private schools having a course of instruction
approved by the State Department of Education for students enrolled in K
through grade 12, or any portion thereof;



      (6)   Riding academies;



      (7)   Day care facilities serving 13 through 16 persons;



      (8)   Adult day care centers as conditional use, subject to
the following conditions. The adult day care centers shall:



         (a)   Serve 13 or more persons;



         (b)   Provide proof of an adequate water and sewer
system if not served by municipal utilities;



         (c)   Have outdoor leisure/recreation areas located and
designed to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas;



         (d)   1.   The total indoor space available for use
by participants must equal at least 40 square feet for each day care
participant and each day care staff member present at the center. When a
center is located in a multi-functional organization, the center may share a
common space with the multi- functional organization if the required space
available for use by participants is maintained while the center is operating.



            2.   In determining the square footage of usable
indoor space available, a center must not count:



               a.   Hallways, stairways, closets, offices,
restrooms, and utility and storage areas;



               b.   More than 25% of the space occupied by
the furniture or equipment used by participants or staff; or



               c.   In a multi-functional organization, any
space occupied by persons associated with the multi-functional organization
while participants are using common space;



         (e)   Provide proof of state, federal, and other
governmental licensing agency approval; and



         (f)   Comply with all other state licensing requirements.



      (9)   Residential facilities serving from 7 through 16 persons;



      (10)   Wind energy conversion systems or windmills;



      (11)   Structures over 2-1/2 stories or 35 feet in height;



      (12)   Developments containing more than one principal
structure per lot;



      (13)   Other uses similar to those permitted by this division
(C), upon a determination by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, may be
allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit;



      (14)   Home occupations on properties 10 acres or greater in
area where more than one employee does not reside in the dwelling unit; or



      (15)   Utility structures which do not meet the standard
conditions under the permitted uses.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Within the Rural Residential Zone,
the following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Garages;



      (2)   Fences;



      (3)   Gardening and other horticultural uses not involving
retail sales;



      (4)   One lodging room per single-family dwelling;



      (5)   Recreational equipment;



      (6)   Machinery, structures, and silos necessary to the
conduct of agricultural operations;



      (7)   Communication service apparatus/device(s) as permitted
accessory uses, subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall be co-located on an existing tower or an
existing structure;



         (b)   Must not exceed 175 feet in total height
(including the extension of any communication service device(s) apparatus);



         (c)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (d)   Signage shall not be allowed on the communication
service device(s)/apparatus other than danger or warning type signs;



         (e)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment will not interfere with existing communications for public
safety purposes;



         (f)   Shall be located and have an exterior finish that
minimizes visibility off-site to the maximum extent possible;



         (g)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (h)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
approved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site;



         (i)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating all
anticipated future location-sites for communication towers and/or
communication devices(s)/apparatus;



         (j)   Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
will only be considered for city parks when the following conditions exist
and if those areas are recommended by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
and approved by the City Council:



            1.   City parks of sufficient size and character
that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use; or



            2.   Commercial recreation areas and major play
fields used primarily by adults.



         (k)   All revenue generated through the lease of a city
park for wireless telecommunication towers and antennas should be transferred
to the Park Reserve Fund.



      (8)   Stables with not more than 2 horses per 2-1/2 acres;



      (9)   Swimming pools;



      (10)   Solar equipment;



      (11)   Receive-only satellite dish antennas and other antenna
devices;



      (12)   Home occupations contingent upon approval of a home
occupation permit;



      (13)   Tennis courts; or



      (14)   Towers for commercial wireless telecommunications
services shall only be allowed subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall also operate as a public utility structure;



         (b)   Shall be located within the public rights-of-way;



         (c)   Shall be limited to 75 feet in height;



         (d)   Shall limit the height of antennas and
communication service devices to 10 feet beyond the height of the structure;



         (e)   No setback shall be required when located in the
public rights-of-way;



         (f)   Turf or other materials shall be established in
the right-of-way consistent with the materials in the right-of-way at the
time of installation;



         (g)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (h)   Shall be protected with corrosive resistant
material;



         (i)   Signage shall not be allowed on the tower other
than danger or warning type signs;



         (j)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment is not able to be collocated on any existing or approved
towers and prove that the planned tower will not interfere with existing
communications for public safety purposes;



         (k)   Must be built to accommodate antennas being placed
at varying heights on the tower;



         (l)   Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible;



         (m)   Shall be surrounded by a security fence 6 feet in
height with a lockable gate;



         (n)   Shall have an exterior finish that minimizes
visibility off-site to the greatest extent possible;



         (o)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (p)   No tower shall be permitted unless the equipment
planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or building within the one-half mile search radius of the
proposed tower for any of the following reasons:



            1.   The necessary equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building and the
existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost, as
certified by a qualified, licensed professional engineer;



            2.   The necessary equipment would cause
interference as to significantly impact the usability of other existing or
planned equipment at the tower, structure, or building and the interference,
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost, as certified by a qualified,
licensed structural engineer;



            3.   Existing or approved towers and buildings
within the one-half mile search radius cannot or will not accommodate the
planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably, as certified
by a qualified, licensed professional engineer; or



            4.   The applicant, after a good faith effort, is
unable to lease space on an existing or approved tower or building.



         (q)   1.   All obsolete or unused towers and
accompanying accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the
cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by
the city.



            2.   After the facilities are removed, the site
shall be restored to its original or an improved state. The user of the tower
and/or accompanying accessory facilities shall be responsible for the removal
of facilities and restoration of the site.



         (r)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating
anticipated sites for future location for communication towers and/or
communication device(s)/apparatus; and



         (s)   Other accessory uses, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.



   (E)   Design standards. Within the Rural Residential Zone, no land
shall be used, and no structure shall be constructed or used, except in
conformance with the following requirements:



      (1)   Maximum density. One dwelling per 10 acres. For lots
approved prior to January 18, 1994, the maximum density is one dwelling per
2-1/2 acres;



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface percentage. 30%;



      (3)   Lot specifications.



         (a)   1.   Minimum lot width: 150 feet; and



            2.   Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.



         (b)   1.   Minimum front yard setback: 40 feet;



            2.   Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet;



            3.   Minimum rear yard setback: 40 feet; and



            4.   Minimum setback for accessory machinery and
buildings necessary to the conduct of agricultural operations: 100 feet from
all lot lines.



      (4)   Maximum height. No structure shall exceed 35 feet in
height without a conditional use permit.



   (F)   Additional requirements.



      (1)   All dwellings shall have a depth of at least 20 feet for
at least 50% of their width. All dwellings shall have a width of at least 20
feet for at least 50% of their depth.



      (2)   All dwellings shall have a permanent foundation in
conformance with the State Building Code.



(2013 Code, § 11.24)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 264, passed
5-26-1989; Ord. 288, passed 2-16-1990; Ord. 304, passed 11-7-1991; Ord. 377,
passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 435, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 479, passed 3-13-1997;
Ord. 482, passed 5-15-1997; Ord. 501, passed 9-18-1997; Ord. 528, passed
10-29-1998; Ord. 549, passed 6-3-1999; Ord. 600, passed 6-28-2001; Ord. 741,
passed 12-1-2005; Ord. 793, passed 3-27-2008; Ord. 813, passed 2-26-2009;
Ord. 903, passed 3-17-2015)



§ 151.032  SEWER RURAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE (SRR).



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Sewered Rural Residential Zone is
to allow low-density residential development in areas that were platted prior
to September 2006, and which are served by municipal urban services.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within the Sewered Rural Residential Zone, no
structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (2)   Agricultural uses;



      (3)   Forestry and nursery uses;



      (4)   Utility services;



      (5)   Utility service structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall not be a water tower or electrical
substation or a building constructed to house sanitary lift station controls;



         (b)   Shall be 20 feet or less in height;



         (c)   May be used only to provide weather protection for
utility equipment;



         (d)   Shall be designed, placed, and landscaped as
necessary to assure that it blends with the neighboring uses, and is
unobtrusive; and



         (e)   Shall comply with all applicable design standards.



      (6)   Public recreation;



      (7)   Public buildings;



      (8)   Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons;



      (9)   Adult day care centers as permitted uses, subject to the
following conditions. The adult day care center shall:



         (a)   Serve 12 or fewer persons;



         (b)   Provide proof of an adequate water and sewer
system if not served by municipal utilities;



         (c)   Have outdoor leisure/recreation areas located and
designed to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas;



         (d)   1.   The total indoor space available for use
by participants must equal at least 40 square feet for each day care
participant and each day care staff member present at the center. When a
center is located in a multi-functional organization if the required space
available for use by participants is maintained while the center is operating.



            2.   In determining the square footage of usable
indoor space available, a center must not count:



               a.    Hallways, stairways, closets, offices,
restrooms, and utility and storage areas;



               b.   More than 25% of the space occupied by
the furniture or equipment used by participants or staff; or



               c.   In a multi-functional organization, any
space occupied by persons associated with the multi-functional organization
while participants are using common space.



         (e)   Comply with all other state licensing requirements.



      (10)   Group family day care facilities serving 14 or fewer
children;



      (11)   Residential facilities serving 6 or fewer persons; or



      (12)   Relocated structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall obtain a moving permit from the city under
§ 111.07;



         (b)   Prior to moving, the applicant shall have given
cash, a cashier’s check, or letter of credit as a financial guarantee to
the city to ensure completion of all work. The financial guarantee shall be
in an amount equal to the Building Official’s estimate of the cost to bring
the structure into compliance with the Building Code;



         (c)   The structure shall meet all requirements of the
Building Code within 6 months after moving;



         (d)   If the structure is not in full compliance with
the Building Code after 6 months of moving, the city, in its sole discretion,
may draw on the financial guarantee and take whatever steps it deems
necessary to bring the relocated structure into compliance with the Building
Code. In the event the city draws on the financial guarantee, 10% of the
total guarantee shall be paid to the city as its administrative fee;



         (e)   The applicant shall provide the Building
Department with all plan review comments and inspection records from Building
Codes and STDS Division and from the city of origin where constructed;



         (f)   An approved county highway moving permit will be
required for the moving of the structure;



         (g)   The structure shall be required to meet all
setbacks, design, and performance standards specified in this code of
ordinances, unless otherwise approved; and



         (h)   Repair of any damage to city streets as a result
of relocating the structure shall be paid for by the applicant.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Within the Sewered Rural Residential Zone,
no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by
conditional use permit:



      (1)   Churches and other places of worship;



      (2)   Cemeteries;



      (3)   Commercial recreation, minor;



      (4)   Seasonal produce stands when the principal use of the
property is agricultural;



      (5)   Public or private schools having a course of instruction
approved by the State Department of Education for students enrolled in K
through grade 12, or any portion thereof;



      (6)   Riding academies;



      (7)   Day care facilities serving 13 through 16 persons;



      (8)   Adult day care centers as conditional use, subject to
the following conditions. The adult day care centers shall:



         (a)   Serve 13 or more persons;



         (b)   Provide proof of an adequate water and sewer
system if not served by municipal utilities;



         (c)   Have outdoor leisure/recreation areas located and
designed to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas;



         (d)   1.   The total indoor space available for use
by participants must equal at least 40 square feet for each day care
participant and each day care staff member present at the center. When a
center is located in a multi-functional organization, the center may share a
common space with the multi- functional organization if the required space
available for use by participants is maintained while the center is operating.



            2.   In determining the square footage of usable
indoor space available, a center must not count:



               a.   Hallways, stairways, closets, offices,
restrooms, and utility and storage areas;



               b.   More than 25% of the space occupied by
the furniture or equipment used by participants or staff; or



               c.    In a multi-functional organization,
any space occupied by persons associated with the multi-functional
organization while participants are using common space.



         (e)   Provide proof of state, federal, and other
governmental licensing agency approval; and



         (f)   Comply with all other state licensing requirements.



      (9)   Residential facilities serving from 7 through 16 persons;



      (10)   Wind energy conversion systems or windmills;



      (11)   Structures over 2-1/2 stories or 35 feet in height;



      (12)   Developments containing more than one principal
structure per lot; or



      (13)   Other uses similar to those permitted by this division
(C), upon a determination by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, may be
allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Within the Sewered Rural Residential
Zone, the following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Garages;



      (2)   Fences;



      (3)   Gardening and other horticultural uses not involving
retail sales;



      (4)   One lodging room per single-family dwelling;



      (5)   Recreational equipment;



      (6)   Machinery, structures, and silos necessary to the
conduct of agricultural operations;



      (7)   Communication service apparatus/device(s) as permitted
accessory uses, subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall be co-located on an existing tower or an
existing structure;



         (b)   Must not exceed 175 feet in total height
(including the extension of any communication service device(s) apparatus);



         (c)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (d)   Signage shall  not be allowed on  the
communication service device(s)/apparatus other than danger or warning type
signs;



         (e)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment will not interfere with existing communications for public
safety purposes;



         (f)   Shall be located and have an exterior finish that
minimizes visibility off-site to the maximum extent possible;



         (g)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (h)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
approved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site;



         (i)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating all
anticipated future location-sites for communication towers and/or
communication devices(s)/apparatus; and



         (j)   Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
will only be considered for city parks when the following conditions exist,
and if those areas are recommended by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
and approved by the City Council:



            1.   City parks of sufficient size and character
that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use; and



            2.   Commercial recreation areas and major
playfields used primarily by adults.



         (k)   All revenue generated through the lease of a city
park for wireless telecommunication towers and antennas should be transferred
to the Park Reserve Fund.



      (8)   Stables with not more than 2 horses per 2-1/2 acres;



      (9)   Swimming pools;



      (10)   Solar equipment;



      (11)   Receive-only satellite dish antennas and other antenna
devices;



      (12)   Home occupations contingent upon approval of a home
occupation permit;



      (13)   Tennis courts; or



      (14)   Towers for commercial wireless telecommunications
services shall only be allowed subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall also operate as a public utility structure;



         (b)   Shall be located within the public rights-of-way;



         (c)   Shall be limited to 75 feet in height;



         (d)   Shall limit the height of antennas and
communication service devices to 10 feet beyond the height of the structure;



         (e)   No setback shall be required when located in the
public rights-of-way;



         (f)   Turf or other materials shall be established in
the right-of-way consistent with the materials in the right-of-way at the
time of installation;



         (g)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (h)   Shall be protected with corrosive resistant
material;



         (i)   Signage shall not be allowed on the tower other
than danger or warning type signs;



         (j)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment is not able to be collocated on any existing or approved
towers and prove that the planned tower will not interfere with existing
communications for public safety purposes;



         (k)   Must be built to accommodate antennas being placed
at varying heights on the tower;



         (l)   Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible;



         (m)   Shall be surrounded by a security fence 6 feet in
height with a lockable gate;



         (n)   Shall have an exterior finish that minimizes
visibility off-site to the greatest extent possible;



         (o)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (p)   No tower shall be permitted unless the equipment
planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or building within one-half mile search radius of the proposed
tower for any of the following reasons:



            1.   The necessary equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building and the
existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost, as
certified by a qualified, licensed professional engineer;



            2.   The necessary equipment would cause
interference as to significantly impact the usability of other existing or
planned equipment at the tower, structure, or building and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost, as certified by a qualified,
licensed structural engineer;



            3.   Existing or approved towers and buildings
within the one-half mile search radius cannot or will not accommodate the
planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably, as certified
by a qualified, licensed professional engineer; or



            4.   The applicant, after a good faith effort, is
unable to lease space on an existing or approved tower or building.



         (q)    All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
improved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site; and



         (r)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating
anticipated sites for future location for communication towers and/or
communication device(s)/apparatus.



      (15)   Other accessory uses, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.



   (E)   Design standards. Within the Sewered Rural Residential Zone,
no land shall be used, and no structure shall be constructed or used, except
in conformance with the following requirements:



      (1)   Maximum density: Densities shall be as approved at the
time of platting prior to September 2006;



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface percentage: 30%;



      (3)   Lot specifications: As approved at the time of platting
prior to September 2006; and



      (4)   Maximum heights: No structure shall exceed 35 feet in
height without a conditional use permit.



   (F)   Additional requirements.



      (1)   All dwellings shall have a depth of at least 20 feet for
at least 50% of their width. All dwellings shall have a width of at least 20
feet for at least 50% of their depth.



      (2)   All dwellings shall have a permanent foundation in
conformance with the State Building Code.



(2013 Code, § 11.25)  (Ord. 771, passed 10-26-2006; Ord. 793, passed
3-27-2008; Ord. 813, passed 2-26-2009)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.033  LOW-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-1A).



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Low-Density Residential Zone is to
allow large-lot single-family development in areas of the city served by
sanitary sewer and water.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within the Low-Density Residential Zone, no
structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (2)   Public recreation;



      (3)   Utility services;



      (4)   Utility service structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall not be a water tower or electrical
substation or a building constructed to house sanitary lift station controls;



         (b)   Shall be 20 feet or less in height;



         (c)   May be used only to provide weather protection for
utility equipment;



         (d)   Shall be designated, placed, and landscaped as
necessary to assure that it blends with the neighboring uses, and is
unobtrusive; and



         (e)   Shall comply with all applicable design standards.



      (5)   Public buildings;



      (6)   Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons;



      (7)   Adult day care centers as permitted uses, subject to the
following conditions. The adult day care center shall:



         (a)   Serve 12 or fewer persons;



         (b)   Provide proof of an adequate water and sewer
system if not served by municipal utilities;



         (c)    Have outdoor leisure/recreation areas located and
designated to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas;



         (d)   1.   The total indoor space available for use
by participants must equal at least 40 square feet for each day care
participant and each day care staff member present at the center. When a
center is located in a multi-functional organization if the required space
available for use by participants is maintained while the center is operating.



            2.   In determining the square footage of usable
indoor space available, a center must not count:



               a.    Hallways, stairways, closets, offices,
restrooms, and utility and storage areas;



               b.   More than 25% of the space occupied by
the furniture or equipment used by participants or staff; or



               c.   In a multi-functional organization, any
space occupied by persons associated with the multi-functional organization
while participants are using common space.



         (e)   Comply with all other state licensing requirements.



      (8)   Group family day care facilities serving 14 or fewer
children;



      (9)   Residential facilities serving 6 or fewer persons; and



      (10)   Single- and mixed-use developments which comply with §
151.048 and have received approval from the City Council.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Within the Low-Density Residential Zone, no
structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by conditional
use permit:



      (1)   Churches and other places of worship;



      (2)   Public or private schools having a course of instruction
approved by the State Department of Education for students enrolled in K
through grade 12, or any portion thereof;



      (3)   Day care facilities serving 13 through 16 persons;



      (4)   Adult day care centers as conditional use, subject to
the following conditions, the adult day care centers shall:



         (a)   Serve 13 or more persons;



         (b)   Provide proof of an adequate water and sewer
system if not served by municipal utilities;



         (c)   Have outdoor leisure/recreation areas located and
designed to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas;



         (d)   1.   The total indoor space available for use
by participants must equal at least 40 square feet for each day care
participant and each day care staff member present at the center. When a
center is located in a multi-functional organization, the center may share a
common space with the multi- functional organization if the required space
available for use by participants is maintained while the center is operating.



            2.   In determining the square footage of usable
indoor space available, a center must not count:



               a.   Hallways, stairways, closets, offices,
restrooms, and utility and storage areas;



               b.   More than 25% of the space occupied by
the furniture or equipment used by participants or staff; or



               c.   In a multi-functional organization, any
space occupied by persons associated with the multi-functional organization
while participants are using common space.



         (e)   Provide proof of state, federal, and other
governmental licensing agency approval; and



         (f)   Comply with all other state licensing requirements.



      (5)   Residential facilities serving from 7 through 16 persons;



      (6)   Structures over 2-1/2 stories or 35 feet in height;



      (7)   Developments containing more than one principal
structure per lot;



      (8)   Utility structures which do not meet the standard
conditions under the permitted uses; or



      (9)   Other uses similar to those permitted by this division
(C), upon a determination by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, may be
allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Within the Low-Density Residential
Zone, the following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Garages;



      (2)   Fences;



      (3)   Recreational equipment;



      (4)   Gardening and other horticultural uses not involving
retail sales;



      (5)   Communication service apparatus/device(s) as permitted
uses, subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall be co-located on an existing tower or an
existing structure;



         (b)   Must not exceed 175 feet in total height
(including the extension of any communication service device(s) apparatus);



         (c)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (d)   Signage shall not be allowed on the communication
service device(s)/apparatus other than danger or warning type signs;



         (e)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment will not interfere with existing communications for public
safety purposes;



         (f)   Shall be located and have an exterior finish that
minimizes visibility off-site to the maximum extent possible;



         (g)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (h)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months. After the facilities
are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an approved state.
The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory facilities shall be
responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration of the site;



         (i)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating all
anticipated future location-sites for communication towers and/or
communication devices(s)/apparatus;



         (j)   Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
will only be considered for city parks when the following conditions exist
and if those areas are recommended by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
and approved by the City Council:



            1.   City parks of sufficient size and character
that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use; and



            2.   Commercial recreation areas and major play
fields used primarily by adults.



         (k)   All revenue generated through the lease of a city
park for wireless telecommunication towers and antennas should be transferred
to the Park Reserve Fund.



      (6)   Swimming pools;



      (7)   Tennis courts;



      (8)   Home occupations contingent upon approval of a home
occupation permit;



      (9)   Solar equipment; or



      (10)   Towers for commercial wireless telecommunications
services shall only be allowed subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall also operate as a public utility structure;



         (b)   Shall be located within the public rights-of-way;



         (c)   Shall be limited to 75 feet in height;



         (d)   Shall limit the height of antennas and
communication service devices to 10 feet beyond the height of the structure;



         (e)   No setback shall be required when located in the
public rights-of-way;



         (f)   Turf or other materials shall be established in
the right-of-way consistent with the materials in the right-of-way at the
time of installation;



         (g)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (h)   Shall be protected with corrosive resistant
material;



         (i)   Signage shall not be allowed on the tower other
than danger or warning type signs;



         (j)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment is not able to be collocated on any existing or approved
towers and prove that the planned tower will not interfere with existing
communications for public safety purposes;



         (k)   Must be built to accommodate antennas being placed
at varying heights on the tower;



         (l)   Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible;



         (m)   Shall be surrounded by a security fence 6 feet in
height with a lockable gate;



         (n)   Shall have an exterior finish that minimizes
visibility off-site to the greatest extent possible;



         (o)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (p)   No tower shall be permitted unless the equipment
planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or building within one-half mile search radius of the proposed
tower for any of the following reasons:



            1.   The necessary equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building and the
existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost, as
certified by a qualified, licensed professional engineer;



            2.   The necessary equipment would cause
interference as to significantly impact the ability of other existing or
planned equipment at the tower, structure, or building and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost, as certified by a qualified,
licensed structural engineer;



            3.   Existing or approved towers and buildings
within the one-half mile search radius cannot or will not accommodate the
planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably, as certified
by a qualified, licensed professional engineer; or



            4.   The applicant, after a good faith effort, is
unable to lease space on an existing or approved tower or building.



         (r)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
improved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site; and



         (s)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating
anticipated sites for future location for communication towers and/or
communication device(s)/apparatus.



      (11)   Other accessory uses, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.



   (E)   Design standards. Within the Low-Density Residential Zone, no
land shall be used, and no structure shall be constructed or used, except in
conformance with the following requirements:



      (1)   Maximum density: Three dwellings per acre. Streets shall
be excluded in calculating acreage;



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface percentage: 50%;



      (3)   Lot specifications:



         (a)   Minimum lot width: 95 feet;



         (b)   Minimum lot area: 12,800 square feet;



         (c)   Minimum front yard setback: 35 feet;



         (d)   Minimum side yard setback: 15 feet; and



         (e)   Minimum rear yard setback: 40 feet.



      (4)   Maximum height: No structure shall exceed 35 feet in
height without a conditional use permit.



   (F)   Additional requirements.



      (1)   All dwellings shall have a depth of at least 20 feet for
at least 50% of their width. All dwellings shall have a width of at least 20
feet for at least 50% of their depth.



      (2)   All dwellings shall have a permanent foundation in
conformance with the State Building Code.



(2013 Code, § 11.26)  (Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 435, passed
11-30-1995; Ord. 479, passed 3-13-1997; Ord. 482, passed 5-15-1997; Ord. 501,
passed 9-18-1997; Ord. 528, passed 10-29-1998;  Ord. 563, passed 11-25-1999;
Ord. 741, passed 12-1-2005; Ord. 763, passed 6-15-2006; Ord. 793, passed
3-27-2008; Ord. 813, passed 2-26-2009; Ord. 903, passed 3-17-2015)



§ 151.034  URBAN RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-1B).



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Urban Residential Zone is to
provide an area for residential development where public sanitary sewer and
water are available.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within the Urban Residential Zone, no
structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (2)   Existing single-family attached dwellings up to a
maximum of 2 dwellings;



      (3)   Public recreation;



      (4)   Utility services;



      (5)   Utility service structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall not be a water tower or electrical
substation or a building constructed to house sanitary lift station controls;



         (b)   Shall be 20 feet or less in height;



         (c)   May be used only to provide weather protection for
utility equipment;



         (d)   Shall be designed, placed, and landscaped as
necessary to assure that it blends with the neighboring uses, and is
unobtrusive; and



         (e)   Shall comply with all applicable design standards.



      (6)   Public buildings;



      (7)   Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons;



      (8)   Adult day care centers as permitted uses, subject to the
following conditions. The adult day care center shall:



         (a)   Serve 12 or fewer persons;



         (b)   Provide proof of an adequate water and sewer
system if not served by municipal utilities;



         (c)   Have outdoor leisure/recreation areas located and
designated to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas;



         (d)   1.   The total indoor space available for use
by participants must equal at least 40 square feet for each day care
participant and each day care staff member present at the center. When a
center is located in a multi-functional organization if the required space
available for use by participants is maintained while the center is operating.



            2.   In determining the square footage of usable
indoor space available, a center must not count:



               a.   Hallways, stairways, closets, offices,
restrooms, and utility and storage areas;



               b.   More than 25% of the space occupied by
the furniture or equipment used by participants or staff; or



               c.   In a multi-functional organization, any
space occupied by persons associated with the multi-functional organization
while participants are using common space.



         (e)   Comply with all other state licensing requirements.



      (9)   Group family day care facilities serving 14 or fewer
children;



      (10)   Residential facilities serving 6 or fewer persons;



      (11)   Single-family detached residences previously
constructed as accessory uses to a church, where the resulting lot meets the
design standards found in division (E) below;



      (12)   Single- and mixed-use developments which comply with §
151.048 and have received approval from the City Council;



      (13)   Relocated structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall obtain a moving permit from the city under
§ 111.07;



         (b)   Prior to moving, the applicant shall have given
cash, a cashier’s check, or letter of credit as a financial guarantee to
the city to ensure completion of all work. The financial guarantee shall be
in an amount equal to the Building Official’s estimate of the cost to bring
the structure into compliance with the Building Code;



         (c)   The structure shall meet all requirements of the
Building Code within 6 months after moving;



         (d)   If the structure is not in full compliance with
the Building Code after 6 months of moving, the city, in its sole discretion,
may draw on the financial guarantee and take whatever steps it deems
necessary to bring the relocated structure into compliance with the Building
Code. In the event the city draws on the financial guarantee, 10% of the
total guarantee shall be paid to the city as its administrative fee;



         (e)   The applicant shall provide the Building
Department with all plan review comments and inspection records from Building
Codes and STDS Division and from the city of origin where constructed;



         (f)   An approved county highway moving permit will be
required for the moving of the structure;



         (g)   The structure shall be required to meet all
setbacks, design, and performance standards specified in this code of
ordinances, unless otherwise approved; and



         (h)   Repair of any damage to city streets as a result
of relocating the structure shall be paid for by the applicant.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Within the Urban Residential Zone, no
structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by conditional
use permit:



      (1)   Churches and other places of worship;



      (2)   Cemeteries;



      (3)   Public or private schools having a course of instruction
approved by the State Board of Education for students enrolled in K through
grade 12, or any portion thereof;



      (4)   Bed and breakfast inns;



      (5)   Day care facilities serving 13 through 16 persons;



      (6)   Adult day care centers as permitted uses, subject to the
following conditions. The adult day centers shall:



         (a)   Serve 13 or more persons;



         (b)   Provide proof of an adequate water and sewer
system if not served by municipal utilities;



         (c)   Have outdoor leisure/recreation areas located and
designed to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas;



         (d)   1.   The total indoor space available for use
by participants must equal at least 40 square feet for each day care
participant and each day care staff member present at the center. When a
center is located in a multi-functional organization, the center may share a
common space with the multi- functional organization if the required space
available for use by participants is maintained while the center is operating.



            2.   In determining the square footage of usable
indoor space available, a center must not count:



               a.   Hallways, stairways, closets, offices,
restrooms, and utility and storage areas;



               b.   More than 25% of the space occupied by
the furniture or equipment used by participants or staff; or



               c.   In a multi-functional organization, any
space occupied by persons associated with the multi-functional organization
while participants are using common space.



         (e)   Provide proof of state, federal, and other
governmental licensing agency approval; and



         (f)   Comply with all other state licensing requirements.



      (7)   Residential facilities servicing from 7 through 16
persons;



      (8)   Structures over 2-1/2 stories or 35 feet in height;



      (9)   Developments containing more than one principal
structure per lot;



      (10)   Other uses similar to those permitted by this division
(C), upon a determination by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, may be
allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit;



      (11)   Assisted living housing facility; or



      (12)   Utility structures which do not meet the standard
conditions under the permitted uses.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Within the Urban Residential Zone,
the following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Garages;



      (2)   Fences;



      (3)   Recreation equipment;



      (4)   Gardening and other horticultural uses not involving
retail sales;



      (5)   Communication service apparatus/device(s) as permitted
accessory uses, subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall be co-located on an existing tower or an
existing structure;



         (b)   Must not exceed 175 feet in total height
(including the extension of any communication service device(s) apparatus);



         (c)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (d)   Signage shall not be allowed on the communication
service device(s)/apparatus other than danger or warning type signs;



         (e)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment will not interfere with existing communications for public
safety purposes;



         (f)   Shall be located and have an exterior finish that
minimizes visibility off-site to the maximum extent possible;



         (g)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (h)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
approved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site;



         (i)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating all
anticipated future location sites for communication towers and/or
communication devices(s)/apparatus;



         (j)   Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
will only be considered for city parks when the following conditions exist
and if those areas are recommended by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
and approved by the City Council:



               1.   City parks of sufficient size and
character that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use; and



               2.   Commercial recreation areas and major
play fields used primarily by adults.



         (k)   All revenue generated through the lease of a city
park for wireless telecommunication towers and antennas should be transferred
to the Park Reserve Fund.



      (6)   Swimming pools;



      (7)   Tennis courts;



      (8)   Home occupations contingent upon approval of a home
occupation permit;



      (9)   Solar equipment; or



      (10)   Towers for commercial wireless telecommunications
services shall only be allowed subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall also operate as a public utility structure;



         (b)   Shall be located within the public rights-of-way;



         (c)   Shall be limited to 75 feet in height;



         (d)   Shall limit the height of antennas and
communication service devices to 10 feet beyond the height of the structure;



         (e)   No setback shall be required when located in the
public rights-of-way;



         (f)   Turf or other materials shall be established in
the right-of-way consistent with the materials in the right-of-way at the
time of installation;



         (g)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (h)   Shall be protected with corrosive resistant
material;



         (i)   Signage shall not be allowed on the tower other
than danger or warning type signs;



         (j)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment is not able to be collocated on any existing or approved
towers and prove that the planned tower will not interfere with existing
communications for public safety purposes;



         (k)   Must be built to accommodate antennas being placed
at varying heights on the tower;



         (l)   Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible;



         (m)   Shall be surrounded by a security fence 6 feet in
height with a lockable gate;



         (n)   Shall have an exterior finish that minimizes
visibility off-site to the greatest extent possible;



         (o)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (p)   No tower shall be permitted unless the equipment
planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or building within one-half mile search radius of the proposed
tower for any of the following reasons:



            1.   The necessary equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building and the
existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost, as
certified by a qualified, licensed professional engineer;



            2.   The necessary equipment would cause
interference as to significantly impact the usability of other existing or
planned equipment at the tower, structure, or building and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost, as certified by a qualified,
licensed structural engineer;



            3.   Existing or approved towers and buildings
within the one-half mile search radius cannot or will not accommodate the
planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably, as certified
by a qualified, licensed professional engineer; or



            4.   The applicant, after a good faith effort, is
unable to lease space on an existing or approved tower or building.



         (r)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
improved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site; and



         (s)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating
anticipated sites for future location for communication towers and/or
communication device(s)/apparatus.



      (11)   Other accessory uses, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.



   (E)   Design standards. Within the Urban Residential Zone, no land
shall be used, and no structure shall be constructed or used, except in
conformance with the following requirements:



      (1)   Maximum density: 5 dwellings per acre. Streets shall be
excluded in calculating acreage;



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface percentage: 50%;



      (3)   Lot specifications.



         (a)   Minimum lot width (single-family detached): 60
feet;



         (b)   Minimum lot width for single family detached
corner lots: 60 feet;



         (c)   Existing two-family dwelling: 70 feet;



         (d)   Minimum lot depth: 100 feet;



         (e)   Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet;



         (f)   Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet; and



         (g)   Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet.



      (4)   Maximum height. No structure shall exceed 35 feet in
height without a conditional use permit.



   (F)   Additional requirements.



      (1)   All dwellings shall have a depth of at least 20 feet for
at least 50% of their width. All dwellings shall have a width of at least 20
feet for at least 50% of their depth.



      (2)   All dwellings shall have a permanent foundation in
conformance with the State Building Code.



(2013 Code, § 11.28)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 60, passed
5-14-1981; Ord. 159, passed 2-28-1985; Ord. 264, passed 5-26-1989; Ord. 377,
passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 435, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 479, passed 3-13-1997;
Ord. 482, passed 5-15-1997; Ord. 496, passed 8-21-1997; Ord. 501, passed
9-18-1997; Ord. 528, passed 10-29-1998; Ord. 563, passed 11-25-1999; Ord.
741, passed 12-1-2005; Ord. 793, passed 3-27-2008; Ord. 813, passed
2-26-2009; Ord. 815, passed 3-26-2009; Ord. 865, passed 3-5-2013; Ord. 903,
passed 3-17-2015; Ord. 950, passed 11-15-2016)



§ 151.035  OLD SHAKOPEE RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-1C).



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Old Shakopee Residential Zone is
to provide an area for the continuation of existing residential development
and development of existing lots in the older residential areas where public
sanitary sewer and water are available. The combination of small lots is
encouraged.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within the Old Shakopee Residential Zone, no
structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (2)   Single-family attached dwellings, up to a maximum of 2
dwellings;



      (3)   Public recreation;



      (4)   Utility services;



      (5)   Utility service structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall not be a water tower or electrical
substation or a building constructed to house sanitary lift station controls;



         (b)   Shall be 20 feet or less in height;



         (c)   May be used only to provide weather protection for
utility equipment;



         (d)   Shall be designed, placed, and landscaped as
necessary to assure that it blends with the neighboring uses, and is
unobtrusive; and



         (e)   Shall comply with all applicable design standards.



      (6)   Public buildings;



      (7)   Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons;



      (8)   Adult day care centers as permitted uses, subject to the
following conditions. The adult day care center shall:



         (a)   Serve 12 or fewer persons;



         (b)   Provide proof of an adequate water and sewer
system if not served by municipal utilities;



         (c)   Have outdoor leisure/recreation areas located and
designated to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas;



         (d)   1.      The total indoor space available for
use by participants must equal at least 40 square feet for each day care
participant and each day care staff member present at the center. When a
center is located in a multi-functional organization if the required space
available for use by participants is maintained while the center is operating.



            2.   In determining the square footage of usable
indoor space available, a center must not count:



               a.   Hallways, stairways, closets, offices,
restrooms, and utility and storage areas;



               b.   More than 25% of the space occupied by
the furniture or equipment used by participants or staff; or



               c.   In a multi-functional organization, any
space occupied by persons associated with the multi-functional organization
while participants are using common space.



         (e)   Comply with all other state licensing requirements.



      (9)   Group family day care facilities serving 14 or fewer
children;



      (10)   Residential facilities serving 6 or fewer persons;



      (11)   Single-family detached residences previously
constructed as accessory uses to a church, where the resulting lot meets the
design standards found in division (E) below;



      (12)   Single- and mixed-use developments which comply with §
151.048 and have received approval from the City Council;



      (13)   Relocated structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall obtain a moving permit from the city under
§ 111.07;



         (b)   Prior to moving, the applicant shall have given
cash, a cashier’s check, or letter of credit as a financial guarantee to
the city to ensure completion of all work. The financial guarantee shall be
in an amount equal to the Building Official’s estimate of the cost to bring
the structure in compliance with the Building Code;



         (c)   The structure shall meet all requirements of the
Building Code within 6 months after moving;



         (d)   If the structure is not in full compliance with
the Building Code after 6 months of moving, the city, in its sole discretion,
may draw on the financial guarantee and take whatever steps it deems
necessary to bring the relocated structure into compliance with the Building
Code. In the event the city draws on the financial guarantee, 10% of the
total guarantee shall be paid to the city as its administrative fee;



         (e)   The applicant shall provide to the Building
Department with all plan review comments and inspection records from Building
Codes and STDS Division and from the city of origin where constructed;



         (f)   An approved county highway moving permit will be
required for the moving of the structure;



         (g)   The structure shall be required to meet all
setbacks, design, and performance standards specified in this code of
ordinances, unless otherwise approved; and



         (h)   Repair of any damage to city streets as a result
of the relocating the structure shall be paid for by the applicant.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Within the Old Shakopee Residential Zone, no
structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by conditional
use permit:



      (1)   Over-sized accessory structures as determined by §
151.007(B)(2);



      (2)   Churches and other places of worship;



      (3)   Cemeteries;



      (4)   Hospitals and clinics;



      (5)   Public or private schools having a course of instruction
approved by the State Board of Education for students enrolled in K through
grade 12, or any portion thereof;



      (6)   Bed and breakfast inns;



      (7)   Funeral homes;



      (8)   Day care facilities serving 13 through 16 persons;



      (9)   Adult day care centers as conditional uses, subject to
the following conditions. The adult day care centers shall:



         (a)   Serve 13 or more persons;



         (b)   Provide proof of an adequate water and sewer
system if not served by municipal utilities;



         (c)   Have outdoor leisure/recreation areas located and
designed to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas;



         (d)   1.   The total indoor space available for use
by participants must equal at least 40 square feet for each day care
participant and each day care staff member present at the center. When a
center is located in a multi-functional organization, the center may share a
common space with the multi- functional organization if the required space
available for use by participants is maintained while the center is operating.



            2.   In determining the square footage of usable
indoor space available, a center must not count:



               a.   Hallways, stairways, closets, offices,
restrooms, and utility and storage areas;



               b.   More than 25% of the space occupied by
the furniture or equipment used by participants or staff; or



               c.   In a multi-functional organization, any
space occupied by persons associated with the multi-functional organization
while participants are using common space.



         (e)   Provide proof of state, federal, and other
governmental licensing agency approval; and



         (f)   Comply with all other state licensing requirements.



      (10)   Residential facilities servicing from 7 through 16
persons;



      (11)   Structures over 2-1/2 stories or 35 feet in height;



      (12)   Developments containing more than one principal
structure per lot; or



      (13)   SENIOR HOUSING FACILITIES, which are defined as housing
facilities with or without assisted living services, that are intended to
serve persons greater than 55 years of age, not including nursing homes,
subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Minimum lot size of 0.75 acres;



         (b)   Maximum density of 45 units/acre;



         (c)   Maximum height is equal to the maximum height set
forth by the design standards of the R-1C, Old Shakopee Residential Zone;



         (d)   Minimum structure setbacks are equivalent to R-1C
setback regulations, except that the minimum side yard setback must be at
least one-half of the building height;



         (e)   Maximum impervious surface percentage of 70%; and



         (f)   Building design and materials must meet minimum
requirements set forth in §§ 151.105 through 151.125.



      (14)   Utility structures which do not meet the standard
conditions under the permitted uses; or



      (15)   Other uses similar to those permitted by this division
(C), upon a determination by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, may be
allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Within the Old Shakopee Residential
Zone, the following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Garages;



      (2)   Fences;



      (3)   Recreation equipment;



      (4)   Gardening and other horticultural uses not involving
retail sales;



      (5)   Communication service apparatus/device(s) as permitted
accessory uses, subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall be co-located on an existing tower or an
existing structure;



         (b)   Must not exceed 175 feet in total height including
the extension of any communication service device(s) apparatus);



         (c)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (d)   Signage shall not be allowed on the communication
service device(s)/apparatus other than danger or warning type signs;



         (e)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment will not interfere with existing communications for public
safety purposes;



         (f)   Shall be located and have an exterior finish that
minimizes visibility off-site to the maximum extent possible;



         (g)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (h)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
approved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site;



         (i)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating all
anticipated future location-sites for communication towers and/or
communication devices(s)/apparatus;



         (j)   Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
will only be considered for city parks when the following conditions exist
and if those areas are recommended by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
and approved by the City Council:



            1.   City parks of sufficient size and character
that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use; and



            2.   Commercial recreation areas and major
playfields used primarily by adults.



         (k)   All revenue generated through the lease of a city
park for wireless telecommunication towers and antennas should be transferred
to the Park Reserve Fund.



      (6)   Swimming pools;



      (7)   Tennis courts;



      (8)   Home occupations contingent upon approval of a home
occupation permit;



      (9)   Solar equipment; or



      (10)   Towers for commercial wireless telecommunications
services shall only be allowed subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall also operate as a public utility structure;



         (b)   Shall be located within the public rights-of-way;



         (c)   Shall be limited to 75 feet in height;



         (d)   Shall limit the height of antennas and
communication service devices to 10 feet beyond the height of the structure;



         (e)   No setback shall be required when located in the
public rights-of-way;



         (f)   Turf or other materials shall be established in
the right-of-way consistent with the materials in the right-of-way at the
time of installation;



         (g)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (h)   Shall be protected with corrosive resistant
material;



         (i)   Signage shall not be allowed on the tower other
than danger or warning type signs;



         (j)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment is not able to be collocated on any existing or approved
towers and prove that the planned tower will not interfere with existing
communications for public safety purposes;



         (k)   Must be built to accommodate antennas being placed
at varying heights on the tower;



         (l)   Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible;



         (m)   Shall be surrounded by a security fence 6 feet in
height with a lockable gate;



         (n)   Shall have an exterior finish that minimizes
visibility off-site to the greatest extent possible;



         (o)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (p)   No tower shall be permitted unless the equipment
planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or building within the one-half mile search radius of the
proposed tower for any of the following reasons:



            1.   The necessary equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building and the
existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost, as
certified by a qualified, licensed professional engineer;



            2.   The necessary equipment would cause
interference as to significantly impact the usability of other existing or
planned equipment at the tower, structure, or building and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost, as certified by a qualified,
licensed structural engineer;



            3.   Existing or approved towers and buildings
within the one-half mile search radius cannot or will not accommodate the
planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably, as certified
by a qualified, licensed professional engineer; or



            4.   The applicant, after a good faith effort, is
unable to lease space on an existing or approved tower or building.



         (q)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
improved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying
accessory/facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and
restoration of the site; and



         (r)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating
anticipated sites for future location for communication towers and/or
communication device(s)/apparatus.



      (11)   Other accessory uses, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.



   (E)   Design standards. Within the Old Shakopee Residential Zone, no
land shall be used, and no structure shall be constructed or used, except in
conformance with the following requirements:



      (1)   Maximum density: 7-1/2 dwellings per acre. Streets shall
be excluded in calculating acreage;



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface percentage: 50%;



      (3)   Lot specifications:



         (a)   Minimum lot width (single-family detached): 50
feet;



         (b)   Two-family dwelling: 70 feet;



         (c)   Minimum lot depth: 100 feet;



         (d)   Minimum front yard setback:



            1.   Thirty feet, except that the minimum setback
shall be equal to the average setback of other principal structures on the
block when the applicant proves that there are more than 2 other existing
principal structures on the block, and those structures have an average
setback of less than 30 feet; or



            2.   If there are fewer than 3 other existing
principal structures on the block, the setback is 30 feet.



         (e)   Minimum street side yard setback: 10 feet, except
that the minimum setback shall be equal to the average street side yard
setback of other principal structures on the block when the applicant proves
that the other existing principal structures have an average setback of less
than 10 feet;



         (f)   Minimum interior side yard setback: 5 feet, or one
side at 3 feet and the other side at 7 feet;



         (g)   Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet; and



         (h)   Minimum rear yard setback for accessory
structures: 5 feet.



      (4)   Maximum height. No structure shall exceed 35 feet in
height without a conditional use permit.



   (F)   Additional requirements.



      (1)   All dwellings shall have a depth of at least 20 feet for
at least 50% of their width. All dwellings shall have a width of at least 20
feet for at least 50% of their depth.



      (2)   All dwellings shall have a permanent foundation in
conformance with the State Building Code.



(2013 Code, § 11.30)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 60, passed
5-14-1981; Ord. 159, passed 2-28-1985; Ord. 264, passed 5-26-1989; Ord. 377,
passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 435, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 470, passed 1-1-1997; Ord.
479, passed 3-13-1997; Ord. 482, passed 5-15-1997; Ord. 496, passed
8-21-1997; Ord. 501, passed 9-18-1997; Ord. 528, passed 10-29-1998; Ord. 563,
passed 11-25-1999; Ord. 741, passed 12-1-2005; Ord. 793, passed 3-27-2008;
Ord. 899, passed 1-20-2015; Ord. 903, passed 3-17-2015)



§ 151.036  MEDIUM-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-2).



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Medium-Density Residential Zone is
to provide an area which will allow 5.01 to 8 residential dwellings per acre
and also provide a transitional zone between single-family residential areas
and other land uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within the Medium-Density Residential Zone, no
structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:



      (1)   Public recreation;



      (2)   Utility services;



      (3)   Utility service structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall not be a water tower or electrical
substation or a building constructed to house sanitary lift station controls;



         (b)   Shall be 20 feet or less in height;



         (c)   May be used only to provide weather protection for
utility equipment;



         (d)   Shall be designed, placed, and landscaped as
necessary to assure that it blends with the neighboring uses, and is
unobtrusive; and



         (e)   Shall comply with all applicable design standards.



      (4)   Public buildings;



      (5)   Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons;



      (6)   Adult day care centers as permitted uses, subject to the
following conditions: The adult day care center shall:



         (a)   Serve 12 or fewer persons;



         (b)   Provide proof of an adequate water and sewer
system if not served by municipal utilities;



         (c)   Have outdoor leisure/recreation areas located and
designated to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas;



         (d)   1.   The total indoor space available for use
by participants must equal at least 40 square feet for each day care
participant and each day care staff member present at the center. When a
center is located in a multi-functional organization if the required space
available for use by participants is maintained while the center is operating.



            2.   In determining the square footage of usable
indoor space available, a center must not count:



               a.   Hallways, stairways, closets, offices,
restrooms, and utility and storage areas;



               b.   More than 25% of the space occupied by
the furniture or equipment used by participants or staff; or



               c.   In a multi-functional organization, any
space occupied by persons associated with the multi-functional organization
while participants are using common space; and



         (e)   Comply with all other state licensing requirements.



      (7)   Residential facilities serving 6 or fewer persons;



      (8)   Townhouses containing 2 or 4 dwelling units;



      (9)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (10)   Single-family attached dwelling units up to a maximum
of 4 dwellings;



      (11)   Single- and mixed-use developments which comply with §
151.048, and have received approval from the City Council;



      (12)   Relocated structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall obtain a moving permit from the city under
§ 111.07;



         (b)   Prior to moving, the applicant shall have given
cash, a cashier’s check, or letter of credit as a financial guarantee to
the city to ensure completion of all work. The financial guarantee shall be
in an amount equal to the Building Official’s estimate of the cost to bring
the structure into compliance with the Building Code;



         (c)   The structure shall meet all requirements of the
Building Code within 6 months after moving;



         (d)   If the structure is not in full compliance with
the Building Code after 6 months of moving, the city, in its sole discretion,
may draw on the financial guarantee and take whatever steps it deems
necessary to bring the relocated structure into compliance with the Building
Code. In the event the city draws on the financial guarantee, 10% of the
total guarantee shall be paid to the city as its administrative fee;



         (e)   The applicant shall provide the Building
Department with all plan review comments and inspection records from Building
Codes and STDS Division and from the city of origin where constructed;



         (f)   An approved county highway moving permit will be
required for the moving of the structure;



         (g)   The structure shall be required to meet all
setbacks, design, and performance standards specified in this code of
ordinances, unless otherwise approved; and



         (h)   Repair of any damage to city streets as a result
of relocating the structure shall be paid for by the applicant.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Within the Medium-Density Residential Zone,
no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by
conditional use permit:



      (1)   Single-family attached dwellings and multiple-family
dwellings up to a maximum of 6 units;



      (2)   Townhouses containing 5 and 6 dwelling units;



      (3)   Hospitals and clinics;



      (4)   Cemeteries;



      (5)   Churches and other places of worship;



      (6)   Public or private schools having a course of instruction
approved by the State Board of Education for students enrolled in K through
grade 12, or any portion thereof;



      (7)   Nursing homes;



      (8)   Bed and breakfast inns;



      (9)   Day care facilities serving from 13 through 16 persons;



      (10)   Adult day care centers as conditional use, subject to
the following conditions. The adult day care centers shall:



         (a)   Serve 13 or more persons;



         (b)   Provide proof of an adequate water and sewer
system if not served by municipal utilities;



         (c)   Have outdoor leisure/recreation areas located and
designed to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas;



         (d)   1.   The total indoor space available for use
by participants must equal at least 40 square feet for each day care
participant and each day care staff member present at the center. When a
center is located in a multi-functional organization, the center may share a
common space with the multi- functional organization if the required space
available for use by participants is maintained while the center is operating.



            2.   In determining the square footage of usable
indoor space available, a center must not count:



               a.   Hallways, stairways, closets, offices,
restrooms, and utility and storage areas;



               b.   More than 25% of the space occupied by
the furniture or equipment used by participants or staff; or



               c.   In a multi-functional organization, any
space occupied by persons associated with the multi-functional organization
while participants are using common space.



         (e)   Provide proof of state, federal, and other
governmental licensing agency approval; and



         (f)   Comply with all other state licensing requirements.



      (11)   Residential facilities serving from 7 through 16
persons;



      (12)   Structures over 2-1/2 stories or 35 feet in height;



      (13)   Developments containing more than one principal
structure per lot;



      (14)   Other uses similar to those permitted by this division
(C), upon a determination by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, may be
allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit; or



      (15)   Assisted living housing facility; or



      (16)   Utility structures which do not meet the standard
conditions under the permitted uses.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Within the Medium-Density
Residential Zone, the following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Open off-street parking spaces not to exceed 3 spaces
per dwelling unit;



      (2)   Garages;



      (3)   Fences;



      (4)   Gardening and other horticultural uses not involving
retail sales;



      (5)   Communication service apparatus/devices, as permitted
accessory uses, subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall be co-located on an existing tower or an
existing structure;



         (b)   Must not exceed 175 feet in total height
(including the extension of any communication service device(s) apparatus);



         (c)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (d)   Signage shall not be allowed on the communication
service device(s)/apparatus other than danger or warning type signs;



         (e)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment will not interfere with existing communications for public
safety purposes;



         (f)   Shall be located and have an exterior finish that
minimizes visibility off-site to the maximum extent possible;



         (g)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (h)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
approved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site;



         (i)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating all
anticipated future location sites for communication towers and/or
communication devices(s)/apparatus;



         (j)   Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
will only be considered for city parks when the following conditions exist
and if those areas are recommended by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
and approved by the City Council:



            1.   City parks of sufficient size and character
that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use; and



            2.   Commercial recreation areas and major play
fields used primarily by adults.



         (k)   All revenue generated through the lease of a city
park for wireless telecommunication towers and antennas should be transferred
to the Park Reserve Fund.



      (6)   Swimming pools;



      (7)   Tennis courts;



      (8)   Receive-only satellite dish antennas and other antennas;



      (9)   Home occupations contingent upon approval of a home
occupation permit;



      (10)   Solar equipment; or



      (11)   Towers for commercial wireless telecommunications
services shall only be allowed subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall also operate as a public utility structure;



         (b)   Shall be located within the public rights-of-way;



         (c)   Shall be limited to 75 feet in height;



         (d)   Shall limit the height of antennas and
communication service devices to 10 feet beyond the height of the structure;



         (e)   No setback shall be required when located in the
public rights-of-way;



         (f)   Turf or other materials shall be established in
the right-of-way consistent with the materials in the right-of-way at the
time of installation;



         (g)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (h)   Shall be protected with corrosive resistant
material;



         (i)   Signage shall not be allowed on the tower other
than danger or warning type signs;



         (j)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment is not able to be collocated on any existing or approved
towers and prove that the planned tower will not interfere with existing
communications for public safety purposes;



         (k)   Must be built to accommodate antennas being placed
at varying heights on the tower;



         (l)   Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible;



         (m)   Shall be surrounded by a security fence 6 feet in
height with a lockable gate;



         (n)   Shall have an exterior finish that minimizes
visibility off-site to the greatest extent possible;



         (o)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (p)   No tower shall be permitted unless the equipment
planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or building within the one-half mile search radius of the
proposed tower for any of the following reasons:



            1.   The necessary equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building and the
existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost, as
certified by a qualified, licensed professional engineer;



            2.   The necessary equipment would cause
interference as to significantly impact the usability of other existing or
planned equipment at the tower, structure, or building and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost, as certified by a qualified,
licensed structural engineer;



            3.   Existing or approved towers and buildings
within the one-half mile search radius cannot or will not accommodate the
planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably, as certified
by a qualified, licensed professional engineer; or



            4.   The applicant, after a good faith effort, is
unable to lease space on an existing or approved tower or building.



         (r)   1.   All obsolete or unused towers and
accompanying accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the
cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by
the city. After the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its
original or an improved state.



            2.   The user of the tower and/or accompanying
accessory facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and
restoration of the site.



         (s)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating
anticipated sites for future location for communication towers and/or
communication device(s)/apparatus.



      (12)   Other accessory uses, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.



   (E)   Design standards. Within the Medium-Density Residential Zone,
no land shall be used, and no structure shall be constructed or used, except
in conformance with the following requirements:



      (1)   Density. A minimum of 5.1 and a maximum of 8 dwellings
per acre. Streets shall be excluded in calculating acreage;



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface percentage. 60%;



      (3)   Lot specifications:



         (a)   1.   Minimum lot width (single-family
detached): 60 feet;



            2.   Two-family dwelling: 70 feet; and



            3.   Multiple-family dwelling: 100 feet.



         (b)   Minimum lot depth: 100 feet;



         (c)   1.   Minimum front yard setback: 35 feet; and



            2.   Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet.



         (d)   Maximum height: No structure shall exceed 35 feet
in height without a conditional use permit.



   (F)   Additional requirements.



      (1)   All dwellings shall have a depth of at least 20 feet for
at least 50% of their width. All dwellings shall have a width of at least 20
feet for at least 50% of their depth.



      (2)   All dwellings shall have a permanent foundation in
conformance with the State Building Code.



(2013 Code, § 11.32)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 60, passed
5-14-1981; Ord. 159, passed 2-28-1985; Ord. 264, passed 5-26-1989; Ord. 377,
passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 435, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 467, passed 12-19-1996;
Ord. 479, passed 3-13-1997; Ord. 482, passed 5-15-1997; Ord. 501, passed
9-18-1997; Ord. 528, passed 10-29-1998; Ord. 544, passed 4-15-1999; Ord. 563,
passed 11-25-1999; Ord. 603, passed 8-2-2001; Ord. 741, passed 12-1-2005;
Ord. 793, passed 3-27-2008; Ord. 813, passed 2-26-2009; Ord. 865, passed
3-5-2013; Ord. 903, passed 3-17-2015)



§ 151.037  PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (PRD).



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The purpose of the Planned Residential District (PRD) is
to provide areas for the mixed-use development; including single-family
detached, medium-density, and high-density residential, as well as compatible
community commercial and service uses. By allowing mixed-use development, the
PRD provides a mechanism for providing a range of housing types and easy
accessibility to services either within a single development or area of the
city.



      (2)   No property in the city shall be re-zoned to PRD after
May 18, 2004. The substantive provisions in the section shall apply only to
those properties that are zoned PRD as of that date.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within the Planned Residential District, the
following shall be permitted uses:



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (2)   Single-family attached dwellings up to a maximum of 2
dwellings;



      (3)   Public recreation;



      (4)   Utility services;



      (5)   Day care facilities servicing 12 or fewer persons;



      (6)   Public buildings;



      (7)   Group family day care facilities serving 14 or fewer
children;



      (8)   Residential facilities serving 6 or fewer persons;



      (9)   Adult day care centers subject to the following
conditions:



         (a)   Serve 12 or fewer persons;



         (b)   Provide proof of an adequate water and sewer
system if not served by municipal utilities;



         (c)   The outdoor leisure/recreation areas located and
designed to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas;



         (d)   1.   The total indoor space available for use
by participants must equal at least 40 square feet for each day care
participant and each day care staff member present at the center. When a
center is located in a multi-functional organization, the center may share a
common space with the multi- functional organization if the required space
available for use by participants is maintained while the center is operating.



            2.   In determining the square footage of usable
indoor space available, a center must not count:



               a.   Hallways, stairways, closets, offices,
restrooms, and utility and storage areas;



               b.   More than 25% of the space occupied by
the furniture or equipment used by participants or staff;



               c.   In a multi-functional organization, any
space occupied by persons associated with the multi-functional organization
while participants are using common space; and



               d.   Comply with all other state licensing
requirements.



      (10)   Relocated structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall obtain a moving permit from the city under
§ 111.07;



         (b)   Prior to moving, the applicant shall have given
cash, a cashier’s check, or letter of credit as a financial guarantee to
the city to ensure completion of all work. The financial guarantee shall be
in an amount equal to the Building Official’s estimate of the cost to bring
the structure into compliance with the Building Code;



         (c)   The structure shall meet all requirements of the
Building Code within 6 months after moving;



         (d)   If the structure is not in full compliance with
the Building Code after 6 months of moving, the city, in its sole discretion,
may draw on the financial guarantee and take whatever steps it deems
necessary to bring the relocated structure into compliance with the Building
Code. In the event the city draws on the financial guarantee, 10% of the
total guarantee shall be paid to the city as its administrative fee;



         (e)   The applicant shall provide the Building
Department with all plan review comments and inspection records from Building
Codes and STDS Division and from the city of origin where constructed;



         (f)   An approved county highway moving permit will be
required for the moving of the structure;



         (g)   The structure shall be required to meet all
setbacks, design, and performance standards specified in this code of
ordinances, unless otherwise approved; and



         (h)   Repair of any damage to city streets as a result
of relocating the structure shall be paid for by the applicant.



   (C)   Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. Within the
Planned Residential District, the following uses of structures or land may be
allowed with conditional use permit approval:



      (1)   Medium-density residential development as allowed under
§ 151.036, Medium-Density Residential Zone, and according to the design
standards contained therein;



      (2)   Multiple-family residential development as allowed under
§ 151.038 and according to the design standards contained therein;



      (3)   Community commercial development as allowed under §
151.039 and according to the design standards contained therein;



      (4)   Clinics;



      (5)   Nursing homes;



      (6)   Churches and other places of worship;



      (7)   Public or private schools;



      (8)   Structures over 2-1/2 stories or 35 feet in height;



      (9)   Developments containing more than one principal
structure per lot;



      (10)   Developments containing more than one permitted use
and/or use permitted with site plan approval;



      (11)   Day care facilities serving 13 or more persons;



      (12)   Residential facilities servicing from 7 through 16
persons; and



      (13)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this division
(C), as determined by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Within the Planned Residential
District the following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any incidental repair or processing necessary to conduct
a permitted principal use;



      (2)   Parking and loading spaces;



      (3)   Temporary construction buildings;



      (4)   Decorative landscape features;



      (5)   Communication service apparatus/devices(s) as permitted
accessory uses, subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall be co-located on an existing tower or an
existing structure;



         (b)   Must not exceed 175 feet in total height
(including the extension of any communication service device(s)/apparatus);



         (c)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (d)   Signage shall not be allowed on the communication
service device(s)/apparatus other than danger or warning type signs:



         (e)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment will not interfere with existing communications for public
safety purposes;



         (f)   Shall be located and have an exterior finish that
minimizes visibility off-site to the maximum extent possible;



         (g)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (h)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
improved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site;



         (i)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating all
anticipated future location-sites for communication towers and/or
communication device(s)/apparatus;



         (j)   Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
will only be considered for city parks when the following conditions exist
and if those areas are recommended by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
and approved by the City Council:



            1.   City parks of sufficient size and character
that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use; and



            2.   Commercial recreation areas and major play
fields used primarily by adults.



         (k)   All revenue generated through the lease of a city
park for wireless telecommunication towers and antennas should be transferred
to the Park Reserve Fund.



      (6)   Towers for commercial wireless telecommunications
services shall only be allowed subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall also operate as a public utility structure;



         (b)   Shall be located within the public rights-of-way;



         (c)   Shall be limited to 75 feet in height;



         (d)   Shall limit the height of antennas and
communication service devices to 10 feet beyond the height of the structure;



         (e)   No setback shall be required when located in the
public rights-of-way;



         (f)   Turf or other materials shall be established in
the right-of-way consistent with the materials in the right-of-way at the
time of installation;



         (g)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (h)   Shall be protected with corrosive resistant
material;



         (i)   Signage shall not be allowed on the tower other
than danger or warning type signs;



         (j)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment is not able to be collocated on any existing or approved
towers and prove that the planned tower will not interfere with existing
communications for public safety purposes;



         (k)   Must be built to accommodate antennas being placed
at varying heights on the tower;



         (l)   Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible;



         (m)   Shall be surrounded by a security fence 6 feet in
height with a lockable gate;



         (n)   Shall have an exterior finish that minimizes
visibility off-site to the greatest extent possible;



         (o)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (p)   No tower shall be permitted unless the equipment
planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or building within one-half mile search radius of the proposed
tower for any of the following reasons:



            1.   The necessary equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building and the
existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost, as
certified by a qualified, licensed professional engineer;



            2.   The necessary equipment would cause
interference as to significantly impact the usability of other existing or
planned equipment at the tower, structure, or building and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost, as certified by a qualified,
licensed structural engineer;



            3.   Existing or approved towers and buildings
within the one-half mile search radius cannot or will not accommodate the
planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably, as certified
by a qualified, licensed professional engineer; or



            4.   The applicant, after a good faith effort, is
unable to lease space on an existing or approved tower or building.



         (r)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
improved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site; and



         (s)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating
anticipated sites for future location for communication towers and/or
communication device(s)/apparatus.



      (7)   Other accessory uses customarily appurtenant to a
permitted or conditional use, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.



   (E)   Design standards. Except as otherwise provided above, design
standards in the Planned Residential District shall be as found in §
151.034, Urban Residential Zone (R-1B).



(2013 Code, § 11.33)  (Ord. 563, passed 11-25-1999; Ord. 704, passed
5-27-2004; Ord. 793, passed 3-27-2008; Ord. 741, passed 12-1-2005; Ord. 813,
passed 2-26-2009)



§ 151.038  MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-3).



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Multiple-Family Zone is to provide
an area which will allow 8 and one-one hundredth to 12 multiple-family
dwelling units per acre, and also provide a transitional zone between
single-family residential areas, medium-density residential areas, and other
land uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within the Multiple-Family Residential Zone,
no structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following
uses:



      (1)   Multiple family, single-family attached, dwellings, and
townhouses containing 2 or more units;



      (2)   Public recreation;



      (3)   Utility services;



      (4)   Utility service structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall not be a water tower or electrical
substation or a building constructed to house sanitary lift station controls;



         (b)   Shall be 20 feet or less in height;



         (c)   May be used only to provide weather protection for
utility equipment;



         (d)   Shall be designed, placed, and landscaped as
necessary to assure that it blends with the neighboring uses, and is
unobtrusive; and



         (e)   Shall comply with all applicable design standards.



      (5)   Public buildings;



      (6)   Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons;



      (7)   Residential facilities serving 6 or fewer persons;



      (8)   Single-family detached residences previously constructed
as accessory uses to a church, where the resulting lot meets the design
standards found in § 151.034(E);



      (9)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (10)   Single- and mixed-use developments which comply with §
151.048, and have received approval from the City Council;



      (11)   Relocated structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall obtain a moving permit from the city under
§ 111.07;



         (b)   Prior to moving, the applicant shall have given
cash, a cashier’s check, or letter of credit as a financial guarantee to
the city to ensure completion of all work. The financial guarantee shall be
in an amount equal to the Building Official’s estimate of the cost to bring
the structure into compliance with the Building Code;



         (c)   The structure shall meet all requirements of the
Building Code within 6 months after moving;



         (d)   If the structure is not in full compliance with
the Building Code after 6 months of moving, the city, in its sole discretion,
may draw on the financial guarantee and take whatever steps it deems
necessary to bring the relocated structure into compliance with the Building
Code. In the event the city draws on the financial guarantee, 10% of the
total guarantee shall be paid to the city as its administrative fee;



         (e)   The applicant shall provide the Building
Department with all plan review comments and inspection records from Building
Codes and STDS Division and from the city of origin where constructed;



         (f)   An approved county highway moving permit will be
required for the moving of the structure;



         (g)   The structure shall be required to meet all
setbacks, design, and performance standards specified in this code of
ordinances, unless otherwise approved; and



         (h)   Repair of any damage to city streets as a result
of relocating the structure shall be paid for by the applicant.



      (12)   Assisted living housing facilities, subject to the
following requirements:



         (a)   Up to 20% of the facilities’ units may be
independent living units; and



         (b)   Only the independent living units shall be
considered for purposes of calculating the maximum density.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Within the Multiple-Family Residential Zone,
no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by
conditional use permit:



      (1)   Nursing homes;



      (2)   Churches and other places of worship;



      (3)   Cemeteries;



      (4)   Hospitals and clinics;



      (5)   Public or private schools having a course of instruction
approved by the State Department of Education for students enrolled in K
through grade 12, or any portion thereof;



      (6)   Bed and breakfast inns;



      (7)   Day care facilities serving from 13 through 16 persons;



      (8)   Adult day care center as conditional use, subject to the
following conditions. The adult day care centers shall:



         (a)   Serve 13 or more persons;



         (b)   Provide proof of an adequate water and sewer
system if not served by municipal utilities;



         (c)   Have outdoor leisure/recreation areas located and
designed to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas;



         (d)   1.   The total indoor space available for use
by participants must equal at least 40 square feet for each day care
participant and each day care staff member present at the center. When a
center is located in a multi-functional organization, the center may share a
common space with the multi- functional organization if the required space
available for use by participants is maintained while the center is operating.



            2.   In determining the square footage of usable
indoor space available, a center must not count:



               a.   Hallways, stairways, closets, offices,
restrooms, and utility and storage areas;



               b.   More than 25% of the space occupied by
the furniture or equipment used by participants or staff; or



               c.   In a multi-functional organization, any
space occupied by persons associated with the multi-functional organization
while participants are using common space.



         (e)   Provide proof of state, federal, and other
governmental licensing agency approval; and



         (f)   Comply with all other state licensing requirements.



      (9)   Residential facilities serving from 7 through 16 persons;



      (10)   Structures over 2-1/2 stories or 35 feet in height;



      (11)   Developments containing more than one principal
structure per lot;



      (12)   Utility structures which do not meet the standard
conditions under the permitted uses; or



      (13)   Other uses similar to those permitted by this division
(C), upon a determination by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, may be
allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Within the Multiple-Family
Residential Zone, the following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Open off-street parking spaces not to exceed 3 spaces
per dwelling unit;



      (2)   Garages;



      (3)   Fences;



      (4)   Gardening and other horticultural uses not involving
retail sales;



      (5)   Communication service apparatus/device(s) as permitted
accessory uses, subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall be co-located on an existing tower or an
existing structure;



         (b)   Must not exceed 175 feet in total height
(including the extension of any communication service device(s) apparatus);



         (c)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (d)   Signage shall not be allowed on the communication
service device(s)/apparatus other than danger or warning type signs;



         (e)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment will not interfere with existing communications for public
safety purposes;



         (f)   Shall be located and have an exterior finish that
minimizes visibility off-site to the maximum extent possible;



         (g)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (h)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
approved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site;



         (i)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating all
anticipated future location-sites for communication towers and/or
communication devices(s)/apparatus;



         (j)   Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
will only be considered for city parks when the following conditions exist
and if those areas are recommended by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
and approved by the City Council:



            1.   City parks of sufficient size and character
that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use; and



            2.   Commercial recreation areas and major play
fields used primarily by adults.



         (k)   All revenue generated through the lease of a city
park for wireless telecommunication towers and antennas should be transferred
to the Park Reserve Fund.



      (6)   Swimming pools;



      (7)   Tennis courts;



      (8)   Receive-only satellite dish antennas and other antennas;



      (9)   Home occupations contingent upon approval of a home
occupation permit;



      (10)   Solar equipment;



      (11)   Towers for commercial wireless telecommunications
services shall only be allowed subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall also operate as a public utility structure;



         (b)   Shall be located within the public rights-of-way;



         (c)   Shall be limited to 75 feet in height;



         (d)   Shall limit the height of antennas and
communication service devices to 10 feet beyond the height of the structure;



         (e)   No setback shall be required when located in the
public rights-of-way;



         (f)   Turf or other materials shall be established in
the right-of-way consistent with the materials in the right-of-way at the
time of installation;



         (g)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (h)   Shall be protected with corrosive resistant
material;



         (i)   Signage shall not be allowed on the tower other
than danger or warning type signs;



         (j)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment is not able to be collocated on any existing or approved
towers and prove that the planned tower will not interfere with existing
communications for public safety purposes;



         (k)   Must be built to accommodate antennas being placed
at varying heights on the tower;



         (l)   Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible;



         (m)   Shall be surrounded by a security fence 6 feet in
height with a lockable gate;



         (n)   Shall have an exterior finish that minimizes
visibility off-site to the greatest extent possible;



         (o)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (p)   No tower shall be permitted unless the equipment
planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or building within one-half mile search radius of the proposed
tower for any of the following reasons:



            1.   The necessary equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building and the
existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost, as
certified by a qualified, licensed professional engineer;



            2.   The necessary equipment would cause
interference as to significantly impact the usability of other existing or
planned equipment at the tower, structure, or building and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost, as certified by a qualified,
licensed structural engineer;



            3.   Existing or approved towers and buildings
within the one-half mile search radius cannot or will not accommodate the
planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably, as certified
by a qualified, licensed professional engineer; or



            4.   The applicant, after a good faith effort, is
unable to lease space on an existing or approved tower or building.



         (r)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
improved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site; and



         (s)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating
anticipated sites for future location for communication towers and/or
communication device(s)/apparatus.



      (12)   Other uses similar to those permitted by this division
(D), as determined by the Zoning Administrator.



   (E)   Design standards. Within the Multiple-Family Residential Zone,
no land shall be used, and no structure shall be constructed or used, except
in conformance with the following requirements:



      (1)   Density.



         (a)   Generally. A minimum of 8.01 and a maximum of 12
dwellings per acre. Streets shall be excluded in calculating acreage; and



         (b)   Density bonuses in Planned Unit Developments
(PUDs). In the event that a proposed PUD in the R-3 Zone exceeds the
requirements for parking or open space, the City Council may grant a density
bonus of up to 2 dwelling units per acre to allow a density of up to 14
dwelling units per acre.



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface percentage: 60%;



      (3)   Lot specifications.



         (a)   1.   Minimum lot size: One acre;



            2.   Minimum lot width: 150 feet; and



            3.   Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.



         (b)   Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet;



         (c)   Minimum side yard setback: One-half of building
height or 15 feet, whichever is greater. All multiple-family residential
structures 30 feet or greater in height shall be setback a minimum of 4 times
the height of the structure from the nearest Low-Density Residential (R-1A),
Urban Residential (R-1B), Old Shakopee Residential (R-1C), Medium-Density
Residential (R-2), or Multiple-Family Residential (R-3) Zone line; and



         (d)   Minimum rear yard setback: 40 feet.



      (4)   Maximum height: No structure shall exceed 35 feet in
height without a conditional use permit; and



      (5)   Open space: A multiple-family dwelling project shall
provide at least 15% of the project area as open space, as that term is
defined in § 151.048(E)(2).



   (F)   Additional requirements.



      (1)   Dwellings shall have a depth of at least 20 feet for at
least 50% of their width. All dwellings shall have a width of at least 20
feet for at least 50% of their depth.



      (2)   All dwellings shall have a permanent foundation in
conformance with the State Building Code.



(2013 Code, § 11.34)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 60, passed
5-14-1981; Ord. 96, passed 11-11-1982; Ord. 159, passed 2-28-1985; Ord. 203,
passed 7-10-1986; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 264, passed 5-26-1989;
Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 435, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 479, passed
3-13-1997; Ord. 482, passed 5-15-1997; Ord. 496, passed 8-21-1997; Ord. 501,
passed 9-18-1997; Ord. 528, passed 10-29-1998; Ord. 563, passed 11-25-1999;
Ord. 603, passed 8-2-2001; Ord. 741, passed 12-1-2005; Ord. 793, passed
3-27-2008; Ord. 813, passed 2-26-2009; Ord. 903, passed 3-17-2015)



§ 151.039  COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL (N-C).



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Community Commercial Zone is to
provide areas for the development of low-intensity, service-oriented uses for
surrounding the immediate residential areas. Immediate residential areas are
understood to be those that are generally within five-minutes walking
distance of a neighborhood commercial area.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within the Community Commercial Zone, no
structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:



      (1)   Retail;



      (2)   Administrative, executive, and professional offices;



      (3)   Medical or dental clinics;



      (4)   Services;



      (5)   Public buildings;



      (6)   Restaurants, Class I, except those having an outdoor
patio or congregation area that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m.
and where the nearest point of the property on which the restaurant is
located is less than 100 feet from the nearest point of the property where a
residential use is located;



      (7)   Restaurants, Class II, except those having an outdoor
patio or congregation area that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m.
and where the nearest point of the property on which the restaurant is
located is less than 100 feet from the nearest point of the property where a
residential use is located;



      (8)   Uses having a drive-up or drive-through window, subject
to the following requirements:



         (a)   Shall be screened to a height of 6 feet from any
adjacent residential zone;



         (b)   Shall not have a public address system which is
audible from any residential property;



         (c)   Shall provide stacking for at least 6 vehicles per
aisle. The required stacking shall not interfere with internal circulation
patterns or with designated parking facilities, and shall not be located in
any public right-of-way, private access easement, or within the required
parking setback; and



         (d)   Trash receptacles, including, but not limited to,
dumpsters, shall be stored in fully enclosed areas, including the top. The
enclosed areas shall be constructed of similar and/or complementary materials
to the principal structure and meet the standards of this code of ordinances.



      (9)   Relocated structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall obtain a moving permit from the city under
§ 111.07;



         (b)   Prior to moving, the applicant shall have given
cash, a cashier’s check, or letter of credit as a financial guarantee to
the city to ensure completion of all work. The financial guarantee shall be
in an amount equal to the Building Official’s estimate of the cost to bring
the structure into compliance with the Building Code;



         (c)   The structure shall meet all requirements of the
Building Code within 6 months after moving;



         (d)   If the structure is not in full compliance with
the Building Code after 6 months of moving, the city, in its sole discretion,
may draw on the financial guarantee and take whatever steps it deems
necessary to bring the relocated structure into compliance with the Building
Code. In the event the city draws on the financial guarantee, 10% of the
total guarantee shall be paid to the city as its administrative fee;



         (e)   The applicant shall provide the Building
Department with all plan review comments and inspection records from Building
Codes and STDS Division and from the city of origin where constructed;



         (f)   An approved county highway moving permit will be
required for the moving of the structure;



         (g)   The structure shall be required to meet all
setbacks, design, and performance standards specified in this code of
ordinances, unless otherwise approved; and



         (h)   Repair of any damage to city streets as a result
of relocating the structure shall be paid for by the applicant.



      (10)   Brewpubs.



   (C)   Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. Within the
Community Commercial Zone, no structure or land shall be used for any of the
following uses except after approval of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Restaurants, Class I or Class II, that have an outdoor
patio or congregation area that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m.
and where the nearest point of the property on which the restaurant is
located is less than 100 feet from the nearest point of the property where a
residential use is located.  Additional standards for such uses are
contained in § 151.013;



      (2)   Taverns having an outdoor patio or congregation area
that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m. and where the nearest
point of the property on which the tavern is located is less than 100 feet
from the nearest point of the property where a residential use is located.
Additional standards for such uses are contained in § 151.013;



      (3)   Churches;



      (4)   Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics;



      (5)   Gas stations;



      (6)   Bed and breakfast inns;



      (7)   Funeral homes;



      (8)   Day care facilities;



      (9)   Developments containing more than one principal
structure per lot;



      (10)   Farm wineries producing less than 50,000 gallons of
wine per calendar year with tasting rooms;



      (11)   Micro-distilleries with tasting rooms;



      (12)   Small breweries with taprooms;



      (13)   Taprooms; and



      (14)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this division
(C), as determined by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Within the Community Commercial
Zone, the following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any incidental repair or processing necessary to conduct
a permitted principal use;



      (2)   Parking and loading spaces;



      (3)   Temporary construction buildings;



      (4)   Decorative landscape features;



      (5)   Communication service apparatus/devices(s) as permitted
accessory uses, subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall be co-located on an existing tower or an
existing structure;



         (b)   Must not exceed 175 feet in total height
(including the extension of any communication service device(s)/apparatus;



         (c)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (d)   Signage shall not be allowed on the communication
service device(s)/apparatus other than danger or warning type signs;



         (e)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment will not interfere with existing communications for public
safety purposes;



         (f)   Shall be located and have an exterior finish that
minimizes visibility off-site to the maximum extent possible;



         (g)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (h)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
improved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site;



         (i)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating all
anticipated future location sites for communication towers and/or
communication device(s)/apparatus;



         (j)   Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
will only be considered for city parks when the following conditions exist
and if those areas are recommended by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
and approved by the City Council:



            1.   City parks of sufficient size and character
that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use; and



            2.   Commercial recreation areas and major play
fields used primarily by adults;



         (k)   All revenue generated through the lease of a city
park for wireless telecommunication towers and antennas should be transferred
to the Park Reserve Fund.



      (6)   Towers for commercial wireless telecommunications
services shall only be allowed subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall also operate as a public utility structure;



         (b)   Shall be located within the public rights-of-way;



         (c)   Shall be limited to 75 feet in height;



         (d)   Shall limit the height of antennas and
communication service devices to 10 feet beyond the height of the structure;



         (e)   No setback shall be required when located in the
public rights-of-way;



         (f)   Turf or other materials shall be established in
the right-of-way consistent with the materials in the right-of-way at the
time of installation;



         (g)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (h)   Shall be protected with corrosive resistant
material;



         (i)   Signage shall not be allowed on the tower other
than danger or warning type signs;



         (j)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment is not able to be collocated on any existing or approved
towers and prove that the planned tower will not interfere with existing
communications for public safety purposes;



         (k)   Must be built to accommodate antennas being placed
at varying heights on the tower;



         (l)   Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible;



         (m)   Shall be surrounded by a security fence 6 feet in
height with a lockable gate;



         (n)   Shall have an exterior finish that minimizes
visibility off-site to the greatest extent possible;



         (o)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (p)   No tower shall be permitted unless the equipment
planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or building within the one-half mile search radius of the
proposed tower for any of the following reasons:



            1.   The necessary equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building and the
existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost, as
certified by a qualified, licensed professional engineer;



            2.   The necessary equipment would cause
interference as to significantly impact the usability of other existing or
planned equipment at the tower, structure, or building and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost, as certified by a qualified,
licensed structural engineer;



            3.   Existing or approved towers and buildings
within the one-half mile search radius cannot or will not accommodate the
planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably, as certified
by a qualified, licensed professional engineer; or



            4.   The applicant, after a good faith effort, is
unable to lease space on an existing or approved tower or building.



         (r)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
improved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site; and



         (s)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating
anticipated sites for future location for communication towers and/or the
communication device(s)/apparatus.



      (7)   Other accessory uses customarily appurtenant to a
permitted or conditional use, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.



   (E)   Design standards.



      (1)   Minimum lot area: One acre;



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface coverage: 75%;



      (3)   Lot specifications.



         (a)   Minimum lot width: 100 feet;



         (b)   Building setbacks.



            1.   Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet;



            2.   Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet;



            3.   Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet;



            4.   Minimum side or rear yard setback from
residential zone: 50 feet; and



            5.   Maximum height: 35 feet.



         (c)   Dumpsters, trash handling equipment, and the like.
Dumpsters, trash handling equipment, and recycling equipment shall be stored
within the principal structure, or within a fully enclosed accessory
structure constructed of the same materials as the principal structure;



         (d)   Exterior lighting. Exterior lighting fixtures
shall be of downcast, cut-off type; and



         (e)   Parking or drive aisle setbacks.



            1.   Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet;



            2.   Minimum rear yard setback: 10 feet; and



            3.   Minimum side or rear yard setback from
residential zone: 20 feet.



   (F)   Construction materials. In the Community Commercial Zone, only
the following materials may be used for the exterior finish of any principal
or accessory building: face brick; stone; glass; decorative concrete block;
architecturally treated concrete; cast in place or precast concrete; stucco;
and materials substantially similar to these as determined by the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals. Steel, aluminum, copper, or other high quality,
durable metal, and wood may be used, but only as an accent, trim, or frame,
and not as siding for a substantial portion of any building facade.



(2013 Code, § 11.35)  (Ord. 563, passed 11-25-1999; Ord. 741, passed
12-1-2005; Ord. 813, passed 2-26-2009; Ord. 877, passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 915,
passed 9-1-2015)



§ 151.040  HIGHWAY BUSINESS ZONE (B-1).



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Highway Business Zone is to
provide an area for business uses fronting on or with immediate access to
arterial and collector streets.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within the Highway Business Zone, no structure
or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:



      (1)   Motels and hotels;



      (2)   Restaurants, Class I; except those having an outdoor
patio or congregation area that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m.
and where the nearest point of the property on which the restaurant is
located is less than 100 feet from the nearest point of the property where a
residential use is located;



      (3)   Restaurants, Class II, except those having an outdoor
patio or congregation area that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m.
and where the nearest point of the property on which the restaurant is
located is less than 100 feet from the nearest point of the property where a
residential use is located.



      (4)   Retail establishments;



      (5)   Utility services;



      (6)   Utility service structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall not be a water tower or electrical
substation or a building constructed to house sanitary lift station controls;



         (b)   Shall be 20 feet or less in height;



         (c)   May be used only to provide weather protection for
utility equipment;



         (d)   Shall be designed, placed, and landscaped as
necessary to assure that it blends with the neighboring uses, and is
unobtrusive; and



         (e)   Shall comply with all applicable design standards.



      (7)   Administrative, executive, and professional offices;



      (8)   Financial institutions;



      (9)   Medical or dental clinics;



      (10)   Public buildings;



      (11)   Dwellings when combined in the same structure with
another permitted use within the Highway Business Zone (B-1) along the County
Road 69/State Highway 101/First Avenue corridor west of County Road
17/Marschall Road and east of Webster Street or a line running northwesterly
along the eastern boundary of the Webster Street right-of-way;



      (12)   Single- and mixed-use developments which comply with §
151.048, and have received approval from the City Council;



      (13)   Single-family and two-family dwellings constructed
before December 31, 2003. If a single-family or two-family dwelling
originally constructed before December 31, 2003 is destroyed, e.g., by fire,
it may be reconstructed to a size, configuration, and style consistent with
the original structure;



      (14)   Uses having a drive-up or drive-through window, subject
to the following requirements:



         (a)   Shall be screened to a height of 6 feet from any
adjacent residential zone;



         (b)   Shall not have a public address system which is
audible from any residential property;



         (c)   Shall provide stacking for at least 6 vehicles per
aisle. The required stacking shall not interfere with internal circulation
patterns or with designated parking facilities, and shall not be located in
any public right-of-way, private access easement, or within the required
parking setback; and



         (d)   Trash receptacles, including, but not limited to,
dumpsters, shall be stored in fully enclosed areas, including the top. The
enclosed areas shall be constructed of similar and/or complementary materials
to the principal structure and meet the standards of this code of ordinances.



      (15)   Relocated structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall obtain a moving permit from the city under
§ 111.07;



         (b)   Prior to moving, the applicant shall have given
cash, a cashier’s check, or letter of credit as a financial guarantee to
the city to ensure completion of all work. The financial guarantee shall be
in an amount equal to the Building Official’s estimate of the cost to bring
the structure into compliance with the Building Code;



         (c)   The structure shall meet all requirements of the
Building Code within 6 months after moving;



         (d)   If the structure is not in full compliance with
the Building Code after 6 months of moving, the city, in its sole discretion,
may draw on the financial guarantee and take whatever steps it deems
necessary to bring the relocated structure into compliance with the Building
Code, in the event the city draws on the financial guarantee, 10% of the
total guarantee shall be paid to the city as its administrative fee;



         (e)   The applicant shall provide the Building
Department with all plan review comments and inspection records from Building
Codes and STDS Division and from the city of origin where constructed;



         (f)   An approved county highway moving permit will be
required for the moving of the structure;



         (g)   The structure shall be required to meet all
setbacks, design, and performance standards specified in this code of
ordinances, unless otherwise approved; and



         (h)   Repair of any damage to city streets as a result
of relocating the structure shall be paid for by the applicant.



      (16)   Brewpubs.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Within the Highway Business Zone, no
structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by conditional
use permit:



      (1)   Restaurants, Class I or Class II, that have an outdoor
patio or congregation area that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m.
and where the nearest point of the property on which the restaurant is
located is less than 100 feet from the nearest point of the property where a
residential use is located.  Additional standards for such uses are
contained in § 151.013;



      (2)   Taverns having an outdoor patio or congregation area
that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m. and where the nearest
point of the property on which the tavern is located is less than 100 feet
from the nearest point of the property where a residential use is located.
Additional standards for such uses are contained in § 151.013;



      (3)   Churches;



      (4)   Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics;



      (5)   Pet day care and boarding facilities;



      (6)   Open sales lots or any use having exterior storage of
goods for sale;



      (7)   Gas stations;



      (8)   Private lodges and clubs;



      (9)   Commercial recreation, major or minor;



      (10)   Bed and breakfast inns;



      (11)   New vehicle sales;



      (12)   Used vehicle sales but only if the business is located
on the same site as a new vehicle sales business authorized by the vehicle
manufacturer;



      (13)   Vehicle service and repair, including minor and major
repairs, body repair, and paint services;



      (14)   Vehicle rental facilities;



      (15)   Car washes;



      (16)   Hospitals;



      (17)   Theaters;



      (18)   Funeral homes;



      (19)   Day care facilities;



      (20)   Adult day care centers as conditional use, subject to
the following conditions: The adult day care centers shall:



         (a)   Serve 13 or more persons;



         (b)   Provide proof of an adequate water and sewer
system if not served by municipal utilities;



         (c)   Have outdoor leisure/recreation areas located and
designed to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas;



         (d)   1.   The total indoor space available for use
by participants must equal at least 40 square feet for each day care
participant and each day care staff member present at the center. When a
center is located in a multi-functional organization, the center may share a
common space with the multi-functional organization if the required space
available for use by participants is maintained while the center is operating.



            2.   In determining the square footage of usable
indoor space available, a center must not count:



               a.   Hallways, stairways, closets, offices,
restrooms, and utility and storage areas;



               b.   More than 25% of the space occupied by
the furniture or equipment used by participants or staff; or



               c.   In a multi-functional organization, any
space occupied by persons associated with the multi-functional organization
while participants are using common space.



         (e)   Provide proof of state, federal, and other
governmental licensing agency approval; and



         (f)   Comply with all other state licensing requirements.



      (21)   Housing designed to serve the needs of handicapped
persons;



      (22)   Structures over 35 feet in height;



      (23)   Developments containing more than one principal
structure per lot;



      (24)   Other uses similar to those permitted by this division
(C), upon a determination by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, may be
allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit;



      (25)   Self-storage facilities, subject to the following
conditions:



         (a)   Shall not allow maintenance of any vehicles
on-site, except for minor maintenance such as tire inflation, adding oil,
wiper replacement, and battery replacement;



         (b)   Shall have a security system adequate to limit
access to persons renting a storage site;



         (c)   Shall screen all storage, consistent with this
code of ordinances’ requirements;



         (d)   Shall be screened from all public rights-of-way
and residential uses and/or zones, with an opaque fence, wall, or berm not to
exceed 8 feet in height, constructed of new materials (chain link with slats
is not an acceptable screening material), and maintained in good condition;



         (e)   Exterior storage shall be allowed ; provided, that
it have a maximum area that does not exceed the combined footprint of the
principal and accessory buildings;



         (f)   Shall not be located closer than 1,000 feet to any
residential use and/or zone; and



         (g)   Shall be surfaced entirely with asphalt, concrete,
or Class 5 aggregate.



      (26)   Public and private colleges/universities licensed by
the state, subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall be located adjacent to an arterial or
collector street as identified in the comprehensive plan, or otherwise
located so that access can be provided without conducting significant traffic
on local residential streets;



         (b)   Shall have all buildings setback 50 feet from all
property lines;



         (c)    Shall have parking facilities setback 15 feet
from streets and nonresidential property, 25 feet from residential property;



         (d)   Shall provide one parking space per every 2
students, plus one space per every employee and member of staff, based on the
time of day that experiences the greatest capacity;



         (e)   Shall screen parking facilities adjacent to
residential property with a berm, fencing, and/or landscaping to a minimum
height of 3 feet);



         (f)   Shall have drop-off and pick-up areas located
outside of the public right-of-way, and designed to enhance vehicular and
pedestrian safety;



         (g)   Shall have recreational areas designed for group
sports activities setback 25 feet from residential property, with adequate
screening to protect neighboring properties from noise, and adverse visual
impacts;



         (h)   Shall comply with applicable design and
performance standards of this code of ordinances;



         (i)   Shall not have any lighted playing fields unless
the visual impact on residential areas can be substantially mitigated; and



         (j)   Shall have an impervious surface percent of no
more than 60%, and the remainder of the site shall be suitably landscaped;



      (27)   Landscape services and contractors on properties
adjacent to the CSAH 69 right- of-way in the area bounded on the north by the
southernmost railroad bridge over CSAH 69 and the south by the intersection
of 10th Avenue West and CSAH 69;



      (28)   Farm wineries producing less than 50,000 gallons of
wine per calendar year;



      (29)   Micro-distilleries;



      (30)   Small breweries;



      (31)   Taprooms;



      (32)   Utility structures which do not meet the standard
conditions under the permitted uses;



      (33)   Massage establishments; and



      (34)   Schools licensed by the Minnesota Department of
Education, serving students in grades Kindergarten through twelfth grade.



   (D)   Planned unit development uses. Within the Highway Business
Zone, the following uses shall be planned unit development uses: retail
centers.



   (E)   Permitted accessory uses. Within the Highway Business Zone,
the following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any incidental repair or processing necessary to conduct
a permitted principal use;



      (2)   Parking and loading spaces;



      (3)   Temporary construction buildings;



      (4)   Decorative landscape features;



      (5)   Communication service apparatus/device(s) as permitted
accessory uses, subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall be co-located on an existing tower or an
existing structure;



         (b)   Must not exceed 175 feet in total height
(including the extension of any communication service device(s) apparatus);



         (c)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (d)   Signage shall not be allowed on the communication
service device(s)/apparatus other than danger or warning type signs;



         (e)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment will not interfere with existing communications for public
safety purposes;



         (f)   Shall be located and have an exterior finish that
minimizes visibility off-site to the maximum extent possible;



         (g)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (h)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
approved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site;



         (i)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating all
anticipated future location sites for communication towers and/or
communication devices(s)/ apparatus;



         (j)   Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
will only be considered for city parks when the following conditions exist
and if those areas are recommended by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
and approved by the City Council:



            1.   City parks of sufficient size and character
that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use; and



            2.   Commercial recreation areas and major play
fields used primarily by adults.



         (k)   All revenue generated through the lease of a city
park for wireless telecommunication towers and antennas should be transferred
to the Park Reserve Fund.



      (6)   Temporary, seasonal sales of farm produced items such as
fruits, vegetables, and Christmas trees with prior review and written
approval from the Zoning Administrator or his or her designee, subject to the
following conditions:



         (a)   Only 2 permits shall be allowed per year, per
site. These permits shall not be issued within 3 months of each other if
issued to the same organization/user;



         (b)   Property owner’s signature is required;



         (c)   Operation of the seasonal sale shall not exceed 90
calendar days in length;



         (d)   The seasonal sales use must meet parking setbacks
established by this code of ordinances;



         (e)   Seasonal sales use cannot inhabit any parking
spaces required to meet the needs of the primary use on-site;



         (f)   Shall provide one off-street customer parking
space for each 250 square feet of seasonal sales display area;



         (g)   Shall submit a scalable drawing of the proposed
site showing the dimensions of the area to be used for seasonal sales, the
proximity to buildings, parking lots, right-of-way, or other such area, a
description of any structure, implement, stand, display, prop, or other such
items intended to be used for the sale of the seasonal items;



         (h)   Signage is not approved as part of the seasonal
sales permit. All signage must comply with the sign regulations of this
chapter (see §§ 151.185 through 151.197);



         (i)   Application for seasonal sales permits shall be
made not less than 10 business days prior to the date(s) for which the
activity is scheduled and no more than 90 days prior to the proposed
commencement of activity;



         (j)   If the applicant is aggrieved by the decision made
by city staff, they may file an appeal to the BOAA of the staff’s
determination within 10 days of staff’s decision. Furthermore, if the
applicant is aggrieved by the decision of the BOAA, within 10 days of the
BOAA decision, an appeal may be filed with the City Council. The City
Council’s determination shall be final. The appeal shall be in accordance
with the approved procedures and fees adopted by the City Council;



         (k)   Staff may waive the fee for a seasonal sales
permit application where the entire proceeds from the operation are given to
charity or used for charitable purposes or are a fundraising effort for
nonprofit groups. Documentation of nonprofit status shall be provided to the
city prior to the approval of a fee waiver;



         (l)    Seasonal sales permits shall require annual
review. Approvals are not carried from year to year;



         (m)    Shall not impair traffic visibility and should
not be located in the r-o-w or the sight triangle, as calculated by this code
of ordinances;



         (n)   The seasonal sales use shall not impair the
normal, safe, and effective operation of the permanent use on the same site;
and



         (o)   The city reserves the right under this chapter to
shutdown a temporary/seasonal sales operation even after the granting of an
approval if the operation is posing safety concerns, has become a nuisance,
or has violated any requirement of this section or other provision of this
code of ordinances.



      (7)   Towers for commercial wireless telecommunications
services shall only be allowed subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall also operate as a public utility structure;



         (b)   Shall be located within the public rights-of-way;



         (c)   Shall be limited to 75 feet in height;



         (d)   Shall limit the height of antennas and
communication service devices to 10 feet beyond the height of the structure;



         (e)   No setback shall be required when located in the
public rights-of-way;



         (f)   Turf or other materials shall be established in
the right-of-way consistent with the materials in the right-of-way at the
time of installation;



         (g)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (h)   Shall be protected with corrosive resistant
material;



         (i)   Signage shall not be allowed on the tower other
than danger or warning type signs;



         (j)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment is not able to be collocated on any existing or approved
towers and prove that the planned tower will not interfere with existing
communications for public safety purposes;



         (k)   Must be built to accommodate antennas being placed
at varying heights on the tower;



         (l)   Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible;



         (m)   Shall be surrounded by a security fence 6 feet in
height with a lockable gate;



         (n)   Shall have an exterior finish that minimizes
visibility off-site to the greatest extent possible;



         (o)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (p)   No tower shall be permitted unless the equipment
planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or building within the one-half mile search radius of the
proposed tower for any of the following reasons:



            1.   The necessary equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building and the
existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost, as
certified by a qualified, licensed professional engineer;



            2.   The necessary equipment would cause
interference as to significantly impact the usability of other existing or
planned equipment at the tower, structure, or building and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost, as certified by a qualified,
licensed structural engineer;



            3.   Existing or approved towers and buildings
within the one-half mile search radius cannot or will not accommodate the
planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably, as certified
by a qualified, licensed professional engineer; or



            4.   The applicant, after a good faith effort, is
unable to lease space on an existing or approved tower or building.



         (r)   1.   All obsolete or unused towers and
accompanying accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the
cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by
the city.



            2.   After the facilities are removed, the site
shall be restored to its original or an improved state. The user of the tower
and/or accompanying accessory facilities shall be responsible for the removal
of facilities and restoration of the site.



         (s)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating
anticipated sites for future location for communication towers and/or
communication device(s)/apparatus.



      (8)   Other accessory uses customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.



   (F)   Design standards. Within the Highway Business Zone, no land
shall be used, and no structure shall be constructed or used, except in
conformance with the following minimum requirements:



      (1)   Minimum lot size (new lots): One acre;



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface percentage: 75%;



      (3)   Lot specifications.



         (a)   Minimum lot width (new lots): 100 feet;



         (b)   Existing lots: 60 feet;



         (c)   Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet;



         (d)   Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet;



         (e)   Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet; and



         (f)   Minimum side or rear yard setback from residential
zones: 75 feet.



      (4)   Maximum height: 35 feet without a conditional use permit.



(2013 Code, § 11.36)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 150, passed
10-4-1984; Ord. 158, passed 1-31-1985; Ord. 159, passed 2-28-1985; Ord. 246,
passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 264, passed 5-26-1989; Ord. 275, passed 9-22-1989;
Ord. 279, passed 12-1-1989; Ord. 292, passed 9-7-1990; Ord. 320, passed
10-31-1991; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 479,
passed 3-13-1997; Ord. 482, passed 5-15-1997; Ord. 485, passed 6-12-1997;
Ord. 525, passed 12-31-1998; Ord. 528, passed 10-29-1998; Ord. 546, passed
5-6-1999; Ord. 554, passed 7-6-1999; Ord. 563, passed 11-25- 1999; Ord. 700,
passed 5-6-2004; Ord. 708, passed 7-29-2004; Ord. 724, passed 2-10-2005; Ord.
736, passed 9-8-2005; Ord. 741, passed 12-1-2005; Ord. 813, passed 2-26-2009;
Ord. 830, passed 2-25- 2010; Ord. 865, passed 3-5-2013; Ord. 876, passed
11-9-2013; Ord. 877, passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 903, passed 3-17-2015; Ord. 912,
passed 9-1-2015; Ord. 915, passed 9-1-2015; Ord. 956, passed 2-21-2017; Ord.
959, passed 3-21-2017)



§ 151.041  COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL (CC).



   (A)   Purpose. The purposes of the Community Commercial Zone are:



      (1)   To provide areas that allow the concentration of general
commercial development for the convenience of city residents and the greater
city trade area;



      (2)   To provide space for larger community facilities and
institutions that may be appropriately located in commercial areas; and



      (3)   To provide adequate space to meet the parking spaces,
loading, and traffic management needs of larger scale commercial development.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within the Community Commercial Zone, no
structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:



      (1)   Retail;



      (2)   Administrative, executive, and professional offices;



      (3)   Medical or dental clinics;



      (4)   Restaurants, Class I; except those having an outdoor
patio or congregation area that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m.
and where the nearest point of the property on which the restaurant is
located is less than 100 feet from the nearest point of the property where a
residential use is located;



      (5)   Restaurants, Class II, except those having an outdoor
patio or congregation area that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m.
and where the nearest point of the property on which the restaurant is
located is less than 100 feet from the nearest point of the property where a
residential use is located.



      (6)   Showroom facilities;



      (7)   Medical or dental clinics;



      (8)   Services;



      (9)   Public buildings;



      (10)   Uses having a drive-up or drive-through window, subject
to the following requirements:



         (a)   Shall be screened to a height of 6 feet from any
adjacent residential zone;



         (b)   Shall not have a public address system which is
audible from any residential property;



         (c)   Shall provide stacking for at least 6 vehicles per
aisle. The required stacking shall not interfere with internal circulation
patterns or with designated parking facilities, and shall not be located in
any public right-of-way, private access easement, or within the required
parking setback; and



         (d)   Trash receptacles, including, but not limited to,
dumpsters, shall be stored in fully enclosed areas, including the top. The
enclosed areas shall be constructed of similar and/or complementary materials
to the principal structure and meet the standards of this code of ordinances.



      (11)   Relocated structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall obtain a moving permit from the city under
§ 111.07;



         (b)   Prior to moving, the applicant shall have given
cash, a cashier’s check, or letter of credit as a financial guarantee to
the city to ensure completion of all work. The financial guarantee shall be
in an amount equal to the Building Official’s estimate of the cost to bring
the structure into compliance with the Building Code;



         (c)   The structure shall meet all requirements of the
Building Code within 6 months after moving;



         (d)   If the structure is not in full compliance with
the Building Code after 6 months of moving, the city, in its sole discretion,
may draw on the financial guarantee and take whatever steps it deems
necessary to bring the relocated structure into compliance with the Building
Code. In the event the city draws on the financial guarantee, 10% of the
total guarantee shall be paid to the city as its administrative fee; and



         (e)   The applicant shall provide the Building
Department with all plan review comments and inspection records from Building
Codes and STDS Division and from the city of origin where constructed;



      (f)   An approved county highway moving permit will be
required for the moving of the structure;



      (g)   The structure shall be required to meet all setbacks,
design, and performance standards specified in this code of ordinances,
unless otherwise approved; and



      (h)   Repair of any damage to city streets as a result of
relocating the structure shall be paid for by the applicant.



      (12) Brewpubs.



   (C)   Uses Permitted with a conditional use permit. Within the
Community Commercial Zone, no structure or land shall be used for any of the
following uses except after approval of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Restaurants, Class I or Class II, that have an outdoor
patio or congregation area that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m.
and where the nearest point of the property on which the restaurant is
located is less than 100 feet from the nearest point of the property where a
residential use is located.  Additional standards for such uses are
contained in § 151.013;



      (2)   Taverns having an outdoor patio or congregation area
that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m. and where the nearest
point of the property on which the tavern is located is less than 100 feet
from the nearest point of the property where a residential use is located.
Additional standards for such uses are contained in § 151.013;



      (3)   Churches;



      (4)   Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics;



      (5)   Gas stations;



      (6)   Hotels and motels;



      (7)   Funeral homes;



      (8)   Day care facilities;



      (9)   Vehicle sales, service and repair;



      (10)   Developments containing more than one principal
structure per lot;



      (11)   Structures taller than 45 feet in height;



      (12)   Farm wineries producing less than 50,000 gallons of
wine per calendar year;



      (13)   Micro-distilleries;



      (14)   Small breweries;



      (15)   Taprooms; and



      (16)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this division
(C), as determined by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals.



   (D)   Uses permitted by PUD.



      (1)   Retail centers; and



      (2)   Multiple-family dwellings.



   (E)   Permitted accessory uses. Within the Highway Business Zone,
the following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any incidental repair or processing necessary to conduct
a permitted principal use;



      (2)   Parking and loading spaces;



      (3)   Temporary construction buildings;



      (4)   Decorative landscape features;



      (5)   Communication service apparatus/devices(s) as permitted
accessory uses, subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall be co-located on an existing tower or an
existing structure;



         (b)   Must not exceed 175 feet in total height
(including the extension of any communication service device(s)/apparatus;



         (c)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (d)   Signage shall not be allowed on the communication
service device(s)/apparatus other than danger or warning type signs:



         (e)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment will not interfere with existing communications for public
safety purposes;



         (f)   Shall be located and have an exterior finish that
minimizes visibility off-site to the maximum extent possible;



         (g)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (h)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
improved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site;



         (i)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating all
anticipated future location sites for communication towers and/or
communication device(s)/apparatus;



         (j)   Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
will only be considered for city parks when the following conditions exist
and if those areas are recommended by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
and approved by the City Council:



            1.   City parks of sufficient size and character
that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use; and



            2.   Commercial recreation areas and major play
fields used primarily by adults.



         (k)   All revenue generated through the lease of a city
park for wireless telecommunication towers and antennas should be transferred
to the Park Reserve Fund.



      (6)   Towers for commercial wireless telecommunications
services shall only be allowed subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall also operate as a public utility structure;



         (b)   Shall be located within the public rights-of-way;



         (c)   Shall be limited to 75 feet in height;



         (d)   Shall limit the height of antennas and
communication service devices to 10 feet beyond the height of the structure;



         (e)   No setback shall be required when located in the
public rights-of-way;



         (f)   Turf or other materials shall be established in
the right-of-way consistent with the materials in the right-of-way at the
time of installation;



         (g)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (h)   Shall be protected with corrosive resistant
material;



         (i)   Signage shall not be allowed on the tower other
than danger or warning type signs;



         (j)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment is not able to be collocated on any existing or approved
towers and prove that the planned tower will not interfere with existing
communications for public safety purposes;



         (k)   Must be built to accommodate antennas being placed
at varying heights on the tower;



         (l)   Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible;



         (m)   Shall be surrounded by a security fence 6 feet in
height with a lockable gate;



         (n)   Shall have an exterior finish that minimizes
visibility off-site to the greatest extent possible;



         (o)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (p)   No tower shall be permitted unless the equipment
planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or building within the one-half mile search radius of the
proposed tower for any of the following reasons:



            1.   The necessary equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building and the
existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost, as
certified by a qualified, licensed professional engineer;



            2.   The necessary equipment would cause
interference as to significantly impact the usability of other existing or
planned equipment at the tower, structure, or building and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost, as certified by a qualified,
licensed structural engineer;



            3.   Existing or approved towers and buildings
within the one-half mile search radius cannot or will not accommodate the
planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably, as certified
by a qualified, licensed professional engineer; or



            4.   The applicant, after a good faith effort, is
unable to lease space on an existing or approved tower or building.



         (q)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
improved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site;



         (r)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating
anticipated sites for future location for communication towers and/or
communication device(s)/apparatus; and



         (s)   Other accessory uses customarily appurtenant to a
permitted or conditional use, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.



   (F)   Design standards.



      (1)   Minimum lot area: One acre;



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface coverage: 75%;



      (3)   Lot specifications.



         (a)   Minimum lot width: 100 feet;



         (b)   Building setbacks:



            1.   Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet;



            2.   Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet;



            3.   Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet;



            4.   Minimum side or rear yard setback from
residential zone: 100 feet; and



            5.   Maximum height: 35 feet;



         (c)   Dumpsters, trash handling equipment, and the like.
Dumpsters, trash handling equipment, and recycling equipment shall be stored
within the principal structure, or within a fully enclosed accessory
structure constructed of the same materials as the principal structure;



         (d)   Exterior lighting fixtures. Exterior lighting
fixtures shall be of downcast, cut-off type; and



         (e)   Parking or drive aisle setbacks.



            1.   Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet;



            2.   Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet; and



            3.   Minimum side or rear yard setback from
residential zone: 100 feet.



   (G)   Construction materials. In the Community Commercial Zone, only
the following materials may be used for the exterior finish of any principal
or accessory building: face brick; stone; glass; decorative concrete block;
architecturally treated concrete; cast in place or precast concrete; stucco;
and materials substantially similar to these as determined by the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals. Steel, aluminum, copper, or other high quality,
durable metal, and wood may be used, but only as an accent, trim, or frame,
and not as siding for a substantial portion of any building facade.



(2013 Code, § 11.37)  (Ord. 563, passed 11-25-1999; Ord. 741, passed
12-1-2005; Ord. 813, passed 2-26-2009; Ord. 877, passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 915,
passed 9-1-2015)



§ 151.042  OFFICE BUSINESS ZONE (B-2).



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Office Business Zone is to provide
an area for offices and related service uses, in an area where general retail
is excluded. The Zone is intended for areas identified in the comprehensive
plan for office use or for transitional areas between residential and more
intense uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within the Office Business Zone, no structure
or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:



      (1)   Administrative, executive, and professional offices;



      (2)   Financial institutions;



      (3)   Utility services;



      (4)   Utility service structures, subject to the following
requirements;



         (a)   Shall not be a water tower or electrical
substation or a building constructed to house sanitary lift station controls;



         (b)   Shall be 20 feet or less in height;



         (c)   May be used only to provide weather protection for
utility equipment;



         (d)   Shall be designed, placed, and landscaped as
necessary to assure that it blends with the neighboring uses, and is
unobtrusive; and



         (d)   Shall comply with all applicable design standards.



      (5)   Medical or dental clinics;



      (6)   Public buildings;



      (7)   Single- and mixed-use developments which comply with
§§ 151.105 through 151.125, and have received approval from the City
Council.



      (8)   Relocated structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall obtain a moving permit from the city under
§ 111.07;



         (b)   Prior to moving, the applicant shall have given
cash, a cashier’s check, or letter of credit as a financial guarantee to
the city to ensure completion of all work. The financial guarantee shall be
in an amount equal to the Building Official’s estimate of the cost to bring
the structure into compliance with the Building Code;



         (c)   The structure shall meet all requirements of the
Building Code within 6 months after moving;



         (d)   If the structure is not in full compliance with
the Building Code after 6 months of moving, the city, in its sole discretion,
may draw on the financial guarantee and take whatever steps it deems
necessary to bring the relocated structure into compliance with the Building
Code. In the event the city draws on the financial guarantee, 10% of the
total guarantee shall be paid to the city as its administrative fee;



         (d)   The applicant shall provide the Building
Department with all plan review comments and inspection records from Building
Codes and STDS Division and from the city of origin where constructed;



         (e)   An approved county highway moving permit will be
required for the moving of the structure;



         (f)   The structure shall be required to meet all
setbacks, design, and performance standards specified in this code of
ordinances, unless otherwise approved; and



         (g)   Repair of any damage to city streets as a result
of relocating the structure shall be paid for by the applicant.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Within the Office Business Zone, no
structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by conditional
use permit:



      (1)   Retail uses generally associated with a permitted use;



      (2)   Restaurants, Class I or Class II, contained within a
principal structure and oriented toward serving employees or those working in
the immediate area;



      (3)   Storage, assembly, or servicing incidental to a
permitted use;



      (4)   Hotels and motels;



      (5)   Commercial recreation, minor, but limited to health and
athletic facilities;



      (6)   Hospitals;



      (7)   Multiple-family housing;



      (8)   Day care facilities;



      (9)   Adult day care centers as conditional use, subject to
the following conditions. The adult day care centers shall:



         (a)   Serve 13 or more persons;



         (b)   Provide proof of an adequate water and sewer
system if not served by municipal utilities;



         (c)   Have outdoor leisure/recreation areas located and
designed to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas;



         (d)   1.   The total indoor space available for use
by participants must equal at least 40 square feet for each day care
participant and each day care staff member present at the center. When a
center is located in a multi-functional organization, the center may share a
common space with the multi- functional organization if the required space
available for use by participants is maintained while the center is operating.



            2.   In determining the square footage of usable
indoor space available, a center must not count:



               a.   Hallways, stairways, closets, offices,
restrooms, and utility and storage areas;



               b.   More than 25% of the space occupied by
the furniture or equipment used by participants or staff; or



               c.   In a multi-functional organization, any
space occupied by persons associated with the multi-functional organization
while participants are using common space.



         (e)   Provide proof of state, federal, and other
governmental licensing agency approval; and



         (f)   Comply with all other state licensing requirements.



      (10)   Structures over 55 feet in height;



      (11)   Developments containing more than one principal
structure per lot;



      (12)   Other uses similar to those permitted by this division
(C), upon a determination by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, may be
allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit;



      (13)   Utility structures which do not meet the standard
conditions under the permitted uses; or



      (14)   Churches and other places of worship.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Within the Office Business Zone, the
following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Parking and loading spaces;



      (2)   Temporary construction buildings;



      (3)   Decorative landscaping features;



      (4)   Communication service apparatus/device(s) as permitted
accessory uses, subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall be co-located on an existing tower or an
existing structure;



         (b)   Must not exceed 175 feet in total height
(including the extension of any communication service device(s) apparatus);



         (c)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (d)   Signage shall not be allowed on the communication
service device(s)/apparatus other than danger or warning type signs;



         (e)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment will not interfere with existing communications for public
safety purposes;



         (f)   Shall be located and have an exterior finish that
minimizes visibility off-site to the maximum extent possible;



         (g)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (h)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
approved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site;



         (i)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating all
anticipated future location sites for communication towers and/or
communication devices(s)/apparatus;



         (j)   Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
will only be considered for city parks when the following conditions exist
and if those areas are recommended by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
and approved by the City Council:



            1.   City parks of sufficient size and character
that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use; and



            2.   Commercial recreation areas and major play
fields used primarily by adults.



         (k)   All revenue generated through the lease of a city
park for wireless telecommunication towers and antennas should be transferred
to the Park Reserve Fund.



      (5)   Towers for commercial wireless telecommunications
services shall only be allowed subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall also operate as a public utility structure;



         (b)   Shall be located within the public rights-of-way;



         (c)   Shall be limited to 75 feet in height;



         (d)   Shall limit the height of antennas and
communication service devices to 10 feet beyond the height of the structure;



         (e)   No setback shall be required when located in the
public rights-of-way;



         (f)   Turf or other materials shall be established in
the right-of-way consistent with the materials in the right-of-way at the
time of installation;



         (g)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (h)   Shall be protected with corrosive resistant
material;



         (i)   Signage shall not be allowed on the tower other
than danger or warning type signs;



         (j)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment is not able to be collocated on any existing or approved
towers and prove that the planned tower will not interfere with existing
communications for public safety purposes;



         (k)   Must be built to accommodate antennas being placed
at varying heights on the tower;



         (l)   Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible;



         (m)   Shall be surrounded by a security fence 6 feet in
height with a lockable gate;



         (n)   Shall have an exterior finish that minimizes
visibility off-site to the greatest extent possible;



         (o)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (p)   No tower shall be permitted unless the equipment
planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or building within the one-half mile search radius of the
proposed tower for any of the following reasons:



            1.   The necessary equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building and the
existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost, as
certified by a qualified, licensed professional engineer;



            2.   The necessary equipment would cause
interference as to significantly impact the usability of other existing or
planned equipment at the tower, structure, or building and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost, as certified by a qualified,
licensed structural engineer;



            3.   Existing or approved towers and buildings
within the one-half mile search radius cannot or will not accommodate the
planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably, as certified
by a qualified, licensed professional engineer; or



            4.   The applicant, after a good faith effort, is
unable to lease space on an existing or approved tower or building.



         (q)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
improved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site; and



         (r)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating
anticipated sites for future location for communication towers and/or
communication device(s)/apparatus.



      (6)   Other accessory uses customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.



   (E)   Design standards. Within the Office Business Zone, no land
shall be used, and no structure shall be constructed or used, except in
conformance with the following minimum requirements:



      (1)   Density.



         (a)   Minimum lot area: one acre; and



         (b)   Maximum floor area ratio: .50.



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface percentage: 75%;



      (3)   Lot specifications.



         (a)   Minimum lot width: 100 feet;



         (b)   Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet;



         (c)   Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet;



         (d)   Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet; and



         (e)   Minimum side or rear yard setback from residential
zones: 50 feet.



      (4)   Maximum height: 55 feet without a conditional use permit.



(2013 Code, § 11.38)  (Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 479, passed
3-13-1997; Ord. 482, passed 5-15-1997; Ord. 528, passed 10-29-1998; Ord. 563,
passed 11-25-1999; Ord. 741, passed 12-1-2005; Ord. 813, passed 2-26-2009;
Ord. 903, passed 3-17-2015; Ord. 927, passed 1-19-2016)



§ 151.043  CENTRAL BUSINESS ZONE (B-3).



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Central Business Zone is to
provide a zone which accommodates the unique character of the central
business area in terms of land uses and development patterns.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within the Central Business Zone, no structure
or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:



      (1)   Retail establishments;



      (2)   Public buildings;



      (3)   Medical or dental clinics;



      (4)   Utility services;



      (5)   Utility service structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall not be a water tower or electrical
substation or a building constructed to house sanitary lift station controls;



         (b)   Shall be 20 feet or less in height;



         (c)   May be used only to provide weather protection for
utility equipment;



         (d)   Shall be designed, placed, and landscaped as
necessary to assure that it blends with the neighboring uses, and is
unobtrusive; and



         (e)   Shall comply with all applicable design standards.



      (6)   Dwellings when combined with another permitted use;



      (7)   Restaurants, Class I; except those having an outdoor
patio or congregation area that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m.
and where the nearest point of the property on which the restaurant is
located is less than 100 feet from the nearest point of the property where a
residential use is located;



      (8)   Restaurants, Class II, except those having an outdoor
patio or congregation area that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m.
and where the nearest point of the property on which the restaurant is
located is less than 100 feet from the nearest point of the property where a
residential use is located.



      (9)   Administrative, executive, and professional offices;



      (10)   Financial institutions;



      (11)   Hotels;



      (12)   Single- and mixed-use developments which comply with §
151.048, and have received approval from the City Council.



      (13)   Uses having a drive-up or drive-through window, subject
to the following requirements:



         (a)   Shall be screened to a height of 6 feet from any
adjacent residential zone;



         (b)   Shall not have a public address system which is
audible from any residential property;



         (c)   Shall provide stacking for at least 6 vehicles per
aisle. The required stacking shall not interfere with internal circulation
patterns or with designated parking facilities, and shall not be located in
any public right-of-way, private access easement, or within the required
parking setback; and



         (d)   Trash receptacles, including, but not limited to,
dumpsters, shall be stored in fully enclosed areas, including the top. The
enclosed areas shall be constructed of similar and/or complementary materials
to the principal structure and meet the standards of this code of ordinances.



      (14)   Relocated structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall obtain a moving permit from the city under
§ 111.07;



         (b)   Prior to moving, the applicant shall have given
cash, a cashier’s check, or letter of credit as a financial guarantee to
the city to ensure completion of all work. The financial guarantee shall be
in an amount equal to the Building Official’s estimate of the cost to bring
the structure into compliance with the Building Code;



         (c)   The structure shall meet all requirements of the
Building Code within 6 months after moving;



         (d)   If the structure is not in full compliance with
the Building Code after 6 months of moving, the city, in its sole discretion,
may draw on the financial guarantee and take whatever steps it deems
necessary to bring the relocated structure into compliance with the Building
Code. In the event the city draws on the financial guarantee, 10% of the
total guarantee shall be paid to the city as its administrative fee;



         (e)   The applicant shall provide the Building
Department with all plan review comments and inspection records from Building
Codes and STDS Division and from the city of origin where constructed;



         (f)   An approved county highway moving permit will be
required for the moving of the structure;



         (g)   The structure shall be required to meet all
setbacks, design, and performance standards specified in this code of
ordinances, unless otherwise approved; and



         (h)   Repair of any damage to city streets as a result
of relocating the structure shall be paid for by the applicant.



      (15)   Brewpubs.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Within the Central Business Zone, no
structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by conditional
use permit:



      (1)   Restaurants, Class I or Class II, that have an outdoor
patio or congregation area that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m.
and where the nearest point of the property on which the restaurant is
located is less than 100 feet from the nearest point of the property where a
residential use is located.  Additional standards for such uses are
contained in § 151.013;



      (2)   Commercial recreation, minor;



      (3)   Theaters;



      (4)   Bus terminals and taxi stands;



      (5)   Multiple-family dwellings which are not attached to a
permitted use;



      (6)   Printing or publishing facilities;



      (7)   Private lodges and clubs;



      (8)   Parking facilities open to the public;



      (9)   Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics;



      (10)   Taverns having an outdoor patio or congregation area
that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m. and where the nearest
point of the property on which the tavern is located is less than 100 feet
from the nearest point of the property where a residential use is located.
Additional standards for such uses are contained in § 151.013;



      (11)   Gas stations;



      (12)   Bed and breakfast inns;



      (13)   Funeral homes;



      (14)   Day care facilities;



      (15)   Adult day care centers as conditional use, subject to
the following conditions: The adult day care centers shall:



         (a)   Serve 13 or more persons;



         (b)   Provide proof of an adequate water and sewer
system if not served by municipal utilities;



         (c)   Have outdoor leisure/recreation areas located and
designed to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas;



         (d)   1.   The total indoor space available for use
by participants must equal at least 40 square feet for each day care
participant and each day care staff member present at the center. When a
center is located in a multi-functional organization, the center may share a
common space with the multi-functional organization if the required space
available for use by participants is maintained while the center is operating.



            2.   In determining the square footage of usable
indoor space available, a center must not count:



               a.   Hallways, stairways, closets, offices,
restrooms, and utility and storage areas;



               b.   More than 25% of the space occupied by
the furniture or equipment used by participants or staff; or



               c.   In a multi-functional organization, any
space occupied by persons associated with the multi-functional organization
while participants are using common space.



         (e)   Provide proof of state, federal, and other
governmental licensing agency approval; and



         (f)   Comply with all other state licensing requirements.



      (16)   Structures over 45 feet in height;



      (17)   Developments containing more than one principal
structure per lot;



      (18)   Farm wineries producing less than 50,000 gallons of
wine per calendar year with tasting rooms;



      (19)   Micro-distilleries with tasting rooms;



      (20)   Small breweries with taprooms;



      (21)   Utility structures which do not meet the standard
conditions under the permitted uses;



      (22)   Churches and other places of worship; or



      (23)   Other uses similar to those permitted by this division
(C), upon a determination by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, may be
allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Within the Central Business Zone,
the following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any incidental repair or processing necessary to conduct
a permitted principal use;



      (2)   Private garages or off-street parking;



      (3)   Temporary construction buildings;



      (4)   Decorative landscape features;



      (5)   Communication service apparatus/device(s) as permitted
accessory uses, subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall be co-located on an existing tower or an
existing structure. Any co-located apparatus/device shall not extend more
than 2 feet above the facade, parapet, roof, or other portion of any
structure. Such co-located apparatus/device shall be designed and located in
such a way that its appearance and surface finish minimizes visibility
off-site;



         (b)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (c)   Signage shall not be allowed on the communication
service device(s)/apparatus other than danger or warning type signs;



         (d)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment will not interfere with existing communications for public
safety purposes;



         (e)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (f)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
approved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site;



         (g)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating all
anticipated future location sites for communication towers and/or
communication devices(s)/apparatus;



         (h)   Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
will only be considered for city parks when the following conditions exist
and if those areas are recommended by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
and approved by the City Council:



            1.   City parks of sufficient size and character
that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use; and



            2.   Commercial recreation areas and major play
fields used primarily by adults.



         (i)   All revenue generated through the lease of a city
park for wireless telecommunication towers and antennas should be transferred
to the Park Reserve Fund.



      (6)   Towers for commercial wireless telecommunications
services shall only be allowed subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall also operate as a public utility structure;



         (b)   Shall be located within the public rights-of-way;



         (c)   Shall be limited to 75 feet in height;



         (d)   Shall limit the height of antennas and
communication service devices to 10 feet beyond the height of the structure;



         (e)   No setback shall be required when located in the
public rights-of-way;



         (f)   Turf or other materials shall be established in
the right-of-way consistent with the materials in the right-of-way at the
time of installation;



         (g)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (h)   Shall be protected with corrosive resistant
material;



         (i)   Signage shall not be allowed on the tower other
than danger or warning type signs;



         (j)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment is not able to be collocated on any existing or approved
towers and prove that the planned tower will not interfere with existing
communications for public safety purposes;



         (k)   Must be built to accommodate antennas being placed
at varying heights on the tower;



         (l)   Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible;



         (m)   Shall be surrounded by a security fence 6 feet in
height with a lockable gate;



         (n)   Shall have an exterior finish that minimizes
visibility off-site to the greatest extent possible;



         (o)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (p)   No tower shall be permitted unless the equipment
planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or building within the one-half mile search radius of the
proposed tower for any of the following reasons:



            1.   The necessary equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building and the
existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost, as
certified by a qualified, licensed professional engineer;



            2.   The necessary equipment would cause
interference as to significantly impact the usability of other existing or
planned equipment at the tower, structure, or building and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost, as certified by a qualified,
licensed structural engineer;



            3.   Existing or approved towers and buildings
within the one-half mile search radius cannot or will not accommodate the
planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably, as certified
by a qualified, licensed professional engineer; or



            4.   The applicant, after a good faith effort, is
unable to lease space on an existing or approved tower or building.



         (r)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
improved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site; and



         (s)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating
anticipated sites for future location for communication towers and/or
communication device(s)/apparatus.



      (7)   Other accessory uses customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.



   (E)   Design standards. Within the Central Business Zone, no land
shall be used, and no structure shall be constructed or used, except in
conformance with the following minimum requirements:



      (1)   Density.



         (a)   Minimum lot area: 3,000 square feet; and



         (b)   Maximum floor area ratio: 4.0.



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface percentage: 100%;



      (3)   Lot specifications.



         (a)   Minimum lot width: 20 feet;



         (b)   Minimum front yard setback: Zero feet;



         (c)   Minimum side yard setback: Zero feet; and



         (d)   Minimum rear yard setback: Zero feet



      (4)   Maximum height: 45 feet without a conditional use permit.



(2013 Code, § 11.40)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 96, passed
11-11-1982; Ord. 117, passed 4-28-1983; Ord. 159, passed 2-28-1985; Ord. 246,
passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 264, passed 5-26-1989; Ord. 279, passed 12-1-1989;
Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 479, passed 3-13-1997; Ord. 482, passed
5-15-1997; Ord. 498, passed 9-4-1997; Ord. 528, passed 10-29-1998; Ord. 563,
passed 11-25-1999; Ord. 597, passed 4-26-2001; Ord. 741, passed 12-1-2005;
Ord. 813, passed 2-26-2009; Ord. 877, passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 903, passed
3-17-2015; Ord. 915, passed 9-1-2015; Ord. 927, passed 1-19-2016)



§ 151.044  MAJOR RECREATION ZONE (MR).



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Major Recreation Zone is to create
a high quality environment for large amusement and recreation attractions
with a regional draw, with a high degree of land use compatibility and street
efficiency. It is further the intent of the Zone to protect existing
landscape features, to preserve open space, to sensitively integrate
development with the natural landscape, and to require the planning of entire
land ownerships as a unit rather than permit piecemeal or scattered small
developments.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within the Major Recreation Zone, no structure
or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses;



      (1)   Public recreation;



      (2)   Restaurants, Class I; except those having an outdoor
patio or congregation area that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m.
and where the nearest point of the property on which the restaurant is
located is less than 100 feet from the nearest point of the property where a
residential use is located;



      (3)   Restaurants, Class II; except those having an outdoor
patio or congregation area that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m.
and where the nearest point of the property on which the restaurant is
located is less than 100 feet from the nearest point of the property where a
residential use is located.



      (4)   Public buildings;



      (5)   Utility services;



      (6)   Utility service structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall not be a water tower or electrical
substation or a building constructed to house sanitary lift station controls;



         (b)   Shall be 20 feet or less in height;



         (c)   May be used only to provide weather protection for
utility equipment;



         (d)   Shall be designed, placed, and landscaped as
necessary to assure that it blends with the neighboring uses, and is
unobtrusive;



         (e)   Shall comply with all applicable design standards;
and



         (f)   Single- and mixed-use developments which comply
with § 151.048, and have received approval from the City Council;



      (7)   Uses having a drive-up or drive-through window, subject
to the following requirements:



         (a)   Shall be screened to a height of six feet from any
adjacent residential zone;



         (b)   Shall not have a public address system which is
audible from any residential property;



         (c)   Shall provide stacking for at least six vehicles
per aisle. The required stacking shall not interfere with internal
circulation patterns or with designated parking facilities, and shall not be
located in any public right-of-way, private access easement, or within the
required parking setback;



         (d)   Trash receptacles, including, but not limited to,
dumpsters, shall be stored in any enclosed areas, including the top. The
enclosed areas shall be constructed of similar and/or complementary materials
to the principal structure and meet the standards of this code of ordinances.



      (8)   Relocated structures, subject to the following
requirements.



         (a)   Shall obtain a moving permit from the city under
§ 111.07;



         (b)   Prior to moving, the applicant shall have given
cash, a cashier's check, or letter of credit as a financial guarantee to the
city to ensure completion of all work. The financial guarantee shall be in an
amount equal to the building official's estimate of the cost to bring the
structure into compliance with the building code;



         (c)   The structure shall meet all requirements of the
building code within six months after moving;



         (d)   If the structure is not in full compliance with
the building code after six months of moving, the city, in its sole
discretion, may draw on the financial guarantee and take whatever steps it
deems necessary to bring the relocated structure into compliance with the
building code. In the event the city draws on the financial guarantee, 10% of
the total guarantee shall be paid to the city as its administrative fee;



         (e)   The applicant shall provide the building
department with all plan review comments and inspection records from Building
Codes and STDS Division and from the city of origin where constructed;



         (f)   An approved county highway moving permit will be
required for the moving of the structure;



         (g)   The structure shall be required to meet all
setbacks, design, and performance standards specified in this code of
ordinances, unless otherwise approved; and



         (h)   Repair of any damage to city streets as a result
of relocating the structure shall be paid for by the applicant.



      (9)   Brewpubs.



      (10)   Taverns, except those having an outdoor patio or
congregation area that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m. and
where the nearest point of the property on which the tavern is located is
less than 100 feet from the nearest point of the property where a residential
use is located.



   (C)   Conditional or planned unit development uses. Within the Major
Recreation Zone, no structure or land shall be used for the following uses
except by conditional use permit or planned unit development:



      (1)   Restaurants, Class I or Class II, that have an outdoor
patio or congregation area that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m.
and where the nearest point of the property on which the restaurant is
located is less than 100 feet from the nearest point of the property where a
residential use is located. Additional standards for such uses are contained
in § 151.013;



      (2)   Commercial recreation, major or minor;



      (3)   Hotels, motels, and conference centers;



      (4)   Horse care uses including boarding, training, showing,
grooming, and veterinary clinic facilities;



      (5)   Retail uses and entertainment facilities;



      (6)   Administrative, executive, and professional offices;



      (7)   Health and athletic facilities;



      (8)   Private lodges and clubs;



      (9)   Day care facilities;



      (10)   Adult day care centers as conditional use, subject to
the following conditions: the adult day care centers shall:



         (a)   Serve 13 or more persons;



         (b)   Provide proof of an adequate water and sewer
system if not served by municipal utilities;



         (c)   Have outdoor leisure/recreation areas located and
designed to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas;



         (d)   1.   The total indoor space available for use
by participants must equal at least 40 square feet for each day care
participant and each day care staff member present at the center. When a
center is located in a multi-functional organization, the center may share a
common space with the  multi-functional organization if the required space
available for use by participants is maintained while the center is operating.



            2.   In determining the square footage of usable
indoor space available, a center must not count:



               A.   Hallways, stairways, closets, offices,
restrooms, and utility and storage areas;



               B.   More than 25% of the space occupied by
the furniture or equipment used by participants or staff; or



               C.   In a mufti-functional organization, any
space occupied by persons associated with the multi-functional organization
while participants are using common space.



         (e)   Provide proof of state, federal, and other
governmental licensing agency approval; and



         (f)   Comply with all other state licensing requirements.



      (11)   Structures over the height allowed based on their
setback;



      (12)   Developments containing more than one principal
structure per lot;



      (13)   Farm wineries producing less than 50,000 gallons of
wine per calendar year;



      (14)   Micro-distilleries;



      (15)   Small breweries with taprooms;



      (16)   Utility structures which do not meet the standard
conditions under the permitted uses;



      (17)   Power generation facilities;



      (18)   Churches and other places of worship;



      (19)   Taverns having an outdoor patio or congregation area
that customers are allowed to use after 10:00 p.m. and where the nearest
point of the property on which the tavern is located is less than 100 feet
from the nearest point of the property where a residential use is located.
Additional standards for such uses are contained in § 151.013;



      (20)   Other uses similar to those permitted by this division
(C), upon a determination by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, may be
allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit; or



      (21)   Residential uses where it is an incidental use of no
more than 20% of the total land area and is part of a planned unit
development.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Within the major recreation zone,
the following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Parking and loading spaces;



      (2)   Temporary construction buildings;



      (3)   Decorative landscape features;



      (4)   Communication service apparatus/device(s) as permitted
accessory uses, subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall be co-located on an existing tower or an
existing structure;



         (b)   Must not exceed 175 feet in total height
(including the extension of any communication service device(s) apparatus);



         (c)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (d)   Signage shall not be allowed on the communication
service device(s)/apparatus other than danger or warning type signs;



         (e)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment will not interfere with existing communications for public
safety purposes;



         (f)   Shall be located and have an exterior finish that
minimizes visibility off-site to the maximum extent possible;



         (g)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (h)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
approved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site;



         (i)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating all
anticipated future location sites for communication towers and/or
communication devices(s)/apparatus;



         (j)   Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
will only be considered for city parks when the following conditions exist
and if those areas are recommended by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
and approved by the City Council:



            1.   City parks of sufficient size and character
that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use; and



            2.   Commercial recreation areas and major play
fields used primarily by adults.



         (k)   All revenue generated through the lease of a city
park for wireless telecommunication towers and antennas should be transferred
to the park reserve fund.



      (5)   Towers for commercial wireless telecommunications
services shall only be allowed subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall also operate as a public utility structure;



         (b)   Shall be located within the public rights-of-way;



         (c)   Shall be limited to 75 feet in height;



         (d)   Shall limit the height of antennas and
communication service devices to ten feet beyond the height of the structure;



         (e)   No setback shall be required when located in the
public rights-of-way;



         (f)   Turf or other materials shall be established in
the right-of-way consistent with the materials in the right-of-way at the
time of installation;



         (g)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (h)   Shall be protected with corrosive resistant
material;



         (i)   Signage shall not be allowed on the tower other
than danger or warning type signs;



         (j)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment is not able to be collocated on any existing or approved
towers and prove that the planned tower will not interfere with existing
communications for public safety purposes;



         (k)   Must be built to accommodate antennas being placed
at varying heights on the tower;



         (1)   Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible;



         (m)   Shall be surrounded by a security fence six feet
in height with a lockable gate;



         (n)   Shall have an exterior finish that minimizes
visibility off-site to the greatest extent possible;



         (o)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the state building code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (p)   No tower shall be permitted unless the equipment
planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or building within the one-half mile search radius of the
proposed tower for any of the following reasons:



            1.   The necessary equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building and the
existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost, as
certified by a qualified, licensed professional engineer;



            2.   The necessary equipment would cause
interference as to significantly impact the usability of other existing or
planned equipment at the tower, structure, or building and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost, as certified by a qualified,
licensed structural engineer;



            3.   Existing or approved towers and buildings
within the one-half mile search radius cannot or will not accommodate the
planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably, as certified
by a qualified, licensed professional engineer; or



            4.   The applicant, after a good faith effort, is
unable to lease space on an existing or approved tower or building.



         (q)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
improved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site; and



         (r)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating
anticipated sites for future location for communication towers and/or
communication device(s)/apparatus.



      (6)   Other accessory uses customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.



   (E)   Design standards. Within the Major Recreation Zone, no land
shall be used, and no structure shall be constructed or used, except in
conformance with the following minimum requirements:



      (1)   Density: minimum lot area: ten acres; 40 dwelling units
per acre;



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface percentage: 80%; and



      (3)   Lot specifications.



         (a)   Minimum lot width: 300 feet;



         (b)   Minimum front yard setback: one-half of that
structure's height or 50 feet, whichever is greater; residential setback can
be from zero to 30 feet. Zero setback is allowed in areas where there is an
urban character that includes pedestrian connections and wider than required
sidewalks with boulevard street trees.



         (c)   Minimum side yard setback: one-half of that
structure's height or 25 feet, whichever is greater; residential is 20 feet.



         (d)   Minimum rear yard setback: one-half of that
structure's height or 30 feet, whichever is greater; and residential is 20
feet.



         (e)   Minimum rear yard setback from residential zones:
one-half of that structure's height or 50 feet, whichever is greater and
residential use to residential zone is 20 feet.



      (4)   Minimum access spacing.



         (a)   County Roads 83 and 16: no access is allowed other
than to public and private streets with a minimum spacing of 600 feet; and



         (b)   Shenandoah Drive and any continuation thereof to
and including Secretariat Drive and Fourth Avenue. Street and driveway access
points must be separated by a minimum of 300 feet.



(2013 Code, § 11.42)  (Ord. 204, passed 7-31-1986; Ord. 264, passed
5-26-1989; Ord. 328, passed 1-30-1992; Ord. 342, passed 10-29-1992; Ord. 377,
passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 479, passed 3-13-1997; Ord. 482, passed 5-15-1997; Ord.
528, passed 10-29-1998; Ord. 563, passed 11-25-1999; Ord. 741, passed
12-1-2005; Ord. 813, passed 2-26-2009; Ord. 877, passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 903,
passed 3-17-2015; Ord. 909, passed 8-18-2015; Ord. 915, passed 9-1-2015; Ord.
927, passed 1-19-2016; Ord. 966, passed 7-5-2017)



§ 151.045  LIGHT INDUSTRY ZONE (I-1).



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Light Industry Zone is to provide
an area for industrial, light manufacturing, and office uses which are
generally not obtrusive and which serve as a transition between more
intensive industrial sites and residential and business land uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within the Light Industry Zone, no structure
or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:



      (1)   Warehousing and wholesaling conducted entirely within an
enclosed building, except those involving a project that fits within one of
the Mandatory EIS Categories under Minn. Rules 4410.4400;



      (2)   Research laboratories conducted entirely within an
enclosed building;



      (3)   Establishments supplying goods or services primarily to
industrial uses;



      (4)   Agricultural uses, but limited to the growing of field
crops;



      (5)   Utility services;



      (6)   Utility service structures;



      (7)   Offices within the principal structure and directly
associated with another permitted use;



      (8)   Public buildings;



      (9)   Single- and mixed-use developments which comply with
section § 151.048, and have received approval from the City Council;



      (10)   Office buildings;



      (11)   Breweries;



      (12)   Distilleries; or



      (13)   Wineries.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Within the Light Industry Zone, no structure
or land shall be used for the following uses except by conditional use permit:



      (1)   Manufacturing, fabrication, processing, and assembly
operations conducted entirely within an enclosed building, except those
involving a project that fits within one of the Mandatory EIS Categories
under Minn. Rules 4410.4400;



      (2)   Airports and heliports;



      (3)   Vehicle repair;



      (4)   Landscaping services and contractors;



      (5)   Retail sales of products manufactured, fabricated,
assembled, or stored on-site;



      (6)   Commercial vehicle rental facilities;



      (7)   Self-storage facilities;



      (8)   Industrial or technical training schools;



      (9)   Restaurants, Class I or Class II, contained within a
principal structure and oriented toward serving employees or those working in
the immediate area;



      (10)   Residences for security personnel;



      (11)   Exterior storage;



      (12)   Day care facilities;



      (13)   Adult day care center as conditional use subject to the
following conditions. The adult day care centers shall:



         (a)   Serve 13 or more persons;



         (b)   Provide proof of an adequate water and sewer
system if not served by municipal utilities;



         (c)   Have outdoor leisure/recreation areas located and
designed to minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas;



         (d)   1.   The total indoor space available for use
by participants must equal at least 40 square feet for each day care
participant and each day care staff member present at the center. When a
center is located in a multi-functional organization, the center may share a
common space with the multi- functional organization if the required space
available for use by participants is maintained while the center is operating.



            2.   In determining the square footage of usable
indoor space available, a center must not count:



               a.   Hallways, stairways, closets, offices,
restrooms, and utility and storage areas;



               b.   More than 25% of the space occupied by
the furniture or equipment used by participants or staff; or



               c.   In a multi-functional organization, any
space occupied by persons associated with the multi-functional organization
while participants are using common space.



         (e)   Provide proof of state, federal, and other
governmental licensing agency approval; and



         (f)   Comply with all other state licensing requirements.



      (14)   Structures over 45 feet in height;



      (15)   Developments containing more than one principal
structure per lot;



      (16)   Other uses similar to those permitted by this division
(C), upon a determination by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, may be
allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit;



      (17)   Communication service towers as conditional uses,
subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall be a monopole structure;



         (b)   The location of the tower shall comply with the
minimum setback requirements of the zone in which it is to be located. Towers
located closer to a property line than a distance equal to the height of the
tower shall be designed and engineered to collapse within the distance
between the tower and the property line and supporting documentation shall be
provided to prove this by a professional engineer;



         (c)   Shall not exceed 175 feet in total height
(including the extension of any antenna);



         (d)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (e)   Shall be protected with corrosive resistant
material;



         (f)   Signage shall not be allowed on the tower other
than danger or warning type signs;



         (g)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment is not able to be co-located on any existing or approved
towers and prove that the planned tower will not interfere with existing
communications for public safety purposes;



         (h)   Must be built to accommodate antennas being placed
at varying heights on the tower;



         (i)   Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible;



         (j)   Shall be surrounded by a security fence 6 feet in
height with a lockable gate;



         (k)   Shall be located and have an exterior finish that
minimizes visibility off-site to the greatest extent possible;



         (l)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (m)   Equipment and buildings shall be screened from
view by suitable landscaping, except where a design of non-vegetative
screening better reflects and compliments the architectural character of the
surrounding neighborhood;



         (n)   No tower shall be permitted unless the equipment
planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or building within the one-half mile search radius of the
proposed tower for any of the following reasons:



            1.   The necessary equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building and the
existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost, as
certified by a qualified, licensed professional engineer;



            2.   The necessary equipment would cause
interference as to significantly impact the usability of other existing or
planned equipment at the tower, structure, or building and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost, as certified by a qualified,
licensed structural engineer;



            3.   Existing or approved towers and buildings
within the one-half mile search radius cannot or will not accommodate the
planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably, as certified
by a qualified licensed professional engineer; or



            4.   The applicant, after a good faith effort, is
unable to lease space on an existing or approved tower or building.



         (o)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
improved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and the
restoration of the site;



         (p)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating
anticipated sites for future location for communication towers and/or
communication device(s)/apparatus;



         (q)   When towers are to be located in city parks, no
towers should be located in designated conservation areas such as forest
areas, marsh lands, wildlife preserves, nature center parks, picnic areas,
near historical structures, scenic open space areas, and areas of intense
recreational play for children (play fields, swimming pools, playground
equipment, and the like);



         (r)   Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
will only be considered for city parks when the following conditions exist
and if those areas are recommended by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
and approved by the City Council:



            1.   City parks of sufficient size and character
that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use;



            2.   Commercial recreation areas and major play
fields used primarily by adults; and



            3.   All revenue generated through the lease of a
city park for wireless telecommunication towers and antennas should be
transferred to the Park Reserve Fund.



      (18)   Retail auto sales, subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Limit the percentage of retail sales to no more
than 20% of the business;



         (b)   Must serve as an accessory use of the principle
use;



         (c)   Vehicle retail sales limited to used automobiles
only;



         (d)   No person shall operate a retail auto sales
business on property, any part of which is within 200 feet from any property
developed or zoned for residential uses;



         (e)   Shall not store any vehicles which are unlicensed
and inoperative for more than 7 days, except in appropriately designed and
screened storage areas;



         (f)   Shall conduct all repair, assembly, disassembly,
or maintenance of vehicles within a building, except for minor maintenance
such as tire inflation, adding oil and wiper replacement;



         (g)   Shall not have any outside storage or display
except of vehicles for sale;



         (h)   Shall not have a public address system which is
audible from any residential property;



         (i)   Shall screen all storage areas;



         (j)   Shall screen all display areas adjacent to a
residential zone;



         (k)   Shall apply the parking setback to all areas where
vehicles are located;



         (l)   Shall maintain a landscaped buffer 100 feet wide
from any residential zone;



         (m)   All motor vehicle dealers shall be licensed by the
state; and



         (n)   Vehicle sales area is to be paved.



      (19)   Power generation facilities;



      (20)   Taprooms; and



      (21)   Winery/distillery tasting rooms.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Within the Light Industry Zone, the
following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Parking and loading spaces;



      (2)   Temporary construction buildings;



      (3)   Decorative landscape features; and



      (4)   Communication service apparatus/device(s) as permitted
accessory uses, subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall be co-located on an existing tower or an
existing structure;



         (b)   Must not exceed 175 feet in total height including
the extension of any communication service device(s) apparatus);



         (c)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (d)   Signage shall not be allowed on the communication
service device(s)/apparatus other than danger or warning type signs;



         (e)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment will not interfere with existing communications for public
safety purposes;



         (f)   Shall be located and have an exterior finish that
minimizes visibility off-site to the maximum extent possible;



         (g)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (h)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
approved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site;



         (i)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating all
anticipated future location sites for communication towers and/or
communication devices(s)/apparatus;



         (j)   Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
will only be considered for city parks when the following conditions exist
and if those areas are recommended by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
and approved by the City Council:



            1.   City parks of sufficient size and character
that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use; and



            2.   Commercial recreation areas and major play
fields used primarily by adults.



         (k)   All revenue generated through the lease of a city
park for wireless telecommunication towers and antennas should be transferred
to the Park Reserve Fund.



      (5)   Other accessory uses customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.



   (E)   Design standards. Within the Light Industry Zone, no land
shall be used, and no structure shall be constructed or used, except in
conformance with the following minimum requirements:



      (1)   Density.



         (a)   Minimum lot area (with city services): One acre;
and



         (b)   Minimum lot area (without city services): 20 acres.



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface percentage: 75%;



      (3)   Lot specifications.



         (a)   Minimum lot width (with city services): 100 feet;



         (b)   Minimum lot width (without city services): 600
feet;



         (c)   Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet;



         (d)   Minimum side yard setback: 15 feet;



         (e)   Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet;



         (f)   Minimum side or rear yard setback from residential
zones: 100 feet.



      (4)   Maximum height: 45 feet without a conditional use permit.



(2013 Code, § 11.44)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 96, passed
11-11-1982; Ord. 138, passed 11-24-1983; Ord. 186, passed 1-30-1986; Ord.
203, passed 7-10-1986; Ord. 264, passed 5-26-1989; Ord. 279, passed
12-1-1989; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 429, passed 11-2-1995; Ord. 479,
passed 3-13-1997; Ord. 482, passed 5-5-1997; Ord. 528, passed 10-29-1998;
Ord. 563, passed 11-25-1999; Ord. 601, passed 6-28-2001; Ord. 816, passed
4-30-2009; Ord. 877, passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 909, passed 8-18-2015)



§ 151.046  HEAVY INDUSTRY ZONE (I-2).



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Heavy Industry Zone is to provide
an area for industrial uses in locations remote from residential uses and in
which urban services and adequate transportation exist.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within the Heavy Industry Zone, no structure
or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:



      (1)   Motor freight terminals;



      (2)   Manufacturing, fabrication, processing, assembly, and
storage operations, except those involving a project that fits within one of
the Mandatory EIS Categories under Minn. Rules 4410.4400;



      (3)   Warehousing and wholesaling;



      (4)   Commercial vehicle rental facilities;



      (5)   Research laboratories, except those involving a project
that fits within one of the Mandatory EIS Categories under Minn. Rules
4410.4400;



      (6)   Contractors’ supply yards;



      (7)   Retail sales of heavy industrial, manufacturing, or
construction machinery or equipment;



      (8)   Agricultural uses, but limited to the growing of field
crops;



      (9)   Utility services;



      (10)   Utility service structures;



      (11)   Landscaping services and contractors;



      (12)   Establishments supplying goods or services to
industrial users;



      (13)   Public buildings;



      (14)   Adult establishments;



      (15)   Single- and mixed-use developments which comply with §
151.048, and have received approval from the City Council;



      (16)   Breweries;



      (17)   Distilleries; or



      (18)   Wineries.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Within the Heavy Industry Zone, no structure
or land shall be used for the following uses except by conditional use permit:



      (1)   Manufacturing, fabrication, processing, assembly, and
storage operations, and research laboratories, that fit within one of the
Mandatory EIS Categories under Minn. Rules 4410.4400;



      (2)   Retail sales of products manufactured, fabricated,
assembled, or stored on-site;



      (3)   Concrete or asphalt plants;



      (4)   Airports and heliports;



      (5)   Grain elevators;



      (6)   Junkyards;



      (7)   Residences for security personnel;



      (8)   Vehicle repair;



      (9)   Restaurants, Class I or Class II, contained within a
principal structure and oriented toward serving employees or those working in
the immediate area;



      (10)   Recycling or composting facilities;



      (11)   Exterior storage;



      (12)   Structures over 45 feet in height;



      (13)   Developments containing more than one principal
structure per lot;



      (14)   Offices occupying more than 35% of the principal
structure and directly associated with a permitted use;



      (15)   Exhibit spaces, educational facilities, and
interpretive centers, whether publicly or privately operated;



      (16)   Communication service towers as conditional uses,
subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall be a monopole structure;



         (b)   The location of the tower shall comply with the
minimum setback requirements of the zone in which it is to be located. Towers
located closer to a property line than a distance equal to the height of the
tower shall be designed and engineered to collapse within the distance
between the tower and the property line supporting documentation shall be
provided to prove this by a professional engineer;



         (c)   Shall not exceed 175 feet in total height
(including the extension of any antenna);



         (d)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (e)   Shall be protected with corrosive resistant
material;



         (f)   Signage shall not be allowed on the tower other
than danger or warning type signs;



         (g)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment is not able to be co-located on any existing or approved
towers and prove that the planned tower will not interfere with existing
communications for public safety purposes;



         (h)   Must be built to accommodate antennas being placed
at varying heights on the tower;



         (i)   Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible;



         (j)   Shall be surrounded by a security fence 6 feet in
height with a lockable gate;



         (k)   Shall be located and have an exterior finish that
minimizes visibility off-site to the greatest extent possible;



         (l)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (m)   Equipment and buildings shall be screened from
view by suitable landscaping, except where a design of non-vegetative
screening better reflects and compliments the architectural character of the
surrounding neighborhood;



         (n)   No tower shall be permitted unless the equipment
planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or building within the one-half mile search radius of the
proposed tower for any of the following reasons:



            1.   The necessary equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building and the
existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost, as
certified by a qualified, licensed professional engineer;



            2.   The necessary equipment would cause
interference as to significantly impact the usability of other existing or
planned equipment at the tower, structure, or building and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost, as certified by a qualified,
licensed structural engineer;



            3.   Existing or approved towers and buildings
within the one-half mile search radius cannot or will not accommodate the
planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably, as certified
by a qualified licensed professional engineer; or



            4.   The applicant, after a good faith effort, is
unable to lease space on an existing or approved tower or building.



         (o)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
improved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and the
restoration of the site.



         (p)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating
anticipated sites for future location for communication towers and/or
communication device(s)/apparatus;



         (q)    When towers are to be located in city parks, no
towers should be located in designated conservation areas such as forest
areas, marshlands, wildlife preserves, nature center parks, picnic areas,
near historical structures, scenic open space areas, and areas of intense
recreational play for children (play fields, swimming pools, playground
equipment, and the like);



         (r)   Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
will only be considered for city parks when the following conditions exist
and if those areas are recommended by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
and approved by the City Council:



            1.   City parks of sufficient size and character
that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use; and



            2.   Commercial recreation areas and major play
fields used primarily by adults;



         (s)   All revenue generated through the lease of a city
park for wireless telecommunication towers and antennas should be transferred
to the Park Reserve Fund.



      (17)   Power generation facilities;



      (18)   Taprooms;



      (19)   Winery/distillery tasting rooms; or



      (20)   Other uses similar to those permitted by this division
(C), upon a determination by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, may be
allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Within the Heavy Industry Zone, the
following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Parking and loading spaces;



      (2)   Temporary construction buildings;



      (3)   Decorative landscape features;



      (4)   Offices occupying up to 35% of the principal structure
and directly associated with a permitted use;



      (5)   Communication service apparatus/devices(s) as permitted
accessory uses, subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall be co-located on an existing tower or an
existing structure;



         (b)   Must not exceed 175 feet in total height
(including the extension of any communication service device(s) apparatus);



         (c)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (d)   Signage shall not be allowed on the communication
service device(s)/apparatus other than danger or warning type signs;



         (e)    Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment will not interfere with existing communications for public
safety purposes;



         (f)   Shall be located and have an exterior finish that
minimizes visibility off-site to the maximum extent possible;



         (g)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (h)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
approved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site;



         (i)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating all
anticipated future location sites for communication towers and/or
communication devices(s)/apparatus;



         (j)   Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
will only be considered for city parks when the following conditions exist
and if those areas are recommended by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
and approved by the City Council:



            1.   City parks of sufficient size and character
that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use; and



            2.   Commercial recreation areas and major play
fields used primarily by adults;



         (k)   All revenue generated through the lease of a city
park for wireless telecommunication towers and antennas should be transferred
to the Park Reserve Fund.



      (6)   Silos; and



      (7)   Other accessory uses customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.



   (E)   Design standards. Within the Heavy Industry Zone, no land
shall be used, and no structure shall be constructed or used, except in
conformance with the following minimum requirements:



      (1)   Density: Minimum lot area: One acre;



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface percentage: 85%;



      (3)   Lot specifications.



         (a)   Minimum lot width: 100 feet;



         (b)   Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet;



         (c)   Minimum side yard setback: 15 feet;



         (d)   Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet:



         (e)   Minimum side or rear yard setback from residential
zones: 100 feet; and



         (f)   Minimum side or rear yard setback from railroad
right-of-way: Zero feet.



      (4)   Maximum height: 45 feet without a conditional use permit.



(2013 Code, § 11.46)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 59, passed
5-14-1981; Ord. 96, passed 11-11-1982; Ord. 138, passed 11-24-1983; Ord. 158,
passed 1-31-1985; Ord. 203, passed 7-10-1986; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988;
Ord. 264, passed 5-26-1989; Ord. 279, passed 12-1-1989; Ord. 334, passed
5-21-1992; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 429, passed 11-2-1995; Ord. 479,
passed 3-13-1997; Ord. 488, passed 7-17-1997; Ord. 514, passed 2-5-1998; Ord.
528, passed 10-29-1998; Ord. 549, passed 6-3-1999; Ord. 563, passed
11-25-1999; Ord. 672, passed 6-26-2003; Ord. 877, passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 909,
passed 8-18-2015)



§ 151.047  BUSINESS PARK ZONE (BP).



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Business Park Zone is to provide
areas for the development of office, business, and light industrial uses
meeting high standards of design and construction and having close proximity
to major transportation corridors and/or other industrial zones.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Within the Business Park Zone, no structure or
land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:



      (1)   Offices and office buildings;



      (2)   Research laboratories conducted entirely within an
enclosed building; except those involving a project that fits within one of
the Mandatory EIS Categories under Minn. Rules 4410.4400;



      (3)   Manufacturing, fabrication, processing, and assembly
operations conducted entirely within an enclosed building, except those
involving a project that fits within one of the Mandatory EIS Categories
under Minn. Rules 4410.4400;



      (4)   Warehousing and wholesaling operations conducted
entirely within an enclosed building, except those involving a project that
fits within one of the Mandatory EIS Categories under Minn. Rules 4410.4400;



      (5)   Office warehouse and office-showroom facilities;



      (6)   Medical or dental clinics;



      (7)   Agricultural uses, but limited to the growing of field
crops;



      (8)   Utility services;



      (9)   Public buildings;



      (10)   Single- and mixed-use developments which comply with §
151.048, and have received approval from the City Council.



      (11)   Breweries;



      (12)   Distilleries; and



      (13)   Wineries.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Within the Business Park Zone, no structure
or land shall be used for any of the following uses except by conditional use
permit:



      (1)   Health and athletic club facilities;



      (2)   Commercial vehicle rental facilities;



      (3)   Industrial or technical training schools;



      (4)   Restaurants, Class I or Class II, contained within a
principal structure, oriented toward serving employees, and not exceeding 10%
of the gross floor area of the building;



      (5)   Manufacturing, fabrication, processing, and assembly
operations; warehousing and wholesaling operations; and research
laboratories, that fit within one of the Mandatory EIS Categories under Minn
Rule 4410.4400;



      (6)   Retail establishments not exceeding 10% of the gross
floor area of the building;



      (7)   Developments containing more than one principal
structure per lot;



      (8)   Hotels;



      (9)   Heliports;



      (10)   Communication service towers, subject to the following
conditions:



         (a)   Shall be a monopole structure;



         (b)   The location of the tower shall comply with the
minimum setback requirements of the zone in which it is to be located. Towers
located closer to a property line than a distance equal to the height of the
tower shall be designed and engineered to collapse within the distance
between the tower and the property line and supporting documentation shall be
provided to prove this by a professional engineer;



         (c)   Shall not exceed 175 feet in total height
(including the extension of any antenna);



         (d)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (e)   Shall be protected with corrosive resistant
material;



         (f)   Signage shall not be allowed on the tower other
than danger or warning type signs;



         (g)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment is not able to be co-located on any existing or approved
towers and prove that the planned tower will not interfere with existing
communications for public safety purposes;



         (h)   Must be built to accommodate antennas being placed
at varying heights on the tower;



         (i)   Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible;



         (j)   Shall be surrounded by a security fence 6 feet in
height with a lockable gate;



         (k)   Shall be located and have an exterior finish that
minimizes visibility off-site to the greatest extent possible;



         (l)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (m)   Equipment and buildings shall be screened from
view by suitable landscaping, except where a design of non-vegetative
screening better reflects and compliments the architectural character of the
surrounding neighborhood;



         (o)   No tower shall be permitted unless the equipment
planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or building within one-half mile search radius of the proposed
tower for any of the following reasons:



            1.   The necessary equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building and the
existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost, as
certified by a qualified, licensed professional engineer;



            2.   The necessary equipment would cause
interference as to significantly impact the usability of other existing or
planned equipment at the tower, structure, or building and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost, as certified by a qualified,
licensed structural engineer;



            3.   Existing or approved towers and buildings
within the one-half mile search radius cannot or will not accommodate the
planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably, as certified
by a qualified, licensed professional engineer; or



            4.   The applicant, after a good faith effort, is
unable to lease space on an existing or approved tower or building.



         (p)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
improved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site;



         (q)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating
anticipated sites for future location for communication towers and/or
communication device(s)/apparatus;



         (r)   When towers are to be located in city parks, no
towers should be located in designated conservation areas such as forest
areas, marsh lands, wildlife preserves, nature center parks, picnic area,
near historical structures, scenic open space areas, and areas of intense
recreational play for children (play fields, swimming pool, playground
equipment, and the like);



         (s)   Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
will only be considered for city parks when the following conditions exist
and if those areas are recommended by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
and approved by the City Council:



            1.   City parks of sufficient size and character
that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use; and



            2.   Commercial recreation areas and major play
fields used primarily by adults.



         (t)   All revenue generated through the lease of a city
park for wireless telecommunication towers and antennas should be transferred
to the Park Reserve Fund.



      (11)   Structures over 45 feet in height;



      (12)   Taprooms;



      (13)   Winery/distillery tasting rooms; and



      (14)   Other uses similar to those in this division (C), upon
a determination by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals may be allowed upon
the issuance of a conditional use permit.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Parking and loading spaces;



      (2)   Temporary construction buildings;



      (3)   Decorative landscape features;



      (4)   Communication tower service apparatus/devices subject to
the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall be co-located on an existing tower or an
existing structure;



         (b)   Must not exceed 175 feet in total height
(including the extension of any communication service device(s)/apparatus);



         (c)   Lights and/or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (d)   Signage shall not be allowed on the communication
service device(s)/apparatus other than danger or warning type signs;



         (e)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment will not interfere with existing communications for public
safety purposes;



         (f)   Shall be located and have an exterior finish that
minimizes visibility off-site to the maximum extent possible;



         (g)   Applicable provisions of this code of ordinances,
including the provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be
complied with;



         (h)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
improved state. The user of the tower and/or accompanying accessory
facilities shall be responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration
of the site;



         (i)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating all
anticipated future location sites for communication towers and/or
communication devices(s)/apparatus.



         (j)   Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
will only be considered for city parks when the following conditions exist
and if those areas are recommended by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
and approved by the City Council:



            1.   City parks of sufficient size and character
that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use; and



            2.   Commercial recreation areas and major play
fields used primarily by adults.



         (k)   All revenue generated through the lease of a city
park for wireless telecommunication towers and antennas should be transferred
to the Park Reserve Fund.



      (5)   Other accessory uses customarily appurtenant to a
permitted or conditional use, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.



   (E)   Design standards.



      (1)   Minimum lot area: One acre;



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface coverage: 80%;



      (3)   Lot specifications.



         (a)   Minimum lot width: 100 feet;



         (b)   Building setbacks.



            1.   Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet;



            2.   Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet;



            3.   Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet; and



            4.   Minimum side or rear yard setback from
residential zone: 100 feet.



      (4)   Dumpsters, trash handing equipment, and the like.
Dumpsters, trash handling equipment, and recycling equipment shall be stored
within the principal structure, or within an accessory structure constructed
of the same materials as the principal structure;



      (5)   Lighting fixtures. Lighting fixtures shall be of
downcast, cut-off type parking, or drive aisle setbacks:



         (a)   Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet;



         (b)   Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet; and



         (c)   Minimum rear yard setback: 10 feet minimum side or
rear yard setback from residential zone: 100 feet.



      (6)   Maximum height: 45 feet without a conditional use permit.



   (F)   Construction materials. In the Business Park Zone, only the
following materials may be used for the exterior finish of any principal or
accessory building: face brick; stone; glass; decorative concrete block;
architecturally treated concrete; cast in place or precast concrete; stucco;
and materials substantially similar to these as determined by the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals. Steel, aluminum, copper, or other high quality,
durable metal, and wood may be used, but only as an accent, trim, or frame,
and not as siding for a substantial portion of any building facade.



(2013 Code, § 11.47)  (Ord. 547, passed 6-10-1999; Ord. 563, passed
11-25-1999; Ord. 877, passed 12-3-2013)



§ 151.048  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of the Planned Unit Development
Overlay District (PUD) to encourage innovation, variety, and creativity in
site planning and architectural design; to promote flexibility in land
development and redevelopment; to maximize development compatibility; to
encourage the planning of large parcels of land as a unit; to provide for
greater efficiency in the use of land, streets, and energy; to preserve and
protect environmentally sensitive site features and historically significant
features; to preserve open space; and to provide quality living, working,
shopping, and recreating environments for residents and visitors. It is not
the intent of this section to establish a separate zoning classification.



   (B)   Areas covered.



      (1)   The Planned Unit Development Overlay District may be
applied within any zone.



      (2)   Any or all contiguous land owned by the applicant shall
be included in a planned unit development when necessary to meet the purpose
of this District.



   (C)   Permitted, conditional, and accessory uses.



      (1)   Uses allowed in a single-use planned unit development
shall be limited to the permitted, conditional, and accessory uses allowed in
the underlying zone. A single-use planned unit development is a development
consisting solely of one of the following use categories: residential;
commercial; or industrial.



      (2)   Uses allowed in a mixed-use planned unit development may
consist of uses consistent with those uses permitted, conditional, and
accessory allowed in the underlying zoning district and/or a similar use
zoning district, The city may place more restrictive conditions on the
mixture of uses within a planned unit development to ensure preservation of
the public health, safety, and welfare; compliance with the intent of this
chapter; and that land uses occurring within the planned unit development,
and between the planned unit development and the surrounding land uses, do
not conflict. A MIXED-USE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT is a development
consisting of any combination of residential, commercial, or industrial uses.



   (D)   Retail centers.



      (1)   Shall not be subject to a minimum or maximum project
size;



      (2)   Shall not have a public address system from any part of
the facility which is audible from any residential property;



      (3)   Shall maintain a landscaped buffer 100 feet wide from
any residential zone;



      (4)   Shall submit a lighting plan for the project area to
verify that on-site lighting is not spilling over to adjacent properties and
is in compliance with the lighting requirements of this code of ordinances;



      (5)   Shall provide berming and landscaping consistent with
the requirements of this code of ordinances and/or as deemed necessary by the
City Council to provide screening and/or transition areas between the site
and adjoining uses;



      (6)   All mechanical components, including, but not limited
to, rooftop components, on-site shall be screened. Said screening can be
accomplished through painting, paneling, or other material as deemed
acceptable by the Zoning Administrator;



      (7)   Trash compactors shall be fully screened from view.
Other trash receptacles, including, but not limited to, dumpsters, shall be
stored in fully enclosed areas, including the top;



      (8)   Building materials used on the sides and rear of the
building(s) shall be of the same or similar materials and colors as the front
to the building(s);



      (9)   Signage shall be limited to the size and height
requirements of this code of ordinances. However, free standing signage along
city streets shall be limited to a monument type design and shall be
constructed of face brick, stone, decorative block, painted block, or other
similar materials. If multiple retail establishments exist within the retail
center, only one free standing business complex sign shall be allowed per
street frontage;



      (10)   Shall provide an internal pedestrian access system;



      (11)   Outdoor storage or display of goods for sale shall
require specific approval by the City Council;



      (12)   Shall provide access points in locations approved by
the City Engineer to ensure proper ingress/egress to the site;



      (13)   Shall allow lots without public street frontage, if
proper cross easements are provided to ensure accessibility;



      (14)   Uses listed as conditional uses in the underlying
zoning district may be allowed within a retail center PUD upon approval by
the City Council. Such uses shall be held to standards outlined in § 151.013
(conditional use permit standards for business zones), unless otherwise
modified by the City Council. A separate CUP review process shall not be
required when these uses are incorporated into the retail center PUD review;
and



      (15)   Staff shall verify that the retail center is in
compliance with its requirements prior to the issuance of any certificate of
occupancy within the retail center.



   (E)   Design standards.



      (1)   Generally.



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (E),
applicable underlying zoning district requirements other than use
restrictions described in division (C) above, are superseded by the approval
of a PUD development plan by the City Council. The PUD development plan
establishes the requirements for a planned unit development and shall govern
and take precedence over underlying zoning districts provisions except where
the PUD development plan is silent as to a specific provision.



         (b)   In reviewing requests for increases in density or
variations from other requirements beyond that allowed in the underlying
district, the Council may take into account the following factors:



            1.   The open space proposed in the PUD exceeds
the minimum required by this division (E);



            2.   Geologic and/or topographic features unduly
restrict development opportunities on 30% or more of the gross project area;



            3.   Environmental features exist on the site and
the variations are necessary to preserve natural features. Environmental
features may include, but are not limited to, the following defined features:



               a.   Slopes in excess of 4:1;



               b.   Tree cover measuring 6 inches in
diameter and/or 6 feet in height covering 20% or more of the gross project
site; and



               c.   The existence of wetlands, lakes,
marshes, streams, springs, or other natural water bodies.



      (2)   Open space.



         (a)   A planned unit development, which includes
dwellings, shall provide at least 15% of the project area as open space. If
the planned unit development is to be developed in phases, the applicant must
include the entire site in the plat of the first phase of development and
designate public open space.



         (b)   Open space is a landscaped area or areas available
for the common use of and is accessible by all residents or occupants of the
buildings within the planned unit development. Open space shall be calculated
on a net basis which excludes private yards, private streets from back of
curb to back of curb, public rights-of-way, any areas within an easement; or
any other non-recreational impervious surface area. Dedicated parkland shall
not be used in calculating open space for a development. The applicant shall
be required to submit, along with the PUD site plan, an open space plan
illustrating the use and/or function of the open space area or areas. The
open space plan shall include any proposed improvements and/or design of the
open space area.



         (c)   PRIVATE YARDS shall be defined as that portion of
a lot not occupied by a structure and under the ownership and/or control of
the individual property owner or those areas adjacent to the residential
units which are typically viewed and/or utilized by the occupants of the
residential units as an extension of their dwelling unit.



         (d)   There shall not be any credit given to the open
space requirements.



      (3)   Contiguous land. The proposed planned unit development
shall be comprised of at least 10 acres of contiguous land. PUDs of 5 to 10
acres in size shall be allowed if the following criteria are met:



         (a)   Regional easements cover 30% or more of the
project area;



         (b)   Environmental features exist on the site which
will be preserved through the PUD development process; and/or



         (c)   The subject site is adjacent to an existing PUD
and the PUD process will provide additional compatibility between the PUDs.



      (4)   Parcels of land under applicant’s control. The parcels
of land, which are the subject of the PUD application, shall be under the
applicant’s control at the time of application. The development plan shall
provide for the development of all of the parcel(s) included in the
application. In addition, the development plan must include provisions for
the preservation of natural amenities.



      (5)   Total coverage. The total coverage of residential
buildings shall not exceed 20% of the total residential area in the PUD.



      (6)   Municipal sewer and water availability. All PUDs shall
have municipal sewer and water service available.



      (7)   Modification prohibited. No design standards shall be
modified in any way, which violates or compromises the fire and safety codes
of the city.



      (8)   Buildings on platted PUD districts. More than one
building may be placed on one platted lot in a PUD district.



      (9)   PUD proposals. Any PUD plan proposed to be constructed
in stages shall include full details relating to staging and the City Council
may approve or modify, where necessary, any such proposals.



      (10)   Staging. The staging shall include estimates of the
time for beginning and completion of each stage. Such timing may be
subsequently modified by the City Council on the showing of good cause by the
developer.



   (F)   Special provisions for planned unit developments.



      (1)   Criteria for granting a planned unit development
application. The City Council shall base its decision to grant or deny an
application for a planned unit development upon the following factors, and
shall adopt findings relative to these criteria.



      (2)   The criteria are as follows:



         (a)   Whether the proposed development is consistent in
all respects with the comprehensive plan and with this section;



         (b)   Whether the proposed development, including
deviations from design standards of the underlying zones, is compatible with
surrounding land uses;



         (c)   Whether the proposed development, including
deviations from development standards of the underlying zone, provides
adequate open space, circulation, parking, recreation, screening, and
landscaping;



         (d)   Whether the primary function of the PUD is to
encourage development which will preserve and enhance the worthwhile, natural
terrain characteristics, and not force intense development to utilize all
portions of a given site in order to arrive at the maximum density allowed.
In evaluating each individual proposal, the recognition of this objective
will be a basic consideration in granting approval or denial;



         (e)   Whether there exists an overall compatibility of
land uses and overall appearance and compatibility of individual buildings to
other site elements or to surrounding development; however, the architectural
style of buildings shall not solely be a basis for denial or approval of a
plan; and/or



         (f)   Whether the proposed PUD plan would afford a
greater general public benefit than would be realized under the underlying
zoning district and/or general zoning provisions.



   (G)   Planned Unit Development Overlay District application process.



      (1)   Generally. An application for a Planned Unit Development
Overlay District shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on forms
provided by the city. The application shall be accompanied by the following:



         (a)   A map or plat of the property and the land within
350 feet thereof;



         (b)   A list of the names and addresses of the owners of
all properties located wholly or partially within 350 feet of the property as
such appear on the records of the County Recorder prepared by a certified
abstract firm;



         (c)   Evidence of ownership or an interest in the
property, applications must include the assent of the property fee owner;



         (d)   In addition to the fee, when the request is for
the addition or deletion of an Overlay District, the Zoning Administrator may
request that the applicant deposit an additional amount up to $1,000 for
planning, engineering, administrative, and legal expenses incurred by the
city for the review and processing of the application, if the Zoning
Administrator anticipates that the application will cause the city to incur
such expenses. Any portion of the supplemental deposit which is not used to
reimburse the city will be refunded to the applicant;



         (e)   If the request is inconsistent with the
comprehensive plan, the application must be accompanied by an application for
an amendment to the comprehensive plan;



         (f)   A development plan which provides substantial
conformance with the concept plan approved by the Planning Commission;



         (g)   Such other information as may be required by the
Zoning Administrator; and



         (h)   All plans and maps shall be prepared at the same
scale unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator.



      (2)   Concept plan review.



         (a)   A concept plan is designed to provide a general
overview of the proposed development. The Planning Commission shall review
the concept plan to determine whether the proposal generally fits the desired
development patterns of the city.



         (b)   A concept plan shall include the following:



            1.   The application and paid fee;



            2.   A meeting shall be held with the residents
within a 350 feet radius of the proposed PUD prior to the city scheduling a
concept review. Documentation, outcomes, and the like, of this meeting shall
be submitted with the application information;



            3.   A cover letter describing the project, any
anticipated variations, and how the project complies with the city’s
comprehensive plan;



            4.   A sketch of the project area, including
approximate site size, proposed land uses, and their approximate location
within the site; surrounding land uses; existing and proposed public
right-of-way; and unique, problematic, or desirable features of the site,
such as wetlands or forests;



            5.   Ownership of the property and identity of
developer;



            6.   A general description of how adverse impacts
on other property will be mitigated; and



            7.   Any other information that the Zoning
Administrator determines will be helpful in reviewing the proposal.



      (3)   Development plan review. The submittal information shall
include the following:



         (a)   A survey of the site prepared by a registered
surveyor, showing site size, property lines, and legal description;



         (b)   A map showing existing improvements and land
ownership on and within 200 feet of the site, including the following:



            1.   The location and width of all streets and
easements;



            2.   The location and size of all existing
utilities, including sewers, manholes, watermains, hydrants, and culverts;



            3.   The location and size of all structures;



            4.   Existing zoning; and



            5.   School district boundary lines.



         (c)   A map showing natural conditions on and within 200
feet of the site, including the following:



            1.   Contour lines at two-foot intervals;



            2.   Soil types and their locations;



            3.   Water features and drainage patterns; and



            4.   Vegetation, including a list of tree species.



      (d)   A development plan showing the following information:



            1.   Proposed uses of land, acreage for each use,
recreation and open space areas, a tabulation of density or building square
footage, impervious surface percentage, and project phasing and development
timing;



            2.    Information on proposed lots, including
location, number, square footage, outer dimensions, and dimensions at
setbacks;



            3.   Proposed street information, including
right-of-way and pavement widths, names, and layout;



            4.   Information on structures, including location
and dimensions of both existing and proposed structures;



            5.   Proposed parking, driveway, and loading
information, including location and dimensions of all driveways, off-street
parking facilities, and loading facilities;



            6.   Proposed and existing sidewalks and trails,
including location and dimensions;



            7.   Areas proposed to be dedicated to the public,
including location, dimensions, and acreage;



            8.   Open space areas, including location,
dimensions, acreage, and detailed information about any amenities; and



            9.   An information table showing density per
acre, open space area requirements;



         (e)   A utility plan showing the following:



            1.   Proposed location and size of sanitary sewer,
watermains, storm sewers, and the gradient of each;



            2.   Proposed point of discharge or connection to
existing utilities; and



            3.   Location and dimensions of proposed and
existing easements.



         (f)    A stormwater management plan showing the
following:



            1.   Site grading at two-foot contour intervals;



            2.   Proposed stormwater management improvements
and techniques; and



            3.   Preliminary stormwater calculations;



         (g)   A landscape plan prepared by or under the
supervision of a landscape architect showing the following:



            1.   Location, size, number, and spacing of all
proposed plantings, including common and botanical names;



            2.   Planting schedule by species name and size;



            3.   Any berms, entry monuments, or other
landscaping elements; and



            4.   Lighting and signage information, showing the
type, height, and location of all exterior lighting and signs.



         (h)   A phasing plan showing the time frame for
construction of all improvements, including starting and completion dates;



         (i)   Preliminary architectural drawings illustrating
schematic floor plans, building massing, elevations, structure heights,
exterior construction materials, and the typical design and dimension of
private yards;



         (j)   A traffic analysis prepared by a professional
engineer; and



         (k)   Any other information that the Zoning
Administrator determines will be helpful in reviewing the proposal.



      (4)   City Council action.



         (a)   An application for a Planned Unit Development
Overlay District may be approved, approved with conditions, or disapproved by
a majority vote of the City Council.



         (b)   The city may impose such conditions as part of the
approval of a development plan as it deems necessary in order to ensure
consistency with the comprehensive plan and this section. The Zoning
Administrator shall maintain a record of all approved plans, amendments, and
development agreements.



      (5)   Amendment. The Planning Commission may approve minor
changes to an approved plan upon such hearing and notice, if any, as it deems
appropriate. Minor changes are those changes listed below, when these changes
do not significantly alter the original overall design, uses, or intent of
the development:



         (a)   Changes in building location or size, which do not
affect more than 10% of the site and/or floor space, not to exceed 10,000
square feet;



         (b)   Changes in landscaping, streets, parking,
driveways, or site improvements which do not affect more than 10% of the site
area, not to exceed 10,000 square feet; or



         (c)   Changes in dwelling units, which do not result in
the number of housing units changing by more than 10%.



(2013 Code, § 11.50)  (Ord. 480, passed 4-24-1997; Ord. 521, passed
9-3-1998; Ord. 554, passed 7-6- 1999; Ord. 626, passed 5-30-2002)



§ 151.049  MINING OVERLAY ZONE (MN).



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Mining Overlay Zone is to provide
an area for mining the city’s sand and gravel deposits while recognizing
and providing for the long-term use of the land. The Mining Overlay Zone
allows for the use of naturally occurring resources but requires that care be
taken to leave the land ready for immediate or eventual reuse consistent with
the city’s comprehensive plan.



   (B)   Areas covered. This section applies only within the Heavy
Industry (I-2) Zone, and to land in other zones which is within an existing
mine or adjacent to and surrounded on at least 3 sides by an existing mine.



   (C)   Permitted uses. Within the Mining Overlay Zone, no structure
or land shall be used except for one or more of the uses permitted in the
underlying zone.



   (D)   Conditional uses. Within the Mining Overlay Zone, no structure
or land shall be used for the following uses, except by conditional use
permit:



      (1)   Any use allowed by conditional use permit in the
underlying zone; or



      (2)   Mining.



   (E)   Permitted accessory uses. Within the Mining Overlay Zone, the
following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any accessory use allowed in the underlying zone; or



      (2)   Any use accessory to mining, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.



   (F)   Design standards.



      (1)   Density as specified in the underlying zone, minimum lot
area: 20 acres; and



      (2)   Site specifications.



         (a)   Minimum setback from any residential zone: 100
feet;



         (b)   Minimum setbacks in existence prior to
commencement of mining: Minimum setback from any residential or business
structure which was in existence prior to commencement of mining, unless the
written consent of all owners and residents or occupants of said structures
is obtained: 500 feet;



         (c)   Minimum setback from any business or industry
zone: 30 feet to the boundary of any business or industry zone; and



         (d)   Minimum setback from the right-of-way of any
existing or platted street: 30 feet, except that excavation may be conducted
within the 30 feet in order to reduce the elevation to conform to the street.



(2013 Code, § 11.52)  (Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994)



§ 151.050  OLD SHAKOPEE BUSINESS OVERLAY ZONE (B-1C).



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Old Shakopee Business Overlay Zone
is to provide an area for the continuation of existing commercial development
and development of existing lots in the older business areas for uses
fronting on or with immediate access to arterial and collector streets, The
combination of small lots is encouraged.



   (B)   Areas covered. The Old Shakopee Business Overlay Zone may be
applied to property zoned Highway Business (B-1) and developed, surrounded by
development, or platted for development as of the effective date of this
chapter.



   (C)   Permitted uses. Within the Old Shakopee Business Overlay Zone,
no structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the uses
permitted in the underlying Highway Business (B-1) Zone.



   (D)   Conditional uses. Within the Old Shakopee Business Overlay
Zone, no structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the uses
permitted in the underlying Highway Business (B-1) Zone.



   (E)   Permitted accessory uses. Within the Old Shakopee Business
Overlay Zone, permitted accessory uses are limited to the accessory uses
allowed in the underlying Highway Business (B-1) Zone.



   (F)   Design standards. Within the Old Shakopee Business Overlay
Zone, no land shall be used, and no structure shall be constructed or used,
except in conformance with the following minimum requirements:



      (1)   Density.



         (a)   Minimum lot area: 8,000 square feet; and



         (b)   Maximum floor area ratio: .50.



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface percentage: 75%;



      (3)   Lot specifications.



         (a)   Minimum lot width: 60 feet;



         (b)   Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet; and



         (c)   Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet minimum; rear
yard setback: 30 feet.



      (4)   Maximum height. 25 feet, without a conditional use
permit.



(2013 Code, § 11.58)  (Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994)



§ 151.051  HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-4).



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of the High Density Residential Zone is
to provide areas for the development of high density residential uses that
are in close proximity to collector and arterial roadways or transit.  The
High Density Residential zoning district allows for the development of
multiple-family housing from 14.01 units per acre to 40 units per acre, and
provides increased housing choices and affordability in the community.
Increased density also allows for the clustering of units near
environmentally sensitive areas and the downtown and riverfront area.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Multiple family dwellings;



      (2)   Utility services;



      (3)   Utility service structures, subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Shall not be a water tower or electrical
substation, or a building to house sanitary lift station controls;



         (b)   Shall be less than 20 feet in height;



         (c)   May only be used to provide weather protection for
utility equipment;



         (d)   Shall be designed, placed, and landscaped as
necessary to assure that it blends with the neighboring uses, and is
unobtrusive; and



         (e)   Shall comply with all applicable design standards;



      (4)   Public recreation;



      (5)   Residential facilities serving six or fewer persons; and



      (6)   Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons.



   (C)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   Daycare centers serving greater than 13 persons;



      (2)   Structures greater than 45 feet in height;



      (3)   Residential facilities serving 7-16 persons; and



      (4)   Multiple principal structures on one lot.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Apartment leasing offices;



      (2)   Open off-street parking spaces not to exceed 2.5
spaces/unit for a development;



      (3)   Garages;



      (4)   Fences;



      (5)   Gardens and other horticultural uses not involving
retail sales;



      (6)   Solar equipment;



      (7)   Swimming pools;



      (8)   Tennis courts;



      (9)   Receive only satellite dish antennas and other antennas;



      (10)   Communication service apparatus/device(s) as permitted
accessory uses, subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall be co-located on an existing tower or
existing structure. Any co-located apparatus/device shall not extend more
than 2 feet above the facade, parapet, roof, or other portion of any
structure. Such co-located apparatus/device shall be designed and located in
such a way that its appearance and surface finish minimizes visibility
off-site;



         (b)   Lights and or flashing equipment shall not be
permitted unless required by state or federal agencies;



         (c)   Signage shall not be allowed on the communication
service apparatus/device(s) other than danger or warning type signs;



         (d)   Must provide proof from a professional engineer
that the equipment will not interfere with existing communications for public
safety purposes;



         (e)   Applicable provisions of the City Code, including
provisions of the State Building Code therein adopted, shall be complied with;



         (f)   All obsolete or unused antennas and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city. After
the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
approved state. The user of the antenna and/or accessory facilities shall be
responsible for the removal of facilities and restoration of the site;



         (g)   The applicant shall submit a plan illustrating all
anticipated future location sites for communication towers and/or
communication device(s)/ apparatus;



         (h)   Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas
will only be considered for city parks when the following conditions exist
and if those areas are recommended by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
and approved by the City Council:



            1.   City parks of sufficient size and character
that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use; and



            2.   Commercial recreation areas and major
playfields used primarily by adults;



         (i)   All revenue generated through the lease of a city
park for wireless telecommunication towers and antennas shall be transferred
to the Park Reserve Fund.



      (11)   Other accessory uses, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.



   (E)   Design standards.  Within the R-4, High Density Residential
Zone, no land shall be used and no structure shall be constructed or used,
except in conformance with the following requirements:



 


 
R-4
 
R-4T (R-4 Lots within 1/4 mile walking distance by sidewalk or trail to an
operating transit station)
 
R-4D (R-4 Lots within the area that lies east of the intersection of 3rd Ave
W and CSAH 69 and north of 3rd Avenue (both East and West) extended east to
Sarazin Street, south of the city boundary, and west of the extension of
Sarazin Street northward)




Minimum lot width
 
150'
 
150'
 
142'


Minimum lot depth
 
200'
 
200'
 
100'


Minimum lot size
 
1 acre
 
1 acre
 
20,000 square feet


Minimum density
 
14.01 units/acre
 
14.01 units/acre
 
14.01 units/acre


Maximum base density
 
24 units/acre
 
28 units/acre
 
36 units/acre


Density bonus for lots within 1/4 mile walking distance by sidewalk or trail
to public park or open space greater than 2 acres, that is intended to be
used for recreation purposes
 
2 units/acre
 
2 units/acre
 
2 units/acre


Density bonus for developments with at least 50 square feet per unit of
indoor community space, indoor or outdoor recreation facilities such as
swimming pools, tennis courts, outdoor cooking facilities, and similar
facilities available for use by occupants. Open space is not counted in this
calculation.
 
2 units/acre
 
2 units/acre
 
2 units/acre


Maximum impervious surface
 
60%
 
65%
 
75%


Minimum front yard setback
 
50'
 
50'
 
1/2 building height, or 15', whichever is greater


Minimum rear yard setback
 
40'
 
40'
 
1/2 building height, or 15', whichever is greater


Minimum street side setback
 
30'
 
30'
 
1/2 building height, or 15', whichever is greater


Minimum side yard setback
 
1/2 building height or 20', whichever is greater
 
1/2 building height or 20', whichever is greater
 
1/2 building height, or 15', whichever is greater


Minimum structure setback to arterial roadway
 
50'
 
50'
 
1/2 building height, or 15', whichever is greater


Minimum distance between buildings within a development
 
25'
 
25'
 
20'


Minimum parking setback to arterial roadway
 
25'
 
25'
 
25'


Maximum structure height
 
45'
 
45'
 
45'


Minimum off-street parking spaces
 
2.25 spaces/unit
 
2.0 spaces/unit
 
1.75 spaces/unit


Off-street parking requirement reduction (for sites within 1/4 mile of a
transit stop accessible by a sidewalk or trail)
 
0.10 spaces/unit
 
N/A
 
0.10 spaces/unit




 



(Ord. 925, passed 12-15-2015)




SHORELAND OVERLAY ZONE (SH)




§ 151.065  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION AND POLICY.



   (A)   Statutory authorization. This subchapter is adopted pursuant
to the authorization and policies contained in M.S. Ch. 103F, as it may be
amended from time; state regulations, Minn  Rules 6120.2500 through
6120.3900; and the planning and zoning enabling legislation in M.S. Ch. 462,
as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Policy. The uncontrolled use of shorelands of the city affects
the public health, safety, and general welfare not only by contributing to
pollution of public waters, but also by impairing the local tax base.
Therefore, it is in the best interest of the public health, safety, and
welfare to provide for the wise subdivision, use, and development of
shorelands of public waters. The legislature of the state has delegated
responsibility to local governments of the state to regulate the subdivision,
use, and development of the shorelands of public waters and thus preserve and
enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve the economic and natural
environmental values of shorelands, and provide for the wise use of waters
and related land resources. The city hereby recognizes this responsibility.



(2013 Code, § 11.54) (Ord. 500, passed 11-13-1997; Ord. 537, passed
2-18-1999)



§ 151.066  GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Jurisdiction. The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to
the shorelands of the public water bodies as classified in § 151.068.
Pursuant to Minn Rules 6120.2500 through 6120.3900, no lake, pond, or flowage
less than 10 acres in size in municipalities or 25 acres in size in
unincorporated areas need be regulated in a local government’s shoreland
regulations. A body of water created by a private user where there was no
previous shoreland may, at the discretion of the governing body, be exempt
from this subchapter.



   (B)   Compliance. The use of any shoreland of public waters; the
size and shape of lots; the use, size, type, and location of structures on
lots; the installation and maintenance of water supply and waste treatment
systems; the grading and filling of any shoreland area; the cutting of
shoreland vegetation; and the subdivision of land shall be in full compliance
with the terms of this subchapter and other applicable regulations.



   (C)   Enforcement. The Zoning Official is responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this subchapter. Any violation of the
provisions of this subchapter or failure to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) shall constitute
a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law. Violations of this
subchapter can occur regardless of whether or not a permit is required for a
regulated activity pursuant to § 151.067.



   (D)   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this subchapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and
shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be
deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.



   (F)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by
this subchapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions; however, where this subchapter imposes
greater restrictions, the provisions of this subchapter shall prevail. All
other sections inconsistent with this subchapter are hereby repealed to the
extent of the inconsistency only.



   (G)   Definitions and statutory interpretation.



      (1)   Statutory interpretation. For the purpose of this
subchapter, the words “must” and “shall” are mandatory and not
permissive. All distances, unless otherwise specified, shall be measured
horizontally.



      (2)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         ACCESSORY STRUCTURE or FACILITY. Any building or
improvement subordinate to a principal use which, because of the nature of
its use, can reasonably be located at or greater than normal structure
setbacks.



         BLUFF. A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or
embankment having the following characteristics (an area with an average
slope of less than 18% over a distance for 50 feet or more shall not be
considered part of the BLUFF):



            1.   Part or all of the feature is located in a
shoreland area;



            2.   The slope rises at least 25 feet above the
ordinary high water level of the waterbody;



            3.    The grade of the slope from the toe of the
bluff to a point 25 feet or more above the ordinary high water level averages
30% or greater; and



            4.   The slope must drain toward the waterbody.



         BLUFF IMPACT ZONE. A bluff and land located within 20 feet
from the top of a bluff.



         BOATHOUSE. A structure designed and used solely for the
storage of boats or boating equipment.



         BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to a lot line or the
ordinary high water level at the required setback beyond which a structure
may not extend.



         COMMERCIAL USE. The principal use of land or buildings for
the sale, lease, rental, or trade of products, goods, and services.



         COMMISSIONER. The Commissioner of the Department of Natural
Resources.



         CONDITIONAL USE. A land use or development as defined by
ordinance that would not be appropriate generally, but may be allowed with
appropriate restrictions as provided by official controls upon a finding that
certain conditions as detailed in the zoning code exist, the use or
development conforms to the comprehensive land use plan of the community, and
the use is compatible with the existing neighborhood.



         DECK. A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without
attached railings, seats, trellises, or other features, attached or
functionally related to a principal use or site and at any point extending
more than 3 feet above ground.



         DUPLEX, TRIPLEX, and QUAD. A dwelling structure on a single
lot, having two, three, and 4 units, respectively, being attached by common
walls and each unit equipped with separate sleeping, cooking, eating, living,
and sanitation facilities.



         DWELLING SITE. A designated location for residential use by
one or more persons using temporary or movable shelter, including camping and
recreational vehicle sites.



         DWELLING UNIT. Any structure or portion of a structure, or
other shelter designed as short- or long-term living quarters for one or more
persons, including rental or timeshare accommodations such as motel, hotel,
and resort rooms and cabins.



         EXTRACTIVE USE. The use of land for surface or sub-surface
removal of sand, gravel, rock, industrial minerals, other nonmetallic
minerals, and peat not regulated under M.S. §§ 93.44 to 93.51, as they may
be amended from time to time.



         FOREST LAND CONVERSION. The clear cutting of forested lands
to prepare for a new land use other than re-establishment of a subsequent
forest stand.



         HARDSHIP. The same meaning as that term is defined in M.S.
Ch. 462, as it may be amended from time to time.



         HEIGHT OF BUILDING. The vertical distance between the
highest adjoining ground level at the building or 10 feet above the lowest
ground level, whichever is lower, and the highest point of a flat roof or
average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof.



         INDUSTRIAL USE. The use of land or buildings for the
production, manufacture, warehousing, storage, or transfer of goods,
products, commodities, or other wholesale items.



         INTENSIVE VEGETATION CLEARING. The complete removal of
trees or shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip, row, or block.



         LOT. A parcel of land designated by plat, metes and bounds,
registered land survey, auditor’s plot, or other accepted means and
separated from other parcels or portions by said description for the purpose
of sale, lease, or separation.



         LOT WIDTH. The shortest distance between lot lines measured
at the midpoint of the building line.



         NONCONFORMITY. Any legal use, structure, or parcel of land
already in existence, recorded, or authorized before the adoption of official
controls or amendments thereto that would not have been permitted to become
established under the terms of the official controls as now written, if the
official controls had been in effect prior to the date it was established,
recorded, or authorized.



         ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL. The boundary of public waters
and wetlands, and shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level
which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence
upon the landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes
from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses,
the ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL is the elevation of the top of the bank of the
channel. For reservoirs and flowages, the ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL is the
operating elevation of the normal summer pool.



         PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A type of development
characterized by a unified site design for a number of dwelling units or
dwelling sites on a parcel, whether for sale, rent, or lease, and also
usually involving clustering of these units or sites to provide areas of
common open space, density increases, and a mix of structure types and land
uses. These developments may be organized and operated as condominiums,
time-share condominiums, cooperatives, full fee ownership, commercial
enterprises, or any combination of these, or cluster subdivisions of dwelling
units, residential condominiums, townhouses, apartment buildings,
campgrounds, recreational vehicle parks, resorts, hotels, motels, and
conversions of structures and land uses to these uses.



         PLANNING UNIT DEVELOPMENTS, COMMERCIAL. These are typically
uses that provide transient, short-term lodging spaces, rooms, or parcels and
their operations are essentially service-oriented. For example, hotel/motel
accommodations, resorts, recreational vehicle and camping parks, and other
primarily service-oriented activities are commercial planned unit
developments.



         PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS, RESIDENTIAL. A use where the
nature of residency is not transient and the major or primary focus of the
development is not service-oriented. For example, residential apartments,
manufactured home parks, time-share condominiums, townhouses, cooperatives,
and full fee ownership residences would be considered as RESIDENTIAL PLANNED
UNIT DEVELOPMENTS. To qualify as a RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT, a
development must contain at least 5 dwelling units or sites.



         PUBLIC WATERS. Any waters as defined in M.S. § 103G.005,
subds. 14 and 15, as it may be amended from time to time.



         SEMI-PUBLIC USE. The use of land by a private, nonprofit
organization to provide a public service that is ordinarily open to some
persons outside the regular constituency of the organization.



         SENSITIVE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT. The preservation and
management of areas unsuitable for development in their natural state due to
constraints such as shallow soils over groundwater or bedrock, highly erosive
or expansive soils, steep slopes, susceptibility to flooding, or occurrence
of flora or fauna in need of special protection.



         SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a
structure, sewage treatment system, or other facility and an ordinary high
water level, sewage treatment system, top of a bluff, road, highway, property
line, or other facility.



         SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM. A septic tank and soil absorption
system or other individual or cluster type sewage treatment system as
described and regulated in § 151.069(H).



         SEWER SYSTEM. Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and
force main, and all other construction, devices, appliances, or appurtenances
used for conducting sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of
ultimate disposal.



         SHORE IMPACT ZONE. Land located between the ordinary high
water level of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50%
of the structure setback.



         SHORELAND. Land located within the following distances from
public waters: 1,000 feet from the ordinary highwater level of a lake, pond,
or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a
floodplain designated by ordinance on a river or stream, whichever is
greater. The limits of SHORELANDs may be reduced whenever the waters involved
are bounded by topographic divides which extend landward from the waters for
lesser distances and when approved by the Commissioner.



         SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC SITE. Any archaeological site,
standing structure, or other property that meets the criteria for eligibility
to the National Register of Historic Places or is listed in the State
Register of Historic Sites; or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that
falls under the provisions of M.S. § 307.08, as it may be amended from time
to time. A historic site meets these criteria if it is presently listed on
either register or if it is determined to meet the qualifications for listing
after review by the state archaeologist or the director of the State
Historical Society. All unplatted cemeteries are automatically considered to
be SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC SITES.



         STEEP SLOPE. Land where agricultural activity or
development is either not recommended or described as poorly suited due to
slope steepness and the site’s soil characteristics, as mapped and
described in available county soil surveys or other technical reports, unless
appropriate design and construction techniques and farming practices are used
in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. Where specific
information is not available, STEEP SLOPES are lands with average slopes over
12%, as measured over horizontal distances of 50 feet or more, that are not
bluffs.



         STRUCTURE. Any building or appurtenance, including decks,
except aerial or underground utility lines, such as sewer, electric,
telephone, telegraph, gas lines, towers, poles, and other supporting
facilities.



         SUBDIVISION. Land that is divided for the purpose of sale,
rent, or lease, including planned unit developments.



         SURFACE WATER-ORIENTED COMMERCIAL USE. The use of land for
commercial purposes, where access to and use of a surface water feature is an
integral part of the normal conductance of business. Marinas, resorts, and
restaurants with transient docking facilities are examples of such use.



         TOE OF THE BLUFF. The lower point of a 50 feet segment with
an average slope exceeding 18%.



         TOP OF THE BLUFF. The higher point of a 50 feet segment
with an average slope exceeding 18%.



         USES WITH WATER-ORIENTED NEEDS (WATER-ORIENTED USES). A
land use that has as an intrinsic element access to, or use of, the water for
recreational purposes. Such uses include, but are not necessarily limited to,
marinas, resorts, boat or canoe accesses, and fishing docks.



         USES WITHOUT WATER-ORIENTED NEEDS (NON WATER-ORIENTED USES).



            1.   Any land use that does not have as an
intrinsic element access to, or use of, the water for recreational purposes.
Commercial, industrial, or business park land uses that do not meet the
definition of “surface water-oriented commercial use” contained herein
are by definition NON WATER-ORIENTED USES.



            2.   Defined at SURFACE WATER-ORIENTED COMMERCIAL
USE, as the use of land for commercial purposes, where access to and use of a
surface water feature is an integral part of the normal conductance of
business. Marinas, resorts, and restaurants with transient docking facilities
are examples of such use.



         VARIANCE. The same as that term is defined or described in
M.S. Ch. 462, as it may be amended from time to time.



         WATER-ORIENTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR FACILITY. A small,
above-ground building or other improvement, except stairways, fences, docks,
and retaining walls, which, because of the relationship of its use to a
surface water feature, reasonably needs to be located closer to public waters
than the normal structure setback. Examples of such structures and facilities
include boathouses, gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses, and
detached decks.



         WETLAND. A surface water feature classified as a wetland in
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39



(2013 Code, § 11.54) (Ord. 500, passed 11-13-1997; Ord. 586, passed
11-15-2000)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.067  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Permit required.



      (1)   A permit is required for the construction of buildings
or building additions (and including such related activities as construction
of decks and signs), the installation and/or alteration of sewage treatment
systems, and those grading and filling activities not exempted by §
151.069(C). Application for a permit shall be made to the Building Official
on the forms provided. The application shall include the necessary
information so that the Building Official can determine the site’s
suitability for the intended use and that a compliant sewage treatment system
will be provided.



      (2)   A permit authorizing an addition to an existing
structure shall stipulate that an identified nonconforming sewage treatment
system, as defined by § 151.069(H), shall be reconstructed or replaced in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   Certificate of zoning compliance. The Zoning Administrator
shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance for each activity requiring a
permit as specified in division (A) above. This certificate will specify that
the use of land conforms to the requirements of this subchapter. Any use,
arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized by permit shall
be deemed a violation of this section and shall be punishable as provided in
§ 151.066(C).



   (C)   Variances.



      (1)   A variance may only be granted in accordance with M.S.
Ch. 462, as it may be amended from time to time. A variance may not
circumvent the general purposes and intent of this subchapter. No variance
may be granted that would allow any use that is prohibited in the zoning
district in which the subject property is located. Conditions may be imposed
in the granting of a variance to ensure compliance and to protect adjacent
properties and the public interest. In considering a variance request, the
Board of Adjustment and Appeals and Appeals must also consider whether the
property owner has reasonable use of the land without the variance, whether
the property is used seasonally or year-round, whether the variance is being
requested solely on the basis of economic considerations, and the
characteristics of development on adjacent properties.



      (2)   (a)   The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall hear
and decide requests for variances in accordance with the rules that it has
adopted for the conduct of business.



         (b)   When a variance is approved after the Department
of Natural Resources has formally recommended denial in the hearing record,
the notification of the approved variance required in division (D)(2) below
shall also include the Board of Adjustment and Appeals’ summary of the
public record/testimony and the findings of facts and conclusions which
supported the issuance of the variance.



      (3)   For existing developments, the application for variance
must clearly demonstrate whether a conforming sewage treatment system is
present for the intended use of the property. The variance, if issued, must
require reconstruction of a nonconforming sewage treatment system.



   (D)   Notifications to the Department of Natural Resources.



      (1)   Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider
variances, amendments, or conditional uses under local shoreland management
controls must be sent to the Commissioner or the commissioner’s designated
representative and postmarked at least 10 days before the hearings. Notices
of hearings to consider proposed subdivisions must include copies of the
proposed subdivision.



      (2)   A copy of approved amendments and subdivisions, and
final decisions granting variances or conditional uses under local shoreland
management controls must be sent to the Commissioner or the commissioner’s
designated representative and postmarked within 10 days of final action.



(2013 Code, § 11.54)  (Ord. 500, passed 11-13-1997)  Penalty, see §
151.999



§ 151.068  SHORELAND CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM AND LAND USE DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Shoreland classification system. The public waters of the city
have been classified below consistent with the criteria found in Minn. Rules
6120.3300, and the Protected Waters Inventory Map for the county.



      (1)   Generally. The shoreland area for the waterbodies listed
in divisions (A)(2) and division (A)(3) below shall be as defined in the term
“shoreland” in § 151.066(G)(2) and as shown on the official zoning map.



      (2)   Lakes.



 

Natural Environment Lakes
 
Protected Waters Inventory I.D. No.




Blue Lake
 
I.D. No. 70-0088


Dean Lake
 
I.D. No. 70-0074


Fisher Lake
 
I.D. No. 70-0087


Rice Lake
 
I.D. No. 70-0025


Unnamed
 
I.D. No. 70-0080


Recreational Development Lakes
 
Protected Waters Inventory I.D. No.


O’Dowd Lake
 
I.D. No. 70-0095




 



      (3)   Rivers and streams.



 




Agricultural Rivers

 

Legal Description



Minnesota River
 
From the border of Scott and LeSueur Counties to the East section line of
Section 5, Township 115N, Range 22W**



Transition Rivers

 

Legal Description



Minnesota River
 
From the west section line of Section 4, Township 115N. Range 22W**



Tributary Streams

 

Legal Description



Eagle Creek
 
From Basin 245, Section 13, Township 115, Range 22W to Section 13, Township
115, Range 22W**


Unnamed to Minnesota River
 
From Section 2, Township 115, Range 22W to Section 1, Township 115, Range
22W**


Unnamed Tributary
 
From Basin 249, Section 23, Township 115, Range 22W to Section 14, Township
115, Range 22W**


Notes:

*All protected watercourses in the city shown on the protected waters
inventory map for the county, a copy of which is hereby adopted by reference,
not given a classification in Items A-E above shall be considered
“Tributary”

** All from and to locations are subject to actual municipality boundaries




 



   (B)   Land use district description.



      (1)   Criteria for designation. The land use districts in this
division (B), and the delineation of a land use district’s boundaries on
the official zoning map must be consistent with the goals, policies, and
objectives of the comprehensive land use plan and the following criteria,
considerations, and objectives:



         (a)   General considerations and criteria for all land
uses.



            1.   Preservation of natural areas;



            2.   Present ownership and development of
shoreland areas;



            3.   Shoreland soil types and their engineering
capabilities;



            4.   Topographic characteristics;



            5.   Vegetative cover;



            6.   In-water physical characteristics, values,
and constraints;



            7.   Recreational use of the surface water;



            8.   Road and service center accessibility;



            9.   Socioeconomic development needs and plans as
they involve water and related land resources;



            10.   The land requirements of industry which, by
its nature, requires location in shoreland areas; and



            11.   The necessity to preserve and restore
certain areas having significant historical or ecological value.



         (b)   Factors and criteria for planned unit developments.



            1.   Existing recreational use of the surface
waters and likely increases in use associated with planned unit developments;



            2.   Physical and aesthetic impacts of increased
density;



            3.   Suitability of lands for the planned unit
development approach;



            4.   Level of current development in the area; and



            5.   Amounts and types of ownership of undeveloped
lands.



      (2)   Land use district descriptions. The land use districts
provided below, and the allowable land uses therein for the given
classifications of waterbodies, shall be properly delineated on the official
zoning map for the shorelands of this community. These land use districts are
in conformance with the criteria specified in Minn. Rules 6120.3200, subp. 3.
Where a conflict exists between a zoning classification in existence prior to
the adoption of this subchapter and the land use described below, the land
use designated on the city’s zoning map shall govern, so long as it is
consistent with the city’s comprehensive plan:



         (a)   Land use districts for lakes.



 


 

Recreational Development Lakes

 

Natural Environment Lakes





General Use District - Uses


Commercial
 

P

 

C



Commercial planned unit development**
 

C

 

C



Extractive use
 

C

 

C



Forest management
 

P

 

P



Industrial
 

C

 

C***



Mining/metallic minerals and peat
 

P

 

P



Public, semi-public
 

P

 

C



Parks and historic site
 

C

 

C



High-Density Residential - Uses


Duplex, triplex, quad residential
 

P

 

C



Forest management
 

P

 

P



Parks and historic sites
 

C

 

C



Residential planned unit developments
 

C

 

C



Semi-public
 

C

 

C



Single residential
 

P

 

P



Surface water-oriented commercial
 

C

 

C



Residential District - Uses


Duplex, triplex, quad residential
 

C

 

C



Extractive use
 

C

 

C



Forest management
 

P

 

P



Mining/metallic minerals and peat
 

P

 

P



Parks and historic sites
 

C

 

C



Semi-public
 

C

 

C



Single residential
 

P

 

P



Special Protection District - Uses


Agricultural: cropland and pasture
 

P

 

P



Agricultural feedlots
 

C

 

C



Extractive use
 

C

 

C



Forest management
 

P

 

P



Mining/metallic minerals and peat
 

P

 

P



Parks and historic sites
 

C

 

C



Sensitive resource management
 

P

 

P



Single residential
 

C

 

C



Water-Oriented Commercial - Uses


Commercial planned unit development**
 

C

 

C



Forest management
 

P

 

P



Parks and historic sites
 

C

 

C



Public, semi-public
 

C

 

C



Surface water-oriented commercial
 

P

 

C



Notes:

*As accessory to a residential planned unit development

** Limited expansion of a commercial planned unit development involving up to
6 additional dwelling units or sites may be allowed as a permitted use
provided the provisions of § 151.072 are satisfied

***Industrial uses are allowed by conditional use permit on natural
environment lakes if properly zoned and if the condition in § 151.073 are
satisfied




 



      (b)   Land use districts for rivers and streams.



 


 

Transition

 

Agricultural

 

Tributary





General Use District - Uses


Commercial
 

C

 

P

 

C



Commercial planned unit development**
 

C

 

C

 

C



Extractive use
 

C

 

C

 

C



Forest management
 

P

 

P

 

P



Industrial
 

N

 

C

 

C



Mining/metallic minerals and peat
 

P

 

P

 

P



Parks and historic sites
 

C

 

C

 

C



Public, semi-public
 

C

 

P

 

C



Sensitive resource management
 

P

 

P

 

P



Single residential
 

C

 

C

 

C



High Density Residential - Uses


Duplex, triplex, quad residential
 

C

 

C

 

C



Forest management
 

P

 

P

 

P



Residential planned unit development
 

C

 

C

 

C



Parks and historic sites
 

C

 

C

 

C



Semi-public
 

C

 

C

 

C



Single residential
 

P

 

P

 

P



Surface water-oriented commercial*
 

C

 

C

 

C



Residential District - Uses


Duplex, triplex, quad residential
 

C

 

C

 

C



Extractive use
 

C

 

C

 

C



Forest management
 

P

 

P

 

P



Mining/metallic minerals and peat
 

P

 

P

 

P



Parks and historic sites
 

C

 

C

 

P




Semi-public   

 

C

 

C

 

P



Single residential
 

P

 

P

 

P



Special Protection District - Uses


Agricultural: cropland and pasture
 

P

 

P

 

P



Agricultural feedlots
 

C

 

C

 

C



Extractive use
 

C

 

C

 

C



Forest management
 

P

 

P

 

P



Mining/metallic minerals and peat
 

P

 

P

 

P



Parks and historic sites
 

C

 

C

 

C



Sensitive resource management
 

P

 

P

 

P



Single residential
 

C

 

C

 

C



Semi-public
 

C

 

C

 

P



Water-Oriented Commercial - Uses


Commercial planned unit development*
 

C

 

C

 

C



Forest management
 

P

 

P

 

P



Parks and historic sites
 

C

 

C

 

C



Public, semi-public
 

P

 

P

 

P



Surface water-oriented commercial
 

C

 

C

 

C



Notes:

*As accessory to a residential planned unit development

** Limited expansion of a commercial planned unit development involving up to
6 additional dwelling units or sites may be allowed as a permitted use
provided the provisions of § 151.072 are satisfied




 



      (3)   Use and upgrading of inconsistent land use district.



         (a)   The land use districts adopted in §§ 151.030
through 151.046, as they apply to shoreland areas, and their delineated
boundaries on the official zoning map, are not consistent with the land use
district designation criteria specified in division (B)(2) above. These
inconsistent land use district designations may continue until revisions are
proposed to change either the land use district designation within an
existing land use district boundary shown on the official zoning map or to
modify the boundary of an existing land use district shown on the official
zoning map.



         (b)   When a revision is proposed to an inconsistent
land use district provision, the following additional criteria and procedures
shall apply.



            1.   For lakes. When a revision to a land use
district designation on a lake is considered, the land use district
boundaries and use provisions therein for all the shoreland areas within the
jurisdiction of this subchapter on said lake must be revised to make them
substantially compatible with the framework in divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2)
above.



            2.   For rivers and streams. When a revision to a
land use district designation on a river or stream is proposed, the land use
district boundaries and the use provisions therein for all shoreland on both
sides of the river or stream within the same classification within the
jurisdiction of this subchapter must be revised to make them substantially
compatible with the framework in division (B)(1) above. If the same river
classification is contiguous for more than a five-mile segment, only the
shoreland for a distance of 2-1/2 miles upstream and downstream, or to the
class boundary if closer, need be evaluated and revised.



         (c)   When an interpretation question arises about
whether a specific land use fits within a given “use” category, the
interpretation shall be made by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. When a
question arises as to whether a land use district’s boundaries are properly
delineated on the official zoning map, this decision shall be made by the
City Council.



         (d)   When a revision is proposed to an inconsistent
land use district provision by an individual party or landowner, this
individual party or landowner will only be responsible to provide the
supporting and/or substantiating information for the specific parcel in
question. The City Council will direct the Zoning Administrator to provide
such additional information for this waterbody as is necessary to satisfy
(3)(a) and (b) above.



         (e)   The City Council must make detailed findings of
fact when taking final action that the revision, and the upgrading of any
inconsistent land use district designations on said waterbody, are consistent
with the enumerated criteria and use provisions of division (B) above.



(2013 Code, § 11.54)  (Ord. 500, passed 11-13-1997; Ord. 537, passed
2-18-1999)



§ 151.069  ZONING AND WATER SUPPLY/SANITARY PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Lot area and width standards. The lot area (in square feet)
and lot width standards (in feet) for single, duplex, triplex, and quad
residential lots created after the date of enactment of this subchapter for
the lake and river/stream Classifications are the following:



      (1)   Unsewered lakes.



         (a)   Natural environment.



 

Riparian Lots
 
Non-Riparian Lots



 
Area
 
Width
 
Area
 
Width



Duplex

 

120,000

 

300

 

160,000

 

400




Quad

 

200,000

 

500

 

320,000

 

800




Single

 

80,000

 

200

 

80,000

 

200




Triplex

 

160,000

 

400

 

240,000

 

600




 



         (b)   Recreational development.



 


Riparian Lots

 

Non-Riparian Lots






 

Area

 

Width

 

Area

 

Width




Duplex

 

80,000

 

225

 

80,000

 

265




Quad

 

160,000

 

375

 

160,000

 

490




Single

 

40,000

 

150

 

40,000

 

150




Triplex

 

120,000

 

300

 

120,000

 

375




 



      (2)   Sewered lakes.



         (a)   Natural environment.



 


Riparian Lots

 

Non-Riparian Lots

 








 

Area

 

Width

 

Area

 

Width




Duplex

 

70,000

 

225

 

35,000

 

220




Quad

 

130,000

 

425

 

65,000

 

410




Single

 

40,000

 

125

 

20,000

 

125




Triplex

 

100,000

 

325

 

52,000

 

315




 



         (b)   Recreational development.



 


Riparian Lots

 

Non-Riparian Lots






 

Area

 

Width

 

Area

 

Width




Duplex

 

35,000

 

135

 

26,000

 

135




Quad

 

65,000

 

255

 

49,000

 

245




Single

 

20,000

 

75

 

15,000

 

75




Triplex

 

50,000

 

195

 

38,000

 

190




 



      (3)   River/stream lot width standards.



         (a)   There is no minimum lot size requirement for
rivers and streams.



         (b)   The lot width standards for single, duplex,
triplex,  and quad residential developments for the 6 river/stream
classifications are as follows.



 




 

Transition

 

Agricultural

 

Urban and Tributary






 

No Sewer

 

Sewer




Duplex

 

375

 

225

 

150

 

115




Quad

 

625

 

375

 

250

 

190




Single

 

250

 

150

 

100

 

75




Triplex

 

500

 

300

 

200

 

150




 



      (4)   Additional special provisions.



         (a)   Residential subdivisions with dwelling unit
densities exceeding those in the tables in divisions (A)(2) and (A)(3) above
can only be allowed if designed and approved as residential planned unit
developments under § 151.072. Only land above the ordinary high water level
of public waters can be used to meet lot area standards, and lot width
standards must be met at both the ordinary high water level and at the
building line. The sewer lot area dimensions in division (A)(2) above can
only be used if publicly-owned sewer system service is available to the
property.



         (b)   Subdivisions of duplexes, triplexes, and quads on
natural environment lakes must also meet the following standards:



            1.   Each building must be setback at least 200
feet from the ordinary high water level;



            2.   Each building must have common sewage
treatment and water systems in one location and serve all dwelling units in
the building;



            3.   Watercraft docking facilities for each lot
must be centralized in one location and serve all dwelling units in the
building; and



            4.   No more than 25% of a lake’s shoreline can
be in duplex, triplex, or quad developments.



         (c)   Lots intended as controlled accesses to public
waters or as recreation areas for use by owners of non-riparian lots within
subdivisions are permissible and must meet or exceed the following standards:



            1.   They must meet the width and size
requirements for residential lots, and be suitable for the intended uses of
controlled access lots;



            2.   If docking, mooring, or over-water storage of
more than 6 watercraft is to be allowed at a controlled access lot, then the
width of the lot (keeping the same lot depth) must be increased by the
percent of the requirements for riparian residential lots for each watercraft
beyond 6 consistent with the following table;



 


Controlled Access Lot Frontage Requirements




Ratio of Lake Size to Shore Length in (Acres/Miles)

 

Required Increase to Shore Length in Frontage (Percent)




Less than 100

 

25




100-20

 

20




201-300

 

15




301-400

 

10




Greater than 40

 

5




 



            3.   Controlled access lots must be jointly owned
by all purchasers of lots in the subdivision or by all purchasers of
non-riparian lots in the subdivision who are provided riparian access rights
on the access lot; and



            4.   a.   Covenants or other equally effective
legal instruments must be developed that specify which lot owners have
authority to use the access lot and what activities are allowed. The
activities may include watercraft launching, loading, storage, beaching,
mooring, or docking. They must also include other outdoor recreational
activities that do not significantly conflict with general public use of the
public water or the enjoyment of normal property rights by adjacent property
owners.



               b.   Examples of the non-significant
conflict activities include swimming, sunbathing, or picnicking. The
covenants must limit the total number of vehicles allowed to be parked and
the total number of watercraft allowed to be continuously moored, docked, or
stored over water, and must require centralization of all common facilities
and activities in the most suitable locations on the lot to minimize
topographic and vegetation alterations.



               c.   They must also require all parking
areas, storage buildings, and other facilities to be screened by vegetation
or topography as much as practical from view from the public water, assuming
summer, leaf-on conditions.



   (B)   Placement, design, and height of structures.



      (1)   Placement of structures on lots.



         (a)   1.   When more than one setback applies to a
site, structures and facilities must be located to meet all setbacks.



            2.   Where structures exist on the adjoining lots
on both sides of a proposed building site, structure setbacks may be altered
without a variance to conform to the adjoining setbacks from the ordinary
high water level, provided the proposed building site is not located in a
shore impact zone or in a bluff impact zone.



         (b)   Structures shall be located as follows.



            1.   Structure and on-site sewage system setbacks
(in feet) from ordinary high water level.*



 


Setbacks



Classes of Public Waters
 

Unsewered

 

Structures Sewers

 

Sewage Treatment System





Lakes


Natural environment
 

150

 

150

 

150



Recreational development
 

150

 

75

 

75



Rivers


Agriculture and tributary
 

100

 

50

 

50



Transition
 

150

 

150

 

100



Notes:

*One water-oriented accessory structure designed in accordance with division
(C)(2) below may be setback a minimum distance of 10 feet from the ordinary
high water level.




 



            2.   Additional structure setbacks. The following
additional structure setbacks apply, regardless of the classification of the
waterbody.



 


Setback From

 

Setback (In Feet)



Right-of-way line of federal, state, or county highway
 

50



Right-of-way line of town road, public street, or other roads or streets not
classified
 

20



Top of bluff
 

30



Unplatted cemetery
 

50




 



         (c)   Structures and accessory facilities, except
stairways and landings, must not be placed within bluff impact zones.



         (d)   Uses without water-oriented needs must be located
on lots or parcels without public water frontage, or, if located on lots or
parcels with public waters frontage, must either be setback double the normal
ordinary high water level setback or be substantially screened from view from
the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.



      (2)   Design criteria for structures.



         (a)   High water elevations. Structures must be placed
in accordance with any floodplain regulations applicable to the site. Where
these controls do not exist, the elevation to which the lowest floor,
including basement, is placed or flood-proofed must be determined as follows:



            1.   For lakes, by placing the lowest floor at a
level at least 3 feet above the highest known water level, or 3 feet above
the ordinary high water level, whichever is higher;



            2.   For rivers and streams, by placing the lowest
floor at least 3 feet above the flood of record, if data is available. If
data is not available, by placing the lowest floor at least 3 feet above the
ordinary high water level, or by conducting a technical evaluation to
determine effects of proposed construction upon flood stages and flood flows
and to establish a flood protection elevation. Under all 3 approaches,
technical evaluations must be done by a qualified engineer or hydrologist
consistent with parts 6120.5000 to 6120.6200 governing the management of
floodplain areas. If more than one approach is used, the highest flood
protection elevation determined must be used for placing structures and other
facilities; and



            3.   Water-oriented accessory structures may have
the lowest floor placed lower than the elevation determined in this item if
the structure is constructed of flood-resistant materials to the elevation,
electrical, and mechanical equipment is placed above the elevation and, if
long duration flooding is anticipated, the structure is built to withstand
ice action and wind-driven waves and debris.



         (b)   Water-oriented accessory structures. Each lot may
have one water-oriented accessory structure not meeting the normal structure
setback in division (B)(1) above if this water-oriented accessory structure
complies with the following provisions:



            1.   The structure or facility must not exceed 10
feet in height, exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area greater
than 250 square feet. Detached decks must not exceed 8 feet above grade at
any point;



            2.   The setback of the structure or facility from
the ordinary high water level must be at least 10 feet;



            3.   The structure or facility must be treated to
reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by
vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, or color, assuming summer,
leaf-on conditions;



            4.   The roof may be used as a deck with safety
rails, but must not be enclosed or used as a storage area;



            5.   The structure or facility must not be
designed or used for human habitation and must not contain water supply or
sewage treatment facilities; and



            6.   As an alternative for general development and
recreational development waterbodies, water-oriented accessory structures
used solely for watercraft storage, and including storage of related boating
and water-oriented sporting equipment, may occupy an area up to 400 square
feet provided the maximum width of the structure is 20 feet as measured
parallel to the configuration of the shoreline.



         (c)   Stairways, lifts, and landings. Stairways and
lifts are the preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for
achieving access up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas.
Stairways and lifts must meet the following design requirements:



            1.   Stairways and lifts must not exceed 4 feet in
width on residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial
properties, public open-space recreational properties, and planned unit
developments;



            2.   Landings for stairways and lifts on
residential lots must not exceed 32 square feet in area. Landings larger than
32 square feet may be used for commercial properties, public open-space
recreational properties, and planned unit developments;



            3.   Canopies or roofs are not allowed on
stairways, lifts, or landings;



            4.   Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either
constructed above the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground;
provided, they are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of
soil erosion;



            5.   Stairways, lifts, and landings must be
located in the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from
the surface of the public water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever
practical; and



            6.   Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility
paths for physically handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving
access to shore areas; provided, that the dimensional and performance
standards of division (B)(2)(c)1. through (B)(2)(c)5. above are complied with
in addition to the requirements of Minn. Rules Ch. 1340.



         (d)   Significant historic sites. No structure may be
placed on a significant historic site in a manner that affects the values of
the site unless adequate information about the site has been removed and
documented in a public repository.



         (e)   Steep slopes. The Building Official and/or the
City Engineer must evaluate possible soil erosion impacts and development
visibility from public waters before issuing a permit for construction of
sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways, structures, or other improvements
on steep slopes. When determined necessary, conditions must be attached to
issued permits to prevent erosion and to preserve existing vegetation
screening of structures, vehicles, and other facilities as viewed from the
surface of public waters, assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation.



      (3)   Height of structures. All structures in residential
districts, except churches and nonresidential agricultural structures, must
not exceed 35 feet in height.



   (C)   Shoreland alterations. Alterations of vegetation and
topography will be regulated to prevent erosion into public waters, fix
nutrients, preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent
bank slumping, and protect fish and wildlife habitat.



      (1)   Vegetation alterations.



         (a)   Vegetation alteration necessary for the
construction of structures and sewage treatment systems and the construction
of roads and parking areas regulated by division (D) below are exempt from
the vegetation alteration standards that follow.



         (b)   Removal or alteration of vegetation, except for
agricultural and forest management uses as regulated in division (F) below is
allowed subject to the following standards.



            1.   Intensive vegetation clearing within the
shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes is not allowed. Intensive
vegetation clearing for forest land conversion to another use outside of
these areas is allowable as a conditional use if an erosion control and
sedimentation plan is developed and approved by the soil and water
conservation district in which the property is located.



            2.   In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep
slopes, limited clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning, and
trimming of trees is allowed to provide a view to the water from the
principal dwelling site and to accommodate the placement of stairways and
landings, picnic areas, access paths, livestock watering areas, beach and
watercraft access areas, and permitted water-oriented accessory structures of
facilities; provided, that:



               a.   The screening of structures, vehicles,
or other facilities as viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on
conditions, is not substantially reduced;



               b.   Along rivers, existing shading of water
surfaces is preserved; and



               c.   The above provisions are not applicable
to the removal of trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose
safety hazards.



      (2)   Topographic alterations/grading and filling.



         (a)   Grading and filling and excavations necessary for
the construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways under
validly issued construction permits for these facilities do not require the
issuance of a separate grading and filling permit; however, the grading and
filling standards in this subchapter must be incorporated into the issuance
of permits for construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and
driveways.



         (b)   Public roads and parking areas are regulated by
division (D) below.



         (c)   Notwithstanding divisions (C)(2)(a) and (C)(2)(b)
above, a grading and filling permit will be required for:



            1.   The movement of more than 10 cubic yards of
material on steep slopes or within shore or bluff impact zones; and



            2.   The movement of more than 50 cubic yards of
material outside of steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones.



         (d)    The following considerations and conditions must
be adhered to during the issuance of construction permits, grading and
filling permits, conditional use permits, variances, and subdivision
approvals:



            1.   Grading or filling in any Type 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, or 8 wetland must be evaluated to determine how extensively the proposed
activity would affect the following functional qualities of the wetland* (*
This evaluation must also include a determination of whether the wetland
alteration being proposed required permits, reviews, or approvals by other
local, state, or federal agencies such as a watershed district, the State
Department of Natural Resources, or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. The
applicant will be so advised):



               a.   Sediment and pollutant trapping and
retention;



               b.   Storage of surface runoff to prevent or
reduce flood damage;



               c.   Fish and wildlife habitat;



               d.   Recreational use;



               e.   Shoreline or bank stabilization; and



               f.   Noteworthiness, including special
qualities such as historic significance, critical habitat for endangered
plants and animals, or others.



            2.   Alterations must be designed and conducted in
a manner that ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for
the shortest time possible;



            3.   Mulches or similar materials must be used,
where necessary, for temporary bare soil coverage, and a permanent vegetation
cover must be established as soon as possible;



            4.   Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap
sediments before they reach any surface water feature must be used;



            5.   Altered areas must be stabilized to
acceptable erosion control standards consistent with the field office
technical guides of the local soil and water conservation districts and the
U.S. Soil Conservation Service;



            6.   Fill or excavated material must not be placed
in a manner that creates an unstable slope;



            7.   Plans to place fill or excavated material on
steep slopes must be reviewed by qualified professionals for continued slope
stability and must not create finished slopes of 30% or greater;



            8.   Fill or excavated material must not be placed
in bluff impact zones;



            9.   Any alterations below the ordinary high water
level of public waters must first be authorized by the Commissioner under
M.S. § 103G.005, as it may be amended from time to time;



            10.   Alterations of topography must only be
allowed if they are accessory to permitted or conditional uses and do not
adversely affect adjacent or nearby properties; and



            11.   Placement of natural rock riprap, including
associated grading of the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, is
permitted if the finished slope does not exceed 3:1 feet horizontal to
vertical, the landward extent of the riprap is within 10 feet of the ordinary
high water level, and the height of the riprap above the ordinary high water
level does not exceed 3 feet.



         (e)   Excavations where the intended purpose is
connection to the public water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons, and
harbors, must be controlled by local shoreland controls. Permission for
excavations may be given only after the Commissioner has approved the
proposed connection to public waters.



   (D)   Placement and design of roads, driveways, and parking areas.



      (1)   Public and private roads and parking areas must be
designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve
maximum screening from view from public waters. Documentation must be
provided by a qualified individual that all roads and parking areas are
designed and constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters
consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water
conservation district, or other applicable technical materials.



      (2)   Roads, driveways, and parking areas must meet structure
setbacks and must not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones, when
other reasonably and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no
alternatives exist, they may be placed within these areas, and must be
designed to minimize adverse impacts.



      (3)   Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach
roads, and access-related parking areas may be placed within shore impact
zones; provided, the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of
this division (D)(3) are met. For private facilities, the grading and filling
provisions of division (C)(2) above must be met.



   (E)   Stormwater management. The following general and specific
standards shall apply.



      (1)   General standards.



         (a)    When possible, existing natural drainageways,
wetlands, and vegetated soil surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter,
and retain stormwater runoff before discharge to public waters.



         (b)   Development must be planned and conducted in a
manner that will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities,
erosion potential, and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must
be stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods
used to retain sediment on the site.



         (c)   When development density, topographic features,
and soil and vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle
stormwater runoff using natural features and vegetation, various types of
constructed facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices,
dikes, waterways, and ponds may be used. Preference must be given to designs
using surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes
and human-made materials and facilities.



      (2)   Specific standards.



         (a)   Impervious surface coverage of lots must not
exceed 25% of the lot area.



         (b)   When constructed facilities are used for
stormwater management, documentation must be provided by a qualified
individual that they are designed and installed consistent with the field
office technical guide of the local soil and water conservation districts.



         (c)   New constructed stormwater outfalls to public
waters must provide for filtering or settling or suspended solids and
skimming of surface debris before discharge.



   (F)   Standards for commercial, industrial, public, and semi-public
uses.



      (1)   Surface water-oriented commercial uses and industrial,
public, or semi-public uses with similar needs to have access to and use of
public waters may be located on parcels or lots with frontage on public
waters. Those uses with water-oriented needs must meet the following
standards:



         (a)   In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits,
setbacks, and other zoning standards in this subchapter, the uses must be
designed to incorporate topographic and vegetative screening of parking areas
and structures;



         (b)   Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring
for patrons must centralize these facilities and design them to avoid
obstructions of navigation and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the
need; and



         (c)   Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft
may use signs and lighting to convey needed information to the public,
subject to the following general standards:



            1.   No advertising signs or supporting facilities
for signs may be placed in or upon public waters. Signs conveying information
or safety messages may be placed in or on public waters by a public authority
or under a permit issued by the County Sheriff;



            2.   Signs may be placed, when necessary, within
the Shore Impact Zone if they are designed and sized to be the minimum
necessary to convey needed information. They must only convey the location
and name of the establishment and the general types of goods or services
available. The signs must not contain other detailed information such as
product brands and prices, must not be located higher than 10 feet above the
ground, and must not exceed 32 square feet in size. If illuminated by
artificial lights, the lights must be shielded or directed to prevent
illumination out across public waters; and



            3.   Other outside lighting may be located within
the Shore Impact Zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to
illuminate potential safety hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to
prevent direct illumination out across public waters. This does not preclude
use of navigational lights.



      (2)   Uses without water-oriented needs must be located on
lots or parcels without public waters frontage, or, if located on lots or
parcels with public waters frontage, must either be setback double the normal
ordinary high water level setback, or be substantially screened from view
from the water by vegetation or topography assuming summer, leaf-on
conditions.



      (3)   (a)   General cultivation farming, grazing,
nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting
are permitted uses if steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones are
maintained in permanent vegetation or operated under an approved conservation
plan (resource management systems) consistent with the field office technical
guides of the local soil and water conservation districts or the U.S. Soil
Conservation Service, as provided by a qualified individual or agency. The
Shore Impact Zone for parcels with permitted agricultural land uses is equal
to a line parallel to and 50 feet from the ordinary high water level.



         (b)   Animal feedlots must meet the following standards:



            1.   New feedlots must not be located in the
shoreland of watercourses or in bluff impact zones and must meet a minimum
setback of 300 feet from the ordinary high water level of all public waters
basins; and



            2.   Modifications or expansions to existing
feedlots that are located within 300 feet of the ordinary high water level or
within a bluff impact zone are allowed if they do not further encroach into
the existing ordinary high water level setback or encroach on bluff impact
zones.



      (4)   Extractive and mining uses shall not be allowed in the
shoreland district.



   (G)   Conditional uses. Conditional uses allowable within shoreland
areas shall be subject to the review and approval procedures, and criteria
and conditions for review of conditional uses established community-wide. The
following additional evaluation criteria and conditions apply within
shoreland areas.



      (1)   Evaluation criteria. A thorough evaluation of the
waterbody and the topographic, vegetation, and soils conditions on the site
must be made to ensure:



         (a)   The prevention of soil erosion or other possible
pollution of public waters, both during and after construction;



         (b)   The visibility of structures and other facilities
as viewed from public waters is limited;



         (c)   The site is adequate for water supply and on-site
and sewage treatment; and



         (d)   The types, uses, and numbers of watercraft that
the project will generate are compatible in relation to the suitability of
public waters to safely accommodate these watercraft.



      (2)   Conditions attached to conditional use permits.



         (a)   The Board of Adjustment and Appeals, upon
consideration of the criteria listed above and the purposes of this
subchapter, shall attach such conditions to the issuance of the conditional
use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this subchapter.



         (b)   Such conditions may include, but are not limited
to, the following:



            1.   Increased setbacks from the ordinary high
water level;



            2.   Limitations on the natural vegetation to be
removed or the requirement that additional vegetation be planted; and



            3.   Special provisions for the location, design,
and use of structures, sewage treatment systems, watercraft, launching and
docking areas, and vehicle parking areas.



   (H)   Water supply and sewage treatment.



      (1)   Water supply. Any public or private supply of water for
domestic purposes must meet or exceed standards for water quality of the
State Department of Health and the State Pollution Control Agency.



      (2)   Sewage treatment. Any premises used for human occupancy
must be provided with an adequate method of sewage treatment, as follows.



         (a)   Publicly-owned sewer systems must be used where
available.



         (b)   All private sewage treatment systems must meet or
exceed the State Pollution Control Agency’s standards for individual sewage
treatment systems contained in the document titled, “Individual Sewage
Treatment Systems Standards, Ch. 7080”, a copy of which is hereby adopted
by reference and declared to be a part of this subchapter.



         (c)   On-site sewage treatment systems must be setback
from the ordinary high water level in accordance with the setbacks contained
in division (B)(1) above.



         (d)   1.   All proposed sites for individual sewage
treatment systems shall be evaluated in accordance with the criteria in
divisions (H)(2)(d)2.a. through (H)(2)(d)2.d below. If the determination of a
site’s suitability cannot be made with publicly available, existing
information, it shall then be the responsibility of the applicant to provide
sufficient soil borings and percolation tests from on-site field
investigations.



            2.   Evaluation criteria is as follows:



               a.   Depth to the highest known or
calculated ground water table or bedrock;



               b.   Soil conditions, properties, and
permeability;



               c.   Slope; and



               d.   The existence of lowlands, local
surface depressions, and rock outcrops.



         (e)   Nonconforming sewage treatment systems shall be
regulated and upgraded in accordance with § 151.070(C).



(2013 Code, § 11.54)  (Ord. 500, passed 11-13-1997; Ord. 537, passed
2-18-1999; Ord. 822, passed 8-6-2009)



§ 151.070  NONCONFORMITIES.



   All legally established nonconformities as of the date of this
subchapter may continue, but they will be managed according to applicable
state statutes and other regulations of this community for the subjects of
alterations and additions, repair after damage, discontinuance of use, and
intensification of use; except that the following standards will also apply
in shoreland areas.



   (A)   Construction on nonconforming lots of record.



      (1)   Lots of record in the office of the County Recorder on
the date of enactment of local shoreland controls that do not meet the
requirements of § 151.069(A) may be allowed as building sites without
variances from lot size requirements provided the use is permitted in the
zoning district, the lot has been in separate ownership from abutting lands
at all times since it became substandard, was created compliant with official
controls in effect at the time, and sewage treatment and setback requirements
of this subchapter are met.



      (2)   A variance from setback requirements must be obtained
before any use, sewage treatment system, or building permit is issued for a
lot. In evaluating the variance, the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall
consider sewage treatment and water supply capabilities or constraints of the
lot and shall deny the variance if adequate facilities cannot be provided.



      (3)   If, in a group of 2 or more contiguous lots under the
same ownership, any individual lot does not meet the requirements of §
151.069(A) the lot must not be considered as a separate parcel of land for
the purposes of sale or development. The lot must be combined with the one or
more contiguous lots so they equal one or more parcels of land, each meeting
the requirements of § 151.069(A)as much as possible.



   (B)   Additions/expansions to nonconforming structures.



      (1)   All additions or expansions to the outside dimensions of
an existing nonconforming structure must meet the setback, height, and other
requirements of § 151.069. Any deviation from these requirements must be
authorized by a variance pursuant to § 151.067(C).



      (2)   Deck additions may be allowed without a variance to a
structure not meeting the required setback from the ordinary high water level
if all of the following criteria and standards are met:



         (a)   The structure existed on the date the structure
setbacks were established;



         (b)   A thorough evaluation of the property and
structure reveals no reasonable location for a deck meeting or exceeding the
existing ordinary high water level setback of the structure;



         (c)   The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high
water level does not exceed 15% of the existing setback of the structure from
the ordinary high water level or does not encroach closer than 30 feet,
whichever is more restrictive; and



         (d)   The deck is constructed primarily of wood, and is
not roofed or screened.



   (C)   Nonconforming sewage treatment systems.



      (1)   A sewage treatment system not meeting the requirements
of § 151.069(H) must be upgraded, at a minimum, at anytime a permit or
variance of any type is required for any improvement on, or use of, the
property. For the purposes of this provision, a sewage treatment system shall
not be considered nonconforming if the only deficiency is the sewage
treatment system’s improper setback from the ordinary high water level.



      (2)   The governing body of the city has by formal resolution
notified the Commissioner of its program to identify nonconforming sewage
treatment systems. The city will require upgrading or replacement of any
nonconforming system identified by this program within a reasonable period of
time which will not exceed 2 years. Sewage systems installed according to all
applicable local shoreland management standards adopted under M.S. §§
103F.201 et seq., as they may be amended from time to time, in effect at the
time of installation may be considered as conforming unless they are
determined to be failing, except that systems using cesspools, leaching pits,
seepage pits, or other deep disposal methods, or systems with less soil
treatment area separation above groundwater than required by the State
Pollution Control Agency’s Ch. 7080 for design of on-site sewage treatment
systems, shall be considered nonconforming.



(2013 Code, § 11.54)  (Ord. 500, passed 11-13-1997)



§ 151.071  SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Land suitability. Each lot created through subdivision must be
suitable in its natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration.
Suitability analysis by the local unit of government shall consider
susceptibility to flooding; existence of wetlands, soil, and rock formations
with severe limitations for development; severe erosion potential; steep
topography; inadequate water supply or sewage treatment capabilities;
near-shore aquatic conditions unsuitable for water-based recreation;
important fish and wildlife habitat; presence of significant historic sites;
or any other feature of the natural land likely to be harmful to the health,
safety, or welfare of future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the
community.



   (B)   Consistency with other controls. Subdivisions must conform to
all official controls of this community. A subdivision will not be approved
where a later variance from one or more standards in official controls would
be needed to use the lots for their intended purpose. In areas not served by
publicly-owned sewer and water systems, a subdivision will not be approved
unless domestic water supply is available and a sewage treatment system
consistent with § 151.069(B) and (H) can be provided for every lot. Each lot
shall meet the minimum lot size and dimensional requirements of §
151.069(A), including at least a minimum contiguous lawn area, that is free
of limiting factors sufficient for the construction of 2 standard soil
treatment systems. Lots that would require use of holding tanks must not be
approved.



   (C)   Information requirements. Sufficient information must be
submitted by the applicant for the community to make a determination of land
suitability. The information shall include at least the following:



      (1)   Topographic contours at ten-foot intervals or less from
U.S. Geological Survey maps or more accurate sources, showing limiting site
characteristics;



      (2)   The surface water features required in M.S. § 505.021,
as it may be amended from time to time, to be shown on plats, obtained from
U.S. Geological Survey quadrangle topographic maps or more accurate sources;



      (3)   Adequate soils information to determine suitability for
building and on-site sewage treatment capabilities for every lot from the
most current existing sources or from field investigations such as soil
borings, percolation tests, or other methods;



      (4)   Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply;
extent of anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations; near-shore
aquatic conditions, including depths, types of bottom sediments, and aquatic
vegetation; and proposed methods for controlling stormwater runoff and
erosion, both during and after construction activities;



      (5)   Location of 100-year floodplain areas and floodway
districts from existing adopted maps or data; and



      (6)   A line or contour representing the ordinary high water
level, the “toe” and the “top” of bluffs, and the minimum building
setback distances from the top of the bluff and the lake or stream.



   (D)   Dedications. When a land or easement dedication is a condition
of subdivision approval, the approval must provide easements over natural
drainage or ponding areas for management of stormwater and significant
wetlands.



   (E)   Platting. All subdivisions that create 5 or more lots or
parcels that are 2-1/2 acres or less in size shall be processed as a plat in
accordance with M.S. Ch. 505, as it may be amended from time to time. No
permit for construction of buildings or sewage treatment systems shall be
issued for lots created after these official controls were enacted unless the
lot was approved as part of a formal subdivision.



   (F)   Controlled access or recreational; lots. Lots intended as
controlled accesses to public waters or for recreational use areas for use by
non-riparian lots within a subdivision must meet or exceed the sizing
criteria in§ 151.069(D).



(2013 Code, § 11.54)  (Ord. 500, passed 11-13-1997)



§ 151.072  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUDS).



   (A)   Types of PUDs permissible. Planned unit developments (PUDs)
are allowed for new projects on undeveloped land, redevelopment of previously
built sites, or conversions of existing buildings and land. The land use
districts in which they are an allowable use are identified in the land use
district descriptions in § 151.068(B) and the official zoning map.



   (B)   Processing of PUDs. Planned unit developments must be
processed consistent with this chapter, except that an expansion to an
existing commercial PUD involving 6 or less new dwelling units or sites since
the date this subchapter was adopted is permissible as a permitted use
provided the total project density does not exceed the allowable densities
calculated in the project density evaluation procedures in division (E)
below. Approval cannot occur until the environmental review process (EAW/EIS)
is complete, where those processes are required by state law and regulation.



   (C)   Application for a PUD. The applicant for a PUD must submit the
following documents prior to final action being taken on the application
request:



      (1)   A site plan and/or plat for the project showing
locations of property boundaries, surface water features, existing, and
proposed structures and other facilities, land alterations, sewage treatment
and water supply systems (where public systems will not be provided), and
topographic contours at ten-foot intervals or less. When a PUD is a combined
commercial and residential development, the site plan and/or plat must
indicate and distinguish which buildings and portions of the project are
residential, commercial, or a combination of the two;



      (2)   A property owner’s association agreement (for
residential PUDs) with mandatory membership, and all in accordance with the
requirements of division (F) below;



      (3)   Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements, or
other instruments that:



         (a)   Properly address future vegetative and topographic
alterations, construction of additional buildings, beaching of watercraft,
and construction of commercial buildings in residential PUDs; and



         (b)   Ensure the long-term preservation and maintenance
of open space in accordance with the criteria and analysis specified in
division (F) below.



      (4)   When necessary, a master plan/drawing describing the
project and the floor plan for all commercial structures to be occupied; and



      (5)   Those additional documents as requested by the Zoning
Official that are necessary to explain how the PUD will be designed and will
function.



   (D)   Site “suitable area” evaluation. Proposed new or
expansions to existing planned unit developments must be evaluated using the
following procedures and standards to determine the suitable area for the
dwelling unit/dwelling site density evaluation in division (E) below.



      (1)   The project parcel must be divided into tiers by
locating one or more lines approximately parallel to a line that identifies
the ordinary high water level at the following intervals, proceeding landward.



 


Shoreland Tier Dimensions




 

Unsewered

 

Sewered



All river classes
 

300 feet

 

300 feet



Natural environment lakes
 

400 feet

 

320 feet



Recreational development lakes
 

267 feet

 

267 feet




 



      (2)   The suitable area within each tier is next calculated by
excluding from the tier area of all wetlands, bluffs, or land below the
ordinary high water level of public waters. This suitable area and the
proposed project are then subjected to either the residential or commercial
planned unit development density evaluation steps to arrive at an allowable
number of dwelling units or sites.



   (E)   Residential and commercial PUD density evaluation. The
procedures for determining the “base” density of a PUD and density
increase multipliers are as follows. Allowable densities may be transferred
from any tier to any other tier further from the waterbody, but must not be
transferred to any other tier closer.



      (1)   Residential PUD “base” density evaluation. The
suitable area within each tier is divided by the single residential lot size
standard for lakes or, for rivers, the single residential lot width standard
times the tier depth, unless the local unit of government has specified an
alternative minimum lot size for rivers which shall then be used to yield a
base density of dwelling units or sites for each tier. Proposed locations and
numbers of dwelling units or sites for the residential planned unit
developments are then compared with the tier, density, and suitability
analyses herein and the design criteria in division (F) below.



      (2)   Commercial PUD “base” density evaluation.



         (a)   Determine the average inside living area size of
dwelling units or sites within each tier, including both existing and
proposed units and sites. Computation of inside living area sizes need not
include decks, patios, stoops, steps, garages, or porches and basements,
unless they are habitable space.



         (b)   Select the appropriate floor area ratio from the
following table.



 


Commercial Planned Unit Development Floor Area Ratios *



Public Waters Classes




*Average
Unit Floor
Area (Square Feet)

 

Agricultural
And Tributary River Segments

 

Recreational Development Lakes and Transition River Segments River Segments

 

Natural
Environment






1,000

 

.108

 

.054

 

.027




1,100

 

.116

 

.058

 

.029




1,200

 

.125

 

.064

 

.032




1,300

 

.133

 

.068

 

.034




1,400

 

.142

 

.072

 

.036




1,500

 

.150

 

.075

 

.038



Note:

* For average unit floor areas less than shown, use the floor area ratios
listed for 200 square feet. For areas greater than shown, use the ratios
listed for 1,500 square feet. For recreational camping areas, use the ratios
listed at 400 square feet. Manufactured home sites in recreational camping
areas shall use a ratio equal to the size of the manufactured home, or if
unknown, the ratio listed for 1,000 square feet




 



         (c)   Multiply the suitable area within each tier by the
floor area ratio to yield total floor area for each tier allowed to be used
for dwelling units or sites.



         (d)   Divide the total floor area by tier computed in
division (E)(2)(c) above by the average inside living area size determined in
division (E)(2)(a) above. This yields a base number of dwelling units and
sites for each tier.



         (e)   Proposed locations and numbers of dwelling units
or sites for the commercial planned unit development are then compared with
the tier, density, and suitability analyses herein and the design criteria in
division (F) below.



      (3)   Density increase multipliers.



         (a)   Increases to the dwelling unit or dwelling site
base densities previously determined are allowable if the dimensional
standards in § 151.069 are met or exceeded and the design criteria in
division (F) below are satisfied. The allowable density increases in division
(E)(3)(b) below will only be allowed if structure setbacks from the ordinary
high water level are increased to at least 50% greater than the minimum
setback, or the impact on the waterbody is reduced an equivalent amount
through vegetative management, topography, or additional means acceptable to
the local unit of government and the setback is at least 25% greater than the
minimum setback.



         (b)   Allowable dwelling unit or dwelling site density
increases for residential or commercial planned unit developments.



 

Density Evaluation Tiers
 
Maximum Density Increase Within Each Tier (Percent)



First

 

50




Second

 

100




Third

 

200




Fourth

 

200




Fifth

 

200




 



   (F)   Maintenance and design criteria.



      (1)   Maintenance and administration requirements.



         (a)   Generally. Before final approval of a planned unit
development, adequate provisions must be developed for preservation and
maintenance in perpetuity of open spaces and for the continued existence and
functioning of the development.



         (b)   Open space preservation.



            1.   Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent
easements, public dedication, and acceptance, or other equally effective and
permanent means must be provided to ensure long-term preservation and
maintenance of open space.



            2.   The instruments must include all of the
following protections:



               a.   Commercial uses prohibited (for
residential PUDs);



               b.   Vegetation and topographic alterations
other than routine maintenance prohibited;



               c.   Construction of additional buildings or
storage of vehicles and other materials prohibited; and



               d.   Uncontrolled beaching of watercraft
prohibited.



         (c)   Development organization and functioning. Unless
an equally effective alternative community framework is established, when
applicable, all residential planned unit developments must use an owner’s
association with the following features:



            1.   Membership must be mandatory for each
dwelling unit or site purchaser and any successive purchasers;



            2.   Each member must pay a pro rata share of the
association’s expenses, and unpaid assessments can become liens on units or
sites;



            3.   Assessments must be adjustable to accommodate
changing conditions; and



            4.   The association must be responsible for
insurance, taxes, and maintenance of all commonly owned property and
facilities.



      (2)   Open space requirements. Planned unit developments must
contain open space meeting all of the following criteria:



         (a)   At least 50% of the total project area must be
preserved as open space;



         (b)   Dwelling units or sites, road rights-of-way, or
land covered by road surfaces, parking areas, or structures, except
water-oriented accessory structures or facilities, are developed areas and
shall not be included in the computation of minimum open space;



         (c)   Open space must include areas with physical
characteristics unsuitable for development in their natural state, and areas
containing significant historic sites or unplatted cemeteries;



         (d)   Open space may include outdoor recreational
facilities for use by owners of dwelling units or sites, by guests staying in
commercial dwelling units or sites, and by the general public;



         (e)   Open space may include sub-surface sewage
treatment systems if the use of the space is restricted to avoid adverse
impacts on the systems;



         (f)   Open space must not include commercial facilities
or uses, but may contain water-oriented accessory structures or facilities;



         (g)   The appearance of open space areas, including
topography, vegetation, and allowable uses, must be preserved by use of
restrictive deed covenants, permanent easements, public dedication and
acceptance, or other equally effective and permanent means; and



         (h)   The Shore Impact Zone, based on normal structure
setbacks, must be included as open space. For residential PUDs, at least 50%
of the Shore Impact Zone area of existing developments, or at least 70% of
the Shore Impact Zone area of new developments must be preserved in its
natural or existing state. For commercial PUDs, at least 50% of the Shore
Impact Zone must be preserved in its natural state.



      (3)   Erosion control and stormwater management. Erosion
control and stormwater management plans must be developed and the PUD must:



         (a)   Be designed, and the construction managed, to
minimize the likelihood of serious erosion occurring either during or after
construction. This must be accomplished by limiting the amount and length of
time of bare ground exposure. Temporary ground covers, sediment entrapment
facilities, vegetated buffer strips, or other appropriate techniques must be
used to minimize erosion impacts on surface water features. Erosion control
plans approved by a soil and water conservation district may be required if
project size and site physical characteristics warrant; and



         (b)   Be designed and constructed to effectively manage
reasonably expected quantities and qualities of stormwater runoff. Impervious
surface coverage within any tier must not exceed 25% of the tier area, except
that for commercial PUDs 35% impervious surface coverage may be allowed in
the first tier of general development lakes with an approved stormwater
management plan and consistency with § 151.069(C).



      (4)   Centralization and design of facilities. Centralization
and design of facilities and structures must be done according to the
following standards:



         (a)   Planned unit developments must be connected to
publicly-owned water supply and sewer systems, if available. On-site water
supply and sewage treatment systems must be centralized and designed and
installed to meet or exceed applicable standards or rules of the State
Department of Health and § 151.069(B) and (H). On-site sewage treatment
systems must be located on the most suitable areas of the development, and
sufficient lawn area free of limiting factors must be provided for a
replacement soil treatment system for each sewage system;



         (b)   Dwelling units or sites must be clustered into one
or more groups and located on suitable areas of the development. They must be
designed and located to meet or exceed the following dimensional standards
for the relevant shoreland classification: setback from the ordinary high
water level, elevation above the surface water features, and maximum height.
Setbacks from the ordinary high water level must be increased in accordance
with division (E)(3) above or developments with density increases;



         (c)   Shore recreation facilities including, but not
limited to, swimming areas, docks, and watercraft mooring areas and launching
ramps, must be centralized and located in areas suitable for them. Evaluation
of suitability must include consideration of land slope, water depth,
vegetation, soils, depth to groundwater and bedrock, or other relevant
factors. The number of spaces provided for continuous beaching, mooring, or
docking of watercraft must not exceed one for each allowable dwelling unit or
site in the first tier (notwithstanding existing mooring sites in an existing
commercially used harbor). Launching ramp facilities, including a small dock
for loading and unloading equipment, may be provided for use by occupants of
dwelling units or sites located in other tiers;



         (d)   Structures, parking areas, and other facilities
must be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and
adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color, or
other means acceptable to the local unit of government, assuming summer,
leaf-on conditions. Vegetative and topographic screening must be preserved,
if existing, or may be required to be provided;



         (e)    Accessory structures and facilities, except
water-oriented accessory structures, must meet the required principal
structure setback and must be centralized; and



         (f)   Water-oriented accessory structures and facilities
may be allowed if they meet or exceed design standards contained in §
151.069(B) and are centralized.



   (G)   Conversions. Local governments may allow existing resorts or
other land uses and facilities to be converted to residential planned unit
developments if all of the following standards are met.



      (1)   Proposed conversions must be initially evaluated using
the same procedures for residential planned unit developments involving all
new construction. Inconsistencies between existing features of the
development and these standards must be identified.



      (2)   Deficiencies involving water supply and sewage
treatment, structure color, impervious coverage, open space, and shore
recreation facilities must be corrected as part of the conversion or as
specified in the conditional use permit.



      (3)    Shore and bluff impact zone deficiencies must be
evaluated and reasonable improvements made as part of the conversion. These
improvements must include, where applicable, the following:



         (a)   Removal of extraneous buildings, docks, or other
facilities that no longer need to be located in shore or bluff impact zones;



         (b)   Remedial measures to correct erosion-sites and
improve vegetative cover and screening of buildings and other facilities as
viewed from the water; and



         (c)   If existing dwelling units are located in shore or
bluff impact zones, conditions are attached to approvals of conversions that
preclude exterior expansions in any dimension or substantial alterations. The
conditions must also provide for future relocation of dwelling units, where
feasible, to other locations, meeting all setback and elevation requirements
when they are rebuilt or replaced.



      (4)   (a)   Existing dwelling unit or dwelling site
densities that exceed standards in division (E) above may be allowed to
continue but must not be allowed to be increased, either at the time of
conversion or in the future.



         (b)   Efforts must be made during the conversion to
limit impacts of high densities by requiring seasonal use, improving
vegetative screening, centralizing shore recreation facilities, installing
new sewage treatment systems, or other means.



(2013 Code, § 11.54)  (Ord. 500, passed 11-13-1997)



§ 151.073  INDUSTRIAL USES ON NATURAL ENVIRONMENT LAKES.



   (A)   Conditional use permit required. Industrial uses are allowed
on natural environment lakes by conditional use permit if such uses are
allowed by this chapter in the underlying zoning district, and if the
conditions attached to the development of the site are met.



   (B)   Impervious surface coverage.



      (1)   Industrial uses on natural environment lakes shall be
allowed 50% maximum lot coverage with impervious surfaces.



      (2)   This can be increased to 75% maximum lot coverage if the
city has an adopted stormwater management plan which adequately addresses
stormwater runoff and surface water quality issues in the city, and a
specific site plan is reviewed and approved by the city for the Industrial
use in question which follows the policies and procedures in the stormwater
management plan and which utilizes accepted engineering practices to divert,
detain, and/or treat runoff before entering the natural environment lake.



   (C)   Building height. The maximum allowable building height for
industrial uses on natural environment lakes is 35 feet.



   (D)   Substantial screening. SUBSTANTIALLY SCREENED FROM VIEW OF
WATER as required in § 151.069(D) when applied to industrial uses on natural
environment lakes which are considered “uses without water-oriented
needs”, shall mean screening of at least 75% opacity in summer, leaf-on
conditions, by either vegetation or topography, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.



   (E)   Trails in Shore Impact Zone. Trails may be allowed in the
Shore Impact Zone as part of a conditional use permit.



(2013 Code, § 11.54)  (Ord. 500, passed 11-13-1997; Ord. 537, passed
2-18-1999)




FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONE (FP)




§ 151.085  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   Statutory authorization. The legislature of the state has, in
M.S. Chs. 103F and 462, as they may be amended from time to time, delegated
the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to
minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council of the city does ordain as
follows.



   (B)   Findings of fact.



      (1)   Generally. The flood hazard areas of the city are
subject to periodic inundation which results in potential loss of life, loss
of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection
and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety, and general welfare.



      (2)   Methods used to analyze flood hazards. This subchapter
is based upon a reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which is
consistent with the standards established by the State Department of Natural
Resources.



   (C)   Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this subchapter to
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize those
losses described in division (B)(1) above by provisions contained herein.



   (D)   Amendments.



      (1)   (a)   The floodplain designation on the official
zoning map shall not be removed from floodplain areas unless it can be shown
that the designation is in error or that the area has been filled to or above
the elevation of the regional flood and is contiguous to lands outside the
floodplain.



         (b)   Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted
by the Commissioner of Natural Resources if Commissioner determines that,
through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use.



      (2)   (a)   All amendments to this subchapter, including
amendments to the official zoning map, must be submitted to and approved by
the Commissioner of Natural Resources prior to adoption. Changes in the
official zoning map must meet the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s
(FEMA) technical conditions and criteria and must receive prior FEMA approval
before adoption.



         (b)   The Commissioner of Natural Resources must be
given 10 days’ written notice of all hearings to consider an amendment to
this subchapter and said notice shall include a draft of the ordinance
amendment or technical study under consideration.



(2013 Code, § 11.56) (Ord. 567, passed 3-16-2000)



§ 151.086  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Lands to which subchapter applies. This subchapter shall apply
to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city shown on the official zoning
map and/or the attachments thereto as being located within the boundaries of
the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts.



   (B)   Establishment of official zoning map. The official zoning map
together with all materials attached thereto is hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this subchapter. The attached material shall
include the flood insurance study for the city prepared by the Federal
Insurance Administration, dated September 29, 1978 therein, the letter of map
revision, issued by the Federal Emergency Management and dated October 23,
1997, and all of the attachments thereto relating to revisions to the flood
boundary and floodway map, flood insurance rate map, and floodway data table.
The official zoning map shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk and
the Community Development Department.



   (C)   Regulatory flood protection elevation. The regulatory flood
protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the
elevation of the regional flood, plus any increases in flood elevation caused
by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway.



   (D)   Interpretation.



      (1)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this subchapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be
liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.



      (2)   The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be
determined by scaling distances on the official zoning map. Where
interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the
district as shown on the official zoning map, as for example where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions and there is a formal appeal of the decision of the Zoning
Administration, the Board of Adjustment shall make the necessary
interpretation. All decisions will be based on elevations on the regional
100-year flood profile and other available technical data. Persons contesting
the location of the district boundaries shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to present their case to the Board and to submit technical
evidence.



   (E)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by
this subchapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions; however, where this subchapter imposes
greater restrictions, the provisions of this subchapter shall prevail. All
other subchapters inconsistent with this subchapter are hereby repealed to
the extent of inconsistency only.



   (F)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. This subchapter does not
imply that areas outside the floodplain districts or land uses permitted
within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
subchapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer
or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
subchapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



   (G)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURES. A use or structure on the same lot
with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.



      BASEMENT. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having
its floor or base sub-grade (below ground level) on all 4 sides, regardless
of the depth of excavation below ground level.



      CONDITIONAL USE. A specific type of structure or land use listed
in the official control that may be allowed but only after an in-depth review
procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the
official zoning controls or building codes and upon a finding that:



         (a)   Certain conditions as detailed in the zoning
ordinance exist; and



         (b)   The structure and/or land use conform to the
comprehensive land use plan if one exists and are compatible with the
existing neighborhood.



      EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT. A method of determining the
location of floodway boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a
stream are capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.



      FLOOD. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or
in the stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally
dry areas.



      FLOOD FREQUENCY. The frequency for which it is expected that a
specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.



      FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the floodplain outside of the
floodway. FLOOD FRINGE is synonymous with the term FLOODWAY FRINGE used in
the flood insurance study for the city.



      FLOODPLAIN. The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland,
lake, or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the
regional flood.



      FLOOD-PROOFING.A combination of structural provision, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for
the reduction or elimination of flood damages.



      FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a
watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are
reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge.



      OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building,
wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across,
or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory floodplain which
may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in
itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water.



      PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE. All uses or structures that are not
accessory uses or structures.



      REACH. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal
segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or human-made
obstruction. In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between 2
consecutive bridge crossings would most typically constitute a REACH.



      REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods
known to have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic
of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of
the 100-year recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous with the term
BASE FLOOD used in the flood insurance study.



      REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. An elevation no lower than
one foot above the elevation, of the regional flood, plus any increases in
flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from
designation of a floodway.



       STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to,
buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes,
travel trailers, vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in §
151.092(C) and other similar items.



      VARIANCE. A modification of a specific permitted development
standard required in an official control including this subchapter to allow
an alternative development standard not stated as acceptable in the official
control, but only as applied to a particular property for the purpose of
alleviating a hardship, practical difficulty, or unique circumstance as
defined and elaborated upon in a community’s respective planning and zoning
enabling legislation.



(2013 Code, § 11.56)  (Ord. 567, passed 3-16-2000; Ord. 568, passed
5-25-2000)



§ 151.087  ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Districts.



      (1)   Floodway District. The Floodway District shall include
those areas designated as floodway on the flood boundary and floodway map
adopted in § 151.086(B).



      (2)   Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District shall
include those areas designated as floodway fringe on the flood boundary and
floodway map adopted in § 151.086(B).



   (B)   Compliance.



      (1)   No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no
structure shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered
without full compliance with the terms of this subchapter and other
applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this
subchapter. Within the Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts, all uses not
listed as permitted uses or conditional uses in §§ 151.088 and 151.089 that
follow, respectively, shall be prohibited.



      (2)   In addition, a caution is provided herein that:



         (a)   New manufactured home, replacement manufactured
homes and certain travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the
general provisions of this subchapter and specifically § 151.092; and



         (b)   Modifications, additions, structural alterations,
or repair after damage to existing nonconforming structures and nonconforming
uses of structures of land are regulated by the general provisions of this
subchapter and specifically § 151.094.



      (3)   As-built elevations for elevated or flood-proofed
structures must be certified by ground surveys and flood-proofing techniques
must be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect as specified in the general provisions of this subchapter and
specifically as stated in § 151.093.



(2013 Code, § 11.56)  (Ord. 567, passed 3-16-2000)



§ 151.088  FLOODWAY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant
nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop
harvesting;



      (2)   Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and
airport landing strips;



      (3)   Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving
ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas,
parks wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting
preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas,
and single- or multiple-purpose recreational trails; and



      (4)   Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play
areas.



   (B)   Standards for floodway permitted uses.



      (1)   The use shall have a low flood damage potential.



      (2)   The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning
district if one exists.



      (3)   The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood
elevations and shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations,
or storage of materials or equipment.



   (C)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   Structures accessory to the uses listed in division (A)
above and the uses listed in divisions (C)(2) through (C)(8) below;



      (2)   Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other
materials;



      (3)   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and
water-control structures;



      (4)   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines,
and pipelines;



      (5)   Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials;



      (6)   Placement of fill;



      (7)   Travel trailers and travel vehicles either on individual
lots of record or in existing or new subdivisions or commercial or
condominium type campgrounds, subject to the exemptions and provisions of §
151.092(C); and



      (8)   Structural works for flood control such as levees,
dikes, and floodwalls constructed to any height where the intent is to
protect individual structures and levees or dikes where the intent is to
protect agricultural crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than
the ten-year frequency flood event.



   (D)   Standards for floodway conditional uses.



      (1)   No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including
fill for roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or
equipment, or other uses may be allowed as a conditional use that will cause
any increase in the stage of the 100-year or regional flood or cause an
increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected.



      (2)   All floodway conditional uses shall be subject to the
procedures and standards contained in § 151.093(D).



      (3)   The conditional uses shall be permissible in the
underlying zoning district if one exists.



      (4)   (a)   Fill, dredge spoil, and all other similar
materials deposited or stored in the floodplain shall be protected from
erosion by vegetative cover, mulching, riprap, or other acceptable method.



         (b)   Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations
shall not be allowed in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan
is submitted which includes and erosion/sedimentation prevention element to
the plan.



         (c)   As an alternative, and consistent with division
(D)(4)(b) above, dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel operations may
allow temporary, on-site storage of fill or other materials which would have
caused an increase to the stage of the 100-year or regional flood, but only
after the governing body has received an appropriate plan which assures the
removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning time
available. The conditional use permit must be title registered with the
property in the office of the County Recorder.



      (5)   (a)   Accessory structures shall not be designed for
human habitation.



         (b)   Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be
constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of flood waters.



            1.   Whenever possible, structures shall be
constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood
flow; and



            2.   So far as practicable, structures shall be
placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining
structures.



         (c)   1.   Accessory structures shall be elevated on
fill or structurally dry flood-proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2
flood-proofing classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative,
an accessory structure may be flood-proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4
flood-proofing classification in the State Building Code provided the
accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed 500
square feet in size, and for a detached garage, the detached garage must be
used solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage.



            2.   All flood-proofed accessory structures must
meet the following additional standards, as appropriate:



               a.   The structure must be adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure
and shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls;
and



               b.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in
a structure must be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation or properly flood-proofed.



      (6)   (a)   The storage or processing of materials that
are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to
human, animal, or plant life is prohibited.



         (b)   Storage of other materials or equipment may be
allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a
flood warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the governing body.



      (7)   Structural works for flood control that will change the
course, current or cross-section of protected wetlands or public waters shall
be subject to the provisions of M.S. Ch. 103G, as it may be amended from time
to time. Community-wide structural works for flood control intended to remove
areas from the regulatory floodplain shall not be allowed in the floodway.



      (8)   A levee, dike, or floodwall constructed in the floodway
shall not cause an increase to the 100-year or regional flood and the
technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides
of a stream.



(2013 Code, § 11.56)  (Ord. 567, passed 3-16-2000)



§ 151.089  FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (FF).



   (A)   Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or
structures listed as permitted uses in the underlying zoning use district(s).
If no pre-existing, underlying zoning use districts exist, then any
residential or nonresidential structure or use of a structure or land shall
be a permitted use in the Flood Fringe provided such use does not constitute
a public nuisance. All permitted uses shall comply with the standards for
flood fringe permitted uses listed in division (B) below and the standards
for all flood fringe uses listed in division (E) below.



   (B)   Standards for flood fringe permitted uses.



      (1)   All structures, including accessory structures, must be
elevated on fill so that the lowest floor including basement floor is at or
above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation
for structures shall be no lower than one foot below the regulatory flood
protection elevation and the fill shall extend at such elevation at least 15
feet beyond the outside limits of the structure erected thereon.



      (2)   As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory
structures that constitute a minimal investment and that do not exceed 500
square feet for the outside dimension at ground level may be internally
flood-proofed in accordance with § 151.088(D)(5).



      (3)    The cumulative placement of fill where at any one time
in excess of 1,000 cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel shall be
allowable only as a conditional use, unless said fill is specifically
intended to elevate a structure in accordance with division (B)(1) above.



      (4)   The storage of any materials or equipment shall be
elevated on fill to the regulatory flood protection elevation.



      (5)   The provisions of division (E) below shall apply.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Any structure that is not elevated on fill
or flood-proofed in accordance with divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above or any
use of land that does not comply with the standards in divisions (B)(3) and
(B)(4) above, shall only be allowable as a conditional use. An application
for a conditional use shall be subject to the standards and criteria and
evaluation procedures specified in divisions (D) and (E) below and §
151.093(D).



   (D)   Standards for flood fringe conditional uses.



      (1)   Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill
may be utilized to elevate a structure’s lowest floor above the regulatory
flood protection elevation. These alternative methods may include the use of
stilts, pilings, parallel walls, and the like, or above-grade, enclosed areas
such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed
area shall be considered above-grade and not a structure’s basement or
lowest floor if:



         (a)   If the enclosed area is above-grade on at least
one side of the structure;



         (b)   It is designed to internally flood and is
constructed with flood resistant materials; and



         (c)   It is used solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage. The above-noted alternative elevation methods are
subject to the following additional standards.



            1.   Design and certification. The structure’s
design and as-built condition must be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect as being in compliance with the general design
standards of the State Building Code and, specifically, that all electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipments and other
service facilities must be at or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation or be designed to prevent flood water from entering or accumulating
within these components during times of flooding.



            2.   Specific standards for above-grade, enclosed
areas. Above-grade, fully-enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under
garages must be designed to internally flood and the design plans must
stipulate:



               a.   The minimum area of openings in the
walls where internal flooding is to be used as a flood-proofing technique.
When openings are placed in a structure’s walls to provide for entry of
flood waters to equalize pressures, the bottom of all openings shall be no
higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves, or other coverings, or devices; provided, that they permit
the automatic entry and exit of flood waters; and



               b.   The enclosed area will be designed of
flood resistant materials in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 Classifications
in the State Building Code and shall be used solely for building access,
parking of vehicles or storage.



      (2)   Basements, as defined by § 151.086(G), shall be subject
to the following.



         (a)   Residential basement construction shall not be
allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation.



         (b)   Nonresidential basements may be allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation provided the basement is structurally
dry flood-proofed in accordance with division (D)(3) below.



      (3)   All areas of nonresidential structures including
basements to be placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation, shall
be flood-proofed in accordance with the structurally dry flood-proofing
classifications in the State Building Code. Structurally dry flood-proofing
must meet the FP-1 or FP-2 flood-proofing classification in the State
Building Code and this shall require making the structure water- tight with
the walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. Structures flood-proofed to
the FP-3 or FP-4 classification shall not be permitted.



      (4)   When at any one time more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill
or other similar material is located on a parcel for such activities as
on-site storage, landscaping, sand, and gravel operations, landfills, roads
dredge spoil disposal, or construction of flood control works, an
erosion/sedimentation control plan must be submitted unless the community is
enforcing a state-approved shoreland management ordinance. In the absence of
a state-approved shoreland ordinance, the plan must clearly specify methods
to be used to stabilize the fill on-site for a flood event at a minimum of
the 100-year or regional flood event. The plan must be prepared and certified
by a registered professional engineer or other qualified individual
acceptable to the governing body. The plan may incorporate alternative
procedures for removal of the material from the floodplain if adequate flood
warning time exists.



      (5)   (a)   The storage or processing of materials that
are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to
human, animal, or plant life is prohibited.



         (b)   Storage of other materials or equipment may be
allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a
flood warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the governing body.



      (6)   The provisions of division (E) below shall also apply.



   (E)   Standards for all flood fringe uses.



      (1)   Generally. All new principal structures must have
vehicular access at or above an elevation not more than 2 feet below the
regulatory flood protection elevation. If a variance to this requirement is
granted, the Board of Adjustment must specify limitations on the period of
use or occupancy of the structure for time of flooding and only after
determining that adequate flood warning time and local flood emergency
response procedures exist.



      (2)   Commercial uses. Accessory land uses, such as yards,
railroad tracks, and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation; however, a permit for such facilities
to be used by the employees or the general public shall not be granted in the
absence of a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation
if the area would be inundated to a depth greater than 2 feet or be subject
to flood velocities greater than 4 feet per second upon occurrence of the
regional flood.



      (3)   Manufacturing and industrial uses. Measures shall be
taken to minimize interference with normal plat operations especially along
streams having protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses such
as yards and parking lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements
set out in division (E)(2) above. In considering permit applications, due
consideration shall be given to needs of an industry whose business requires
that it be located in floodplain areas.



      (4)   Slope protection. Fill shall be properly compacted and
the slopes shall be properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative
cover, or other acceptable method. The Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) has established criteria for removing the special flood hazard area
designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill above the
100-year flood elevation. FEMA’s requirements incorporate specific fill
compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or
multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the
initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area
designation will be requested.



      (5)   Floodplain developments. Floodplain developments shall
not adversely affect the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining
floodplain of any tributary watercourse or drainage system where a floodway
or other encroachment limit has not been specified on the official zoning map.



      (6)   Standards for ravel trailers. Standards for travel
trailers and travel vehicles are contained in § 151.092(C).



      (7)   Securing manufactured homes. All manufactured homes must
be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state or local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.



(2013 Code, § 11.56)  (Ord. 567, passed 3-16-2000; Ord. 568, passed
5-25-2000)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.090  SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   Review criteria. No land shall be subdivided which is
unsuitable for the reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply, or
sewage treatment facilities. All lots within the floodplain districts shall
contain a building site at or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation. All subdivisions shall have water and sewage treatment facilities
that comply with the provisions of this subchapter and have road access both
to the subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower than 2 feet
below the regulatory flood protection elevation. For all subdivisions in the
floodplain, the floodway and flood fringe boundaries, the regulatory flood
protection elevation, and the required elevation of all access roads shall be
clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting documents.



   (B)   Removal of special flood hazard area designation. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the
special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly
elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA’s requirements
incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for
multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should be
investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special flood hazard area designation will be requested.



(2013 Code, § 11.56)  (Ord. 567, passed 3-16-2000)



§ 151.091  PUBLIC UTILITIES, RAILROAD, ROADS, AND BRIDGES.



   (A)   Public utilities. All public utilities and facilities such as
gas, electrical, sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the
floodplain shall be flood-proofed in accordance with the State Building Code
or elevated to above the regulatory flood protection elevation.



   (B)   Public transportation facilities. Railroad tracks, roads, and
bridges to be located within the floodplain shall comply with §§ 151.088
and 151.090. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be
provided where failure or interruption of these transportation facilities
would result in danger to the public health or safety or where such
facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or
auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where
failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the
public health or safety.



   (C)   On-site sewage treatment and water supply systems. Where
public utilities are not provided:



      (1)   On-site water supply systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and



      (2)   New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters and they shall not
be subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding. Any
sewage treatment system designed in accordance with the state’s current
statewide standards for on-site sewage treatment systems shall be determined
to be in compliance with this subchapter.



(2013 Code, § 11.56)  (Ord. 567, passed 3-16-2000)



§ 151.092  MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND PLACEMENT OF
TRAVEL TRAILERS AND TRAVEL VEHICLES.



   (A)   New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing mobile
manufactured home parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on
subdivisions by § 151.090.



   (B)   The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in
existing manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are
located in floodplain districts will be treated as a new structure and may be
placed only if elevated in compliance with § 151.089. If vehicular road
access for pre- existing manufactured home parks is not provided in
accordance with § 151.089, then replacement manufactured homes will not be
allowed until the property owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan
acceptable to the governing body. All manufactured homes must be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces.



   (C)   Travel trailers and travel vehicles that do not meet the
exemption criteria specified in division (C)(1) below shall be subject to the
provisions of this subchapter and as specifically spelled out in divisions
(C)(3) and (C)(4) below.



      (1)   Exemption. Travel trailers and travel vehicles are
exempt from the provisions of this subchapter if they are placed in any of
the areas listed in division (C)(2) below and further they meet the following
criteria:



         (a)   Have current licenses required for highway use;



         (b)   Are highway ready, meaning on wheels or the
internal jacking system, are attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities commonly used in campgrounds and trailer parks and the travel
trailer/travel vehicle has no permanent structural type additions attached to
it; and



         (c)   The travel trailer or travel vehicle and
associated use must be permissible in any pre-existing, underlying zoning use
district.



      (2)   Areas exempted for placement of travel/recreational
vehicles.



         (a)   Individual lots or parcels of record;



         (b)   Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds; and



         (c)   Existing condominium type associations.



      (3)   Travel trailers and travel vehicles; exemptions. Travel
trailers and travel vehicles exempted in division (C)(1) above lose this
exemption when development occurs on the parcel exceeding $500 dollars for a
structural addition to the travel trailer/travel vehicle or an accessory
structure such as a garage or a storage building. The travel trailer/travel
vehicle and all additions and accessory structures will then be treated as a
new structure and shall be subject to the elevation/flood-proofing
requirements and the use of land restrictions specified in §§ 151.088 and
151.089.



      (4)   New commercial travel trailers. New commercial travel
trailer or travel vehicle parks or campgrounds and new residential type
subdivisions and condominium associations and the expansion of any existing
similar use exceeding 5 units or dwelling sites shall be subject to the
following:



         (a)   Any new or replacement travel trailer or travel
vehicle will be allowed in the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts provided
said trailer or vehicle and its contents are placed on fit above the
regulatory flood protection elevation and proper elevated road access to the
site exists in accordance with § 151.089(E)(1). Any fill placed in a
floodway for the purpose of elevating a travel trailer shall be subject to
the requirements of § 151.088.



         (b)   All new or replacement travel trailers or travel
vehicles not meeting the criteria of division (C)(4)(a) above may, as an
alternative, be allowed as a conditional use if in accordance with the
following provisions and the provisions of § 151.093(D). The applicant must
submit an emergency plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people
during the 100-year flood. Said plan shall be prepared by a registered
engineer or other qualified individual and shall demonstrate that adequate
time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation. All attendant sewage
and water facilities for new or replacement travel trailers or other
recreational vehicles must be protected or constructed so as to not be
impaired or contaminated during times of flooding in accordance with §
151.091(C).



(2013 Code, § 11.56)  (Ord. 567, passed 3-16-2000)



§ 151.093  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Zoning Administrator. A Zoning Administrator or other official
designated by the governing body shall administer and enforce this
subchapter. If the Zoning Administrator finds a violation of the provisions
of this subchapter, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the person
responsible for such violation in accordance with the procedures stated in §
151.999.



   (B)   Permit requirements.



      (1)   Permit required. A permit issued by the Zoning
Administrator in conformity with the provisions of this subchapter shall be
secured prior to the erection, addition, or alteration of any building,
structure, or portion thereof, prior to the use or change of use of a
building, structure, or land; prior to the change or extension of a
nonconforming use; and prior to the placement of fill, excavation of
materials, or the storage of materials or equipment within the floodplain.



      (2)   Application for permit. Application for a permit shall
be made in duplicate to the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished by the
Zoning Administrator and shall include the following where applicable; plans
in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill, or storage of
materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation to the stream
channel.



      (3)   State and federal permits. Prior to granting a permit or
processing an application for a conditional use permit or variance, the
Zoning Administrator shall determine that the applicant has obtained all
necessary state and federal permits.



      (4)   Certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered, or
nonconforming use. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or
occupancy of any building or premises or part thereof hereafter created,
erected, changed, converted, altered, or enlarged in its use or structure
until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning
Administrator state that the use of the building or land conforms to the
requirements of this subchapter.



      (5)   Construction and use to be provided on applications,
plans, and the like. Permits, conditional use permits, or certificates of
zoning compliance issued on the basis of approved plans and applications
authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such
approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or
construction. Any user, arrangement, or construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter, and punishable as
provided by § 151.999.



      (6)   Certification. The applicant shall be required to submit
certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or
registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were
accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
Flood-proofing measures shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or registered architect.



      (7)   Record of first floor elevation. The Zoning
Administrator shall maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new structures and alterations or additions to
existing structures in the floodplain. The Zoning Administrator shall also
maintain a record of the elevation to which structures and alterations or
additions to structures are flood-proofed.



   (C)   Board of Adjustment.



      (1)   Rules. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for the
conduct of business and may exercise all of the powers conferred on such
Boards by state law.



      (2)   Administrative review. The Board shall hear and decide
appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the
enforcement or administration of this subchapter.



      (3)   Variances. The Board may authorize upon appeal in
specific cases such relief or variance from the terms of this subchapter as
will not be contrary to the public interest and only for those circumstances
such as hardship, practical difficulties, or circumstances unique to the
property under consideration, as provided for in the respective enabling
legislation for planning and zoning for cities or counties as appropriate. In
the granting of such variance, the Board of Adjustment shall clearly identify
in writing the specific conditions that existed consistent with the criteria
specified in the respective enabling legislation which justified the granting
of the variance. No variance shall have the effect of allowing in any
district uses prohibited in that district, permit a lower degree of flood
protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular
area, or permit standards lower than those required by state law.



      (4)   Hearings. Upon filing with the Board of Adjustment of an
appeal from a decision of the Zoning Administrator, or an application for a
variance, the Board shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing and give due
notice to the parties in interest as specified by law. The Board shall submit
by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application
for proposed variances sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will
receive at least 10 days’ notice of the hearing.



      (5)   Decisions. The Board shall arrive at a decision on such
appeal or variance within 120 days. In passing upon an appeal, the Board may,
so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this
subchapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning Administrator or other
public official. It shall make its decision in writing setting forth the
findings of fact and the reasons for its decisions. In granting a variance
the Board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards such as those
specified in division (D)(6) below which are in conformity with the purposes
of this subchapter. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a
part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a
violation of this subchapter punishable under § 151.999. A copy of all
decisions granting variances shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner
of Natural Resources within 10 days of such action.



      (6)   Appeals. Appeals from any decision of the Board may be
made, and as specified in this community’s official controls and also state
statutes.



      (7)   Flood insurance notice and record-keeping.



         (a)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the
applicant for a variance that:



            1.   The issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and



            2.   Such construction below the 100-year or
regional flood level increases risks to life and property.



         (b)   Such notification shall be maintained with a
record of all variance actions. A community shall maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such
variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the
Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program.



   (D)   Conditional uses. The City Board of Adjustment and Appeals
shall hear and decide applications for conditional uses permissible under
this subchapter. Applications shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator
who shall forward the application to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals for
consideration.



      (1)   Hearings. Upon filing with the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals an application for a conditional use permit, the Board of Adjustment
and Appeals shall submit by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources a
copy of the application for proposed conditional use sufficiently in advance
so that the Commission will receive at least 10 days’ notice of the hearing.



      (2)   Decisions. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall
arrive at a decision on a conditional use permit within 120 days. In granting
a conditional use permit, the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards, in addition to those specified in
division (D)(6) below, which are in conformity with the purposes of this
subchapter. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of
the terms under which the conditional use permit is granted, shall be deemed
a violation of this subchapter punishable under § 151.999. A copy of all
decisions granting conditional use permits shall be forwarded by mail to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten



days of such action.



      (3)   Procedures followed by the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals.



         (a)   Require the applicant to furnish such of the
following information and additional information as deemed necessary by the
Board of Adjustment and Appeals for determining the suitability of the
particular site for the proposed use:



            1.   Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing
the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the lot, existing or
proposed structures, fill storage of materials, flood-proofing measures, and
the relationship of the above to the location of the stream channel; and



            2.   Specifications for building construction and
materials, flood-proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement,
storage of materials, water supply, and sanitary facilities.



         (b)   Transmit one copy of the information described in
division (D)(3)(a) above to a designated engineer or other expert person or
agency for technical assistance, where necessary, in evaluating the proposed
project in relation to flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood
damage to the use, the adequacy of the plans for protection, and other
technical matters; and



         (c)   Based upon the technical evaluation of the
designated engineer or expert, the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall
determine the specific flood hazard at the site and evaluate the suitability
of the proposed use in relation to the flood hazard.



      (4)   Factors upon which the decision of the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals shall be based. In passing on conditional use
applications, the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall consider all relevant
factors specified in other sections of this subchapter:



         (a)   The danger to life and property due to increased
flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments;



         (b)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other
lands or downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges,
culverts, or other hydraulic structures;



         (c)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems
and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and
unsanitary conditions;



         (d)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and
its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;



         (e)   The importance of the services provided by the
proposed facility to the community;



         (f)   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront
location;



         (g)   The availability of alternative locations not
subject to flooding for the proposed use;



         (h)   The compatibility of the proposed use with
existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future;



         (i)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area;



         (j)   The safety of access to the property in times of
flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



         (k)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of
rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and



         (l)   Such other factors which are relevant to the
purposes of this subchapter.



      (5)   Time for acting on application. The Board of Adjustment
and Appeals shall act on an application in the manner described above within
120 days from receiving the application, except where additional information
is required pursuant to division (D)(4) above. The Board of Adjustment and
Appeals shall render a written decision within 60 days from the receipt of
such additional information.



      (6)   Conditions attached to conditional use permits.



         (a)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and
the purpose of this subchapter, the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall
attach such conditions to the granting of conditional use permits as it deems
necessary to fulfill the purposes of this subchapter.



         (b)   Such conditions may include, but are not limited
to, the following:



            1.   Modification of waste treatment and water
supply facilities;



            2.   Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and
operation;



            3.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties,
and deed restrictions;



            4.   Requirements for construction of channel
modifications, compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective
measures; and



            5.   Flood-proofing measures, in accordance with
the State Building Code and this subchapter. The applicant shall submit a
plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the flood-proofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood
protection elevation and associates flood factors for the particular area.



(2013 Code, § 11.56)  (Ord. 567, passed 3-16-2000; Ord. 568, passed
5-25-2000)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.094  NONCONFORMING USES.



   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of this subchapter but which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this subchapter may be continued subject to
the following conditions.



   (A)   No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered
in a way which increases its nonconformity.



   (B)   Any alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure or
nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood damage potential
of that structure or use shall be protected to the regulatory flood
protection elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or
flood-proofing techniques (i.e., FP-1 through FP-4 flood-proofing
classifications) allowable in the State Building Code, except as further
restricted in division (C) below.



   (C)   The cost of any structural alterations or additions to any
nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50%
of the market value of the structure unless the conditions of this subchapter
are satisfied. The cost of all structural alterations and additions
constructed since the adoption of the community’s initial floodplain
controls must be calculated into today’s current cost which will include
all costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost placed on all
manpower or labor. If the current cost of all previous and proposed
alterations and additions exceeds 50% of the current market value of the
structure, then the structure must meet the standards of §§ 151.088 and
151.089 for new structures depending upon whether the structure is in the
floodway or flood fringe, respectively.



   (D)   If any nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive
months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this
subchapter. The assessor shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of
instances of nonconforming uses which have been discontinued for a period of
12 months.



   (E)   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any
means, including floods, to an extent of 50% or more of its market value at
the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity
with the provisions of this subchapter. The applicable provisions for
establishing new uses or new structures in §§ 151.088 and 151.090 will
apply depending upon whether the use or structure is in the floodway or flood
fringe, respectively.



(2013 Code, § 11.56)  (Ord. 567, passed 3-16-2000)  Penalty, see § 151.999




PERFORMANCE STANDARDS




§ 151.105  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The guiding of land development into a compatible relationship
of uses depends upon the maintenance of certain standards. The purpose of
this subchapter is to establish limitations on certain activities with a high
potential for pollution or nuisance.



   (B)   The performance standards shall apply in all zones, unless
specifically stated to the contrary.



(2013 Code, § 11.60)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979;
Ord. 96, passed 11-11-1982; Ord. 132, passed 9-22-1983; Ord. 158, passed
1-31-1985; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 253, passed 10-14-1988; Ord. 259,
passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 272, passed 8-25-1989; Ord. 338, passed 8-6-1992;
Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 430, passed
2-1-1996; Ord. 815, passed 3-26-2009)



§ 151.106  EXTERIOR STORAGE.



   (A)   In all zones, exterior storage is prohibited except as
regulated by conditional use permit, planned unit development, or as
specifically provided in the zone regulations.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the above, exterior storage of the following
items is a permitted accessory use in residential zones:



      (1)   Laundry drying;



      (2)   Recreational equipment;



      (3)   Construction and landscaping materials and equipment
currently being used on the premises;



      (4)   Agricultural equipment and materials if these are used
or intended for use on the premises; and



      (5)   Off-street parking of personal vehicles.



(2013 Code, § 11.60)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979;
Ord. 96, passed 11-11-1982; Ord. 132, passed 9-22-1983; Ord. 158, passed
1-31-1985; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 253, passed 10-14-1988; Ord. 259,
passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 272, passed 8-25-1989; Ord. 338, passed 8-6-1992;
Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 430, passed
2-1-1996; Ord. 815, passed 3-26-2009)



§ 151.107  REFUSE.



   All refuse shall be stored and disposed of in accordance with Ch. 51.



(2013 Code, § 11.60)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979;
Ord. 96, passed 11-11-1982; Ord. 132, passed 9-22-1983; Ord. 158, passed
1-31-1985; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 253, passed 10-14-1988; Ord. 259,
passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 272, passed 8-25-1989; Ord. 338, passed 8-6-1992;
Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 430, passed
2-1-1996; Ord. 815, passed 3-26-2009)



§ 151.108  CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL.



   (A)   Special minimum requirements and performance standards for all
commercial and industrial uses.



      (1)   Building design and materials.



         (a)   Building materials shall be attractive in
appearance, have a durable finish, and be of an architectural character and
quality that is compatible and harmonious with adjacent structures. All
buildings shall be of high architectural quality so as to maintain and
enhance the property values of neighboring properties, and not adversely
impact the community’s public health, safety, and general welfare.



         (b)   All new building facades and refaced facades of
existing buildings, shall include a minimum of 3 of the following elements:



            1.   Accent materials:



            2.   A front entry that, in addition to doors,
shall have an area of accent materials a minimum of 150 square feet around
the door entrance for single occupancy buildings and a minimum of 300 square
feet total for the front of multi-tenant buildings (this area shall be
counted as one element);



            3.   Twenty-five percent window coverage on each
front that faces a street;



            4.   Contrasting, yet complementary material
colors;



            5.   A combination of horizontal and vertical
design features;



            6.   Varying wall depths and shapes;



            7.   Varying roof line, design, or materials;



            8.   Decorative lighting design;



            9.   Art or sculptural elements; or



            10.   Other unique architectural features in the
overall architectural concept.



      (2)   Accent materials and visual relief. Accent materials
shall be wrapped around walls visible from public view. Painting of materials
or walls shall not be substituted for visual relief, accenting, or a required
element. No wall shall exceed 100 feet in length without visual relief.
VISUAL RELIEF may be defined as the incorporation of design features such as
windows, horizontal and vertical patterns, contrasting material colors, or
varying wall depths.



      (3)   Major exterior materials permitted.



         (a)   Major exterior materials of all walls including
face brick, stone, glass, stucco, synthetic stucco, vinyl siding,
architectural concrete, and precise panels shall be acceptable as the major
exterior wall surface when they are incorporated into the overall design of
the building. Color impregnated decorative block shall also be allowed as a
major exterior wall material, and shall be required to be sealed.



         (b)   All materials shall be color impregnated with the
exception of allowing architectural concrete precast panel systems to be
painted. Painting shall not be allowed on color impregnated, major exterior
materials, except that if the architectural precast panel systems are
painted, then they shall be properly prepared and maintained regularly to
prevent peeling, stripping, shading, or any other form of deterioration or
discoloration.



         (c)   Proof of manufacturer’s painting specifications
shall be supplied prior to issuance of a building permit. This division
(A)(3) shall also apply to all exterior repairs, remodeling, or expansion of
existing buildings that require a building permit.



      (4)   Major exterior materials prohibited. Unadorned
pre-stressed concrete panels, whether smooth or raked; non-decorative
concrete block; sheet metal; corrugated metal; or unfinished metal (except
copper or other metal specifically engineered for exterior architectural use,
shall not be used as exterior materials. This restriction shall apply to all
principal structures and to all accessory buildings except those accessory
buildings not visible from any property line. No more than 25% of any
exterior wall on a building shall be wood or metal accent material.



      (5)   Building materials visible from roadways. Allowable
exterior building materials within public view of roadways shall include
architectural precast concrete panels, (excluding raked or plain), stucco,
synthetic stucco, face brick, stone, glass, and any combination thereof. No
more than 25% of any exterior wall surface on a building shall be wood or
metal when used as an accent material. Stucco or synthetic stucco shall not
be allowed within 24 inches from grade. Color impregnated decorative concrete
block may be an acceptable accent material, if approved as part of a planned
unit development (PUD) or conditional use permit (CUP) approval. This
subchapter shall apply to all exterior repairs, remodeling, or expansions of
existing buildings that require a building permit. Roadways means all public
roadways, whether local streets, collector streets, arterial, freeway, or
other classification.



      (6)   Roof materials. Roofs that are exposed or an integral
part of the building aesthetics shall be constructed only of commercial grade
asphalt shingles, wood shingles, standing seam metal, slate, tile, copper, or
materials similar in appearance and performance. Flat roofs, which are
generally parallel with the first floor elevation, are not subject to these
material limitations.



      (7)   Materials standards. All building and roofing materials
shall meet current accepted industry standards, and tolerances, and shall be
subject to review and approval by the Development Review Committee for
quality, durability, and aesthetic appeal. For all new buildings and building
exterior renovations, the applicant shall submit to the city product samples,
color building elevations, and associated drawings which illustrate the
construction techniques to be used in the installation of such materials.
Building and roofing materials not specifically approved in this subchapter
may be allowed by a conditional use permit or planned unit development only
after it is demonstrated that the proposed material is equal to or better
than approved materials. The long-range maintenance of the proposed material
shall be incorporated as a condition of the approval and filed on the
property.



      (8)   Trash handling and recycling. All trash, recyclable
materials, and trash and recyclable materials handling equipment shall be
stored within the principal structure; totally screened from public view by
the principal building; or stored within an accessory structure constructed
of building materials compatible with the principal structure enclosed by a
roof, and readily served through swinging doors or an overhead door on
tracks. Compactors shall be totally screened from eye level view from public
streets and adjacent properties. Existing uses shall comply with the
enclosure requirements listed in this subchapter within 6 months of receiving
notice from the city.



      (9)   Accessory structures. Garages, accessory structures,
screen walls, and exposed areas of retaining walls shall be of a similar
type, quality, and appearance as the principal structure.



      (10)   Rooftop screening. The ground level view of all rooftop
equipment and related piping, ducting, electrical, and mechanical utilities
shall be painted to match the building, designed to be compatible with the
architectural treatment of the principal structure or screened by the use of
parapet walls. Wood fencing shall not be used for screening.



   (B)   Special minimum requirements for all residential uses.



      (1)   Building design and materials. Building materials shall
be attractive in appearance, durable, and of an architectural quality which
is compatible with adjacent structures. All buildings shall be of good
aesthetic and architectural quality, as demonstrated by the inclusion of at
least 3 of the following elements:



         (a)   Accent materials;



         (b)   A front entry that, in addition to doors, shall
have an area of accent materials a minimum of 150 square feet around the door
entrance for single occupancy buildings and a minimum of 300 square feet
total for the front of multi-tenant buildings (this area shall be counted as
one element);



         (c)   Contrasting, yet complementary material colors;



         (d)   A combination of horizontal and vertical design
features;



         (e)   Varying wall depths and shapes;



         (f)   Varying roof line, design, or materials;



         (g)   Decorative lighting design;



         (h)   Art or sculptural elements; or



         (i)   Other unique architectural features in the overall
architectural concept.



      (2)   Major exterior materials. Major exterior surfaces on all
walls shall be facing brick (glazed or unglazed), clay facing tile, stone
masonry (granite, limestone, marble, slate, sandstone, or quartzite),
finished texture stucco (cement or synthetic), exterior finished wood siding
(painted, stained, or weather-sealed), exterior finished metal siding (not
including sheet metal of any kind), or exterior finished vinyl siding.



      (3)   Plans and materials samples. For all new development
projects, buildings, and building exterior renovations, the applicant or
architect shall submit to the city product samples, color building
elevations, and associated drawings that illustrate the construction
techniques to be used in the installation of such materials. If complementary
building styles, materials, and color schemes are proposed for a development,
the developer shall submit to the city a plan showing the distribution of the
styles, materials, and colors throughout the development.



      (4)   Materials standards: All building and roofing materials
shall meet current accepted industry standards, and tolerances, and shall be
subject to review and approval by the city for quality, durability, and
aesthetic appeal.



      (5)   Trash handling and recycling. Except in R-1A Low-Density
Residential, R-1B Urban Residential, and R-1C Old Shakopee Residential, all
trash, recyclable materials, and trash and recyclable materials handling
equipment shall be stored within the principal structure, totally screened
from public view by the principal building, or stored within an accessory
structure constructed of building materials compatible with the principal
structure, enclosed by a roof, and readily served through swinging doors.
Compactors that are attached to the principal structure shall be totally
screened from eye level view from public streets and adjacent properties to a
screening wall constructed of the same building material as the principal
structure. Existing uses shall comply with the enclosure requirements listed
in this subchapter within 5 years of receiving notice from the city.



      (6)   On-site screening. Except in R-1A Low-Density
Residential, R-1B Urban Residential, and R-1C - Old Shakopee Residential, all
mechanical equipment, utility meters, storage, and service areas and similar
features shall be completely screened from the eye-level view from adjacent
properties and public streets, or designed to be compatible with the
architectural treatment of the principal structure.



   (C)   Agricultural uses. Agriculture uses in the Rural Residential
Zone are exempt from the materials standards listed above.



(Ord. 896, passed 11-18-2014)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 31, passed
10-25-1979; Ord. 96, passed 11-11-1982; Ord. 132, passed 9-22-1983; Ord. 158,
passed 1-31-1985; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 253, passed 10-14-1988;
Ord. 259, passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 272, passed 8-25-1989; Ord. 338, passed
8-6-1992; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 430,
passed 2-1-1996; Ord. 677, passed 8-28-2003; Ord. 815, passed 3-26-2009)



§ 151.109  BULK STORAGE OF LIQUIDS.



   All bulk storage of oil, gasoline, liquid fertilizer, chemicals, and
similar liquids shall comply with the requirements of the appropriate state
or federal agency. Within the Agricultural Preservation (AG) and Rural
Residential (RR) Zones, all bulk storage shall be in above-ground containers.



(2013 Code, § 11.60)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979;
Ord. 96, passed 11-11-1982; Ord. 132, passed 9-22-1983; Ord. 158, passed
1-31-1985; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 253, passed 10-14-1988; Ord. 259,
passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 272, passed 8-25-1989; Ord. 338, passed 8-6-1992;
Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 430, passed
2-1-1996; Ord. 815, passed 3-26-2009)



§ 151.110  GRADING, FILLING, AND EXCAVATIONS.



   (A)   Definition. The term GRADING as used in this section means any
excavating, grading, filling, or any other change in the earth’s topography
involving removing, importing, or moving more than 50 cubic yards of soil,
dirt, or similar materials.



   (B)   Grading associates with development. Grading that is proposed
to be done in contemplation of, in connection with, or in any manner
associated with, the development, subdivision, or platting of land, may only
be undertaken after a grading permit has been approved and issued by the City
Engineer pursuant to an approved preliminary plat, planned unit development,
or conditional use permit. Any such grading must be done in accordance with
the plans as approved by the City Engineer.



   (C)   Other grading. Grading that is not associated with development
may only be done after the grading plans have been approved by the City
Engineer and after the issuance of a grading permit by the City Engineer. Any
such grading must be done in accordance with the plans as approved by the
City Engineer.



   (D)   Conditional use permit required. A conditional use permit is
required for grading or vegetation alteration in a designated floodplain or
designated Shoreland Overlay Zone.



   (E)   Exceptions to grading permit requirement. A grading permit is
not required for the following activities, except as may be required by other
chapters of this code of ordinances, state statutes or rules, or federal law:



      (1)   Earthwork that will result in removing, importing, or
moving less than 50 cubic yards of soil, dirt, or similar material that does
not take place in any designated floodplain or Shoreland Overlay Zone;



      (2)   Removal of trees that are storm damaged;



      (3)   Agricultural activities; or



      (4)   Grading or tree removal that has been approved and
authorized pursuant to a Woodland Management Plan subject to § 151.113, or a
building permit properly issued under Ch. 111.



   (F)   Grading permit submittal requirements. No grading permit will
be issued until the applicant:



      (1)   Pays the grading permit fee set forth in the city’s
most recently adopted fee schedule;



      (2)   Submits a complete grading permit application in a form
approved by the City Engineer;



      (3)   Submits all plans, drawings, and calculations required
by the City Engineer;



      (4)   Obtains approvals or permits required by other
governmental entities;



      (5)   Provides the city with a certificate of general
liability insurance with limits of at least the amounts established by M.S.
§ 466.04, as it may be amended from time to time, and naming the city as an
additional insured for all work to be done as part of the grading; and



      (6)   Provides the city with a cash deposit or a letter of
credit in a form approved by the City Attorney in the amount of 125% of the
estimated costs for installation and construction (including the costs of
city inspection and administration) of all erosion control devices and site
restoration, or $1,000 per disturbed acre, whichever is higher.



(2013 Code, § 11.60)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979;
Ord. 96, passed 11-11-1982; Ord. 132, passed 9-22-1983; Ord. 158, passed
1-31-1985; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 253, passed 10-14-1988; Ord. 259,
passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 272, passed 8-25-1989; Ord. 338, passed 8-6-1992;
Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 430, passed
2-1-1996; Ord. 790, passed 3-20-2008; Ord. 815, passed 3-26-2009)



§ 151.111  SCREENING.



   (A)   Whenever required, screening shall be accomplished through the
use of landscaping, topography, site planning, or construction materials.
Screening shall provide an opaque obstruction to view. All construction
materials used shall be of good quality and compatible with the materials of
the principal structure. Chain link fencing interwoven with slats shall not
be allowed as a screening material. Landscaping materials utilized for
screening shall be healthy specimens of hardy species appropriate for the
purpose. All screening shall be maintained in good condition or repair and
shall be replaced when it no longer serves its intended function.



   (B)   Screening shall be accomplished in accordance with the
following:



      (1)   All exterior storage permitted by this chapter shall be
screened, except for the following: goods being displayed for sale, materials
and equipment being used for construction on the premises, merchandise
located on gas station pump islands, and accessory uses in residential zones
(except parking facilities as specified below);



      (2)   Off-street parking facilities in the Medium-Density
Residential (R-2) and Multiple-Family Residential (R-3) Zones shall be
screened whenever the parking facility contains more than 4 parking spaces
and is within 30 feet of a lot line, and whenever the driveway to a parking
facility of more than 6 parking spaces is within 15 feet of a lot line;



      (3)   Parking facilities within any required front yard
setback shall be screened to a height of 3 feet;



      (4)   Screening shall be required in all business and industry
zones whenever any business or industrial use is adjacent to or across a
street from property zoned or developed for residential use;



      (5)   All roof top mechanical equipment shall be totally
screened from view from adjacent properties and existing and planned streets,
painted to match or complement the building, or incorporated into an
architectural design which is aesthetically compatible with the building;



      (6)   Refuse containers in business and industry zones which
are visible from existing or planned streets, residential areas,
institutional uses, or places of public assembly shall be screened to a
height of 6 feet;



      (7)   Loading and service areas located between a street and a
building in any industry zone shall be screened to a height of 4 feet; and



      (8)   Opaque screening at a minimum height of 4 feet. The
screening can be accomplished through berming with overstory deciduous and
coniferous landscaping units, fencing, or topography differences when
commercial or industrial development abuts existing residential development
or residentially zoned properties, unless otherwise approved by the City
Council.



(2013 Code, § 11.60)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979;
Ord. 96, passed 11-11-1982; Ord. 132, passed 9-22-1983; Ord. 158, passed
1-31-1985; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 253, passed 10-14-1988; Ord. 259,
passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 272, passed 8-25-1989; Ord. 338, passed 8-6-1992;
Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 430, passed
2-1-1996; Ord. 563, passed 11-25-1999; Ord. 631, passed 6-27-2002; Ord. 815,
passed 3-26-2009)



§ 151.112  LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.



   Landscaping shall be required in all residential, commercial, and
industrial zones.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      EXTERIOR SIDEWALK CONNECTION. A sidewalk or trail which connects
the interior sidewalk or trail network to a required or existing public
sidewalk or trail.



      GROSS FLOOR AREA. The total floor area for every floor inside the
building envelope, including the external walls, and excluding the roof.



      INTERIOR SIDEWALK CONNECTION. A sidewalk or trail network which
is within a development project to connect multiple businesses, or parking
facilities to primary entrances or privately owned open space areas.



      SIDEWALK. A finished hard surface with a width of at least 5 feet.



      TRAIL. A finished hard surface or a firm and stable natural
surfacing material with a width of at least 8 feet.



   (B)   Landscaping materials.



      (1)   For all single-family residential uses in the R-1 A,
R-1B, R-1C, R-2 and Planned Residential District, the following landscaping
materials shall be provided prior to the issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy:



         (a)   Placement of at least 6 inches of topsoil meeting
requirements set in division (N) below;



         (b)   Each lot shall have a minimum of 2 non-ornamental
trees (planted or preserved), in the front yard. In R-1 A, 3 non-ornamental
trees (planted or preserved) must be placed in the front yard. If trees
cannot be placed in the front yard due to easements or spacing, trees shall
be placed in the rear yard;



         (c)   Sod shall be placed in the front yard, and



         (d)   The side yards and rear yard shall be seeded.



      (2)   Native plants may be substituted for sod or seeding as
long as they meet the requirements set in § 130.18.



   (C)   Landscape requirements for residential, business, and
industrial uses. For all residential uses containing 6 or more dwellings, and
for all business and industrial uses, at least 15% of the lot area shall be
landscaped. The landscaping shall be concentrated between the principal
structure and any adjacent street right-of-way or other areas of the lot
which are visible from a street.



   (D)   Minimum units. A minimum of 3 units, as defined below, of
landscaping shall be required for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
up to 10,000 square feet. An additional 2 units of landscaping shall be
required for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area over 10,000 and up to
50,000 square feet. An additional unit of landscaping shall be required for
each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area over 50,000 and up to 100,000
square feet. An additional one unit of landscaping shall be required for each
1,500 square feet of gross floor area over 100,000. When calculating the
required landscaping, square feet shall be rounded up to the nearest 1,000.



   (E)   Impervious areas. In addition to landscaping units required
for gross building area, for projects with impervious areas which exceed
4,000 square feet, one shade tree shall be required for each 4,000 square
feet of impervious area. When calculating the required landscaping, square
feet shall be rounded up to the nearest 1,000 square feet and pervious
pavement shall be excluded.



   (F)   Parking facilities. A portion of the required landscaping
shall be placed in a parking facility containing more than 50 parking spaces
in accordance with the following minimum landscaping requirements.



      (1)   At least 1 deciduous shade tree shall be planted within
the boundaries of a parking facility for every 4,000 square feet of paved
area in a parking facility.



      (2)   Landscape islands shall meet the following requirements:



         (a)   Contain at least one shade tree;



         (b)   Provide the appropriate available rooting space
listed in division (H) below;



         (c)   A minimum of 10 feet wide;



         (d)   Curbed around all outside corners/radius of end
caps and extending 10 feet from the corner/end of the radius;



         (e)   Concrete ribbon curbing must be provided on any
paved edge which is not curbed; and



         (f)   Proper drainage must be provided within landscape
islands which allow storm water flow into the island.



      (3)   Non-permanent car stops and asphalt curbing shall not be
used.



      (4) (a)   Example.







 



      (b)   Total landscaping required. Total landscaping required =
required landscaping units for gross floor area, + required trees for paved
areas.



      (c)   Trees needed. Number of trees needed to be placed within
the parking area equals parking area/4,000 square feet.



   (G)   Minimum size requirements.



      (1)   Landscaping materials must meet the following minimum
size requirements:



         (a)   Deciduous trees: One and one-quarter inch caliper;



         (b)   Coniferous trees: 5 feet in height;



         (c)   Shrubbery: 5 gallons; and



         (d)   Native plants: 800 square feet.



      (2)   Each of the above shall constitute one unit of
landscaping. Not more than 50% of the landscaping units required by this
section shall be composed of shrubbery and no more than 25% of the trees may
be made of ornamental species.



   (H)   Minimum soil volume for required trees. Required trees shall
be provided a minimum of 1,000 cubic feet (333 square feet if 3 feet deep) of
available rooting space for a single tree or 700 cubic feet (233 square feet
if 3 feet deep) per tree if space is shared with multiple trees. Available
rooting space shall not be calculated as deeper than 3 vertical feet or using
soils compacted beyond 80% of Standard Proctor or 200 PSI.



   (I)   Allowable trees. Landscaping trees shall not be any species
presently under disease or insect epidemics, considered invasive, or a
species that composes a high percentage of the city’s urban forest without
prior written approval from the city. Recommended species can be found in the
City’s Forestry Specification Manual.



   (J)   Tree diversity. If there are greater than or equal to 30 trees
are required, they shall be composed of no more than 10% of one species, 20%
of one genus, and 30% of one family. If less than 30 trees are required, one
species shall make up no more than one-fourth of the total and meet the
requirements set in the City’s Forestry Specifications Manual.



   (K)   Trees location. Trees shall not be planted in a location that
will interfere with other infrastructure or be in extreme competition for
resources with other trees at maturity.



   (L)   Landscaping credit.



      (1)   If healthy landscaping of acceptable species and
location exist on a site prior to development and is preserved, the city’s
Natural Resources staff or another position identified by the Zoning
Administrator may allow credit for such landscaping to meet up to 30% of the
units required for gross floor area only. Credits will be applied to an equal
portion of trees and other landscaping required on the site.



      (2)   Credit may be given based on the following (definitions
found in § 151.113(D)):



         (a)   One preserved common significant tree: 1 unit of
new landscaping;



         (b)   One preserved exceptional significant tree: 2
units of new landscaping; and



         (c)   Preserved high priority tree: 4 units of new
landscaping.



   (M)   Pedestrian sidewalk system in Commercial and Industrial Zones.
In all zoning districts the pedestrian sidewalk system shall meet the
following standards.



      (1)    In retail center developments, interior sidewalk
connections are required between each building.



      (2)   A pedestrian island or walkway at least 5 feet in width
shall be required for all parking facilities which have greater than 15% of
their parking spaces greater than 250 feet from a main entrance to a building
and in accordance with the following:



         (a)   A pedestrian island or walkway shall be provided
to separate pedestrian traffic and vehicular traffic.



         (b)   A pedestrian island or walkway must provide
pedestrian access spanning in a generally direct route from main entrance to
the furthest drive aisle within a parking facility.  City staff may allow
pedestrian walkways or islands to be of a reduced length if other adjacent
sidewalks and trails outside of the parking area allow pedestrians access to
a main entrance of a building.



         (c)   Pedestrian islands or walkways which are adjacent
to handicapped (ADA compliant) parking shall provide ADA compliant pedestrian
ramps or be at the same elevation as the parking and loading area.



         (d)   The pedestrian island shall be landscaped in
accordance with the requirements for landscape islands and parking lots.



         (e)   Pedestrian islands and walkways shall be designed
to limit vehicle encroachment into walkway area, either by 2 feet setback
from parking lot to walkway edge or a physical barrier such as but not
limited to: curbing, trees, shrubs, or bollards.



      (3)   An exterior sidewalk connection is required for all
sites which have existing and/or required public sidewalks, adjacent trails,
parks, or greenways.



      (4)   Where pedestrian islands and walkways cross drive
aisles, crossing areas shall be clearly designated by striping or
differentiated paving material.



   (N)   Topsoil. Topsoil in landscaped areas shall be at least 6
inches in depth and a sandy loam, silt loam, loam, or sandy clay consisting
of no more than 65% sand, 1.5% to 10% organic matter, a pH of 4.5 to 6.8,
soluble salts less than 2 mmhos/cm, free of chemical contaminants, and not
compacted beyond 80% of Standard Proctor or 200 PSI. Subsoil shall be
scarified before topsoil is spread. Soil shall be generally free of debris
such as large rocks and fragments of wood.



   (O)   Financial security.



      (1)   The city shall require submission of a financial
security in form of a cash escrow, or other form of security that the city
deems acceptable, in the amount of 150% of the total tree replacement
estimate, which is found in the fee schedule.



      (2)   Number of trees required x tree replacement estimate x
150%= financial security due.



         (a)   The financial security shall be collected at the
time of building permit issuance if no replacement trees are required per §
151.113. If replacement trees are required on the site, the financial
security shall be collected before the grading permit is issued. In this
situation, at the discretion of city staff, the portion of the financial
security required for this division (O) may be collected at the time of
building permit issuance.



         (b)   All required landscaping plants must be warranted
to guarantee survival. The warranty period shall begin upon inspection and
acceptance by city staff of the installed plants for proper planting, size,
species, health, and location, If at any time during the warranty period the
plants are found to be unhealthy by city staff, they are required to be
replaced with the same size and species by the applicant at the soonest
appropriate planting time.



            1.   For commercial/industrial sites and
residential developers, up to 75% of the financial security may be returned
upon inspection and acceptance by the city of installed plants and upon the
submittal of a city-approved two-year warranty from the landscape contractor
who installed the plants. This warranty must cover plant health issues
relating to excess or insufficient water. The remaining financial security
will be held by the city for 2 years. When reducing the financial security,
75% will be returned unless city staff feels the trees have a heightened risk
of failure.



            2.   For builders of individual residential lots
in a subdivision who receive a one-year warranty from the landscape
contractor who installed the plants, up to 100% of the financial security may
be returned upon:



               a.   Inspection and acceptance of installed
plants by the city; and



               b.   Providing the lot buyer with the copy
of the 1 year warranty from the landscape contractor and contact information
to make a claim on the warranty.



      (3)   (a)   If the financial security has not been returned
in full after the inspection of the installed trees, at the end of a two-year
warranty period the applicant shall schedule a final inspection with city
staff.



         (b)   Prior to the inspection, the applicant shall
confirm the following conditions are met:



            1.   All trees have 1 dominate leader, are free of
deadwood, and injured branches;



            2.   All tree wrap is removed;



            3.   All stakes and wires are removed; and



            4.   Plants are in leaf.



         (c)   At the time of final inspection the city shall
decide to:



            1.   Refund the financial security in full; or



            2.   Require the installation of new plants to
replace what did not survive or are declared unhealthy by city staff. If 25%
or more of the plants are required to be replaced, the appropriate amount of
financial security may be held for an additional 2 years for said plants.



      (4)   The financial security will be used by the city only if
the applicant does not install the plants required in this division (P).



   (P)   Effective date. This section becomes effective from and after
its passage and publication.



(Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 96, passed
11-11-1982; Ord. 132, passed 9-22-1983; Ord. 158, passed 1-31-1985; Ord. 246,
passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 253, passed 10-14-1988; Ord. 259, passed 11-11-1988;
Ord. 272, passed 8-25-1989; Ord. 338, passed 8-6-1992; Ord. 377, passed
7-7-1994; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 430, passed 2-1-1996; Ord. 487,
passed 7-10-1997; Ord. 815, passed 3-26-2009; Ord. 884, passed 5-20-2014;
Ord. 923, passed 11-17-2015)



§ 151.113  TREE PRESERVATION REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. The city regards natural features such as woodlands
and bluffs as part of the community’s identity, attracting residents and
businesses to the area. City Council recognizes that not protecting these
assets would have a quantifiable economic, social, and environmental loss. An
objective of the city’s comprehensive plan is to preserve, enhance, and
maintain natural wooded areas within the city. This section aims to achieve
this objective by encouraging responsible land development through rewarding
those who use creative site design and minimize the impact to existing
landscape and neighborhood character.



   (B)   Regulations.



      (1)   The following requirements and standards shall apply to
any woodland alteration activity requiring a woodland alteration permit,
development for which, a preliminary plat, final plat, minor subdivision,
building permit, demolition permit, conditional use permit, variance, or
grading permit is required by the city on any parcel of land containing a
significant tree. The city is authorized to deny or revoke any permits
extended by the city for individuals or organizations in violation of this
section.



      (2)   On land located in the natural resource corridor being
developed for residential purposes, the requirements and standards in this
division (B) are in addition to the requirements found in the natural
resource corridor design criteria in § 150.55.



      (3)   The requirements and standards in this section apply to
commercial and industrial development only if the development is located
within the natural resource corridor, and are in addition to the requirements
and standards found in the natural resource corridor design criteria in §
150.55.



   (C)   Applicability. The following developments or woodland
alterations are exempt from the requirements for a woodland alteration permit:



      (1)   Any woodland alteration taking place on a residential
property less than 2-1/2 acres in size other than for an initial dwelling;



      (2)   Home gardens or an individual’s home landscaping,
repairs, and maintenance work;



      (3)   Existing agricultural, horticultural, or silvicultural
operations. Expansions of existing agricultural operations will be subject to
the requirements of the woodland alternation permit;



      (4)   Emergency work to prevent or alleviate immediate damages
to life, limb, property, or natural resources. In such event, if a woodland
alteration permit had been required but for emergency, the obligations of
this division (C) shall apply and shall be performed at the earliest
reasonable time thereafter;



      (5)   Maintenance of existing infrastructure by the city is
exempt from the requirements of this section.



   (D)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      APPLICANT. Any person submitting an application to the city for
woodland alteration or any activity for which a preliminary plat, final plat,
minor subdivision, building permit, demolition permit, conditional use
permit, variance, or grading permit is required on land containing a
significant tree.



      BASIC INFRASTRUCTURE. Includes roads, streets, sidewalks,
rights-of-way, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, septic tanks, drain fields,
water, natural gas, electric, cable television service, drainage ways, and
storm ponds.



      BUILDABLE LAND. Any land not considered a wetland as defined in
§ 151.002 or a bluff impact zone as defined in the natural resource design
criteria.



      BUILDING PARAMETER. The footprint of a building or structure with
a distance not to exceed 20 feet in each direction thereof. The area of
disturbance on either side of a driveway, when added together, shall not
exceed 20 feet.



      CALIPER INCH. The measurement of a tree trunk measured at 6
inches above the root ball.



      COMMON TREE. Any of the following trees: box elder; poplar;
silver maple; red maple; ash; elm; cedar; willow; mulberry; balsam fir;
birch; pine; spruce; tamarack; black locust; or other fast growing deciduous
trees not listed as an exceptional tree.



      CONTIGUOUS WOODLAND. A contiguous tree canopy greater than 2
acres regardless of land ownership.



      CRITICAL ROOT ZONE or CRZ. A radius of 1-1/2 feet for every 1
inch of DBH for the tree trunk of the tree being preserved. Example: If a
tree’s DBH is 10 inches, its CRZ is 15 feet (10 x 1-1/2 = 15)



      DEVELOPMENT. Any activity for which a preliminary plat, final
plat, minor subdivision, building permit, demolition permit, conditional use
permit, variance, fence permit, or grading permit is required on land
containing a tree.



      DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT or DBH. The diameter of the trunk of a
tree measured in inches 4-1/2 feet above the ground from the uphill side of
the tree.



      DIAMETER AT ROOT COLLAR or DRC. Used for measuring multi-stem
trees. It is equal to the square root of the sum of the squared stem
diameters measured above the root collar.



         (a)   (DRC=SUM(stem diameters2))



         (b)   Example: A tree has 3 qualifying stems; 4”,
8”, and 5”



            DRC=[(4)2 + (8)2 = (5)2]] = 10.25 inches



            10.25 inches is used as the diameter for this
multi-stem tree.



      EXCEPTIONAL TREE. Any of the following trees: oak; hickory;
basswood; sugar maple; black maple; cherry; catalpa; walnut; hackberry;
hornbeam; coffeetree; butternut; buckeye; or horse chestnut.



      FORESTRY SPECIALIST. A state registered land surveyor, civil
engineer, landscape architect, forester, or certified arborist, who is
capable of identifying a tree by species.



      HAZARD TREE. A tree posing a threat to property or people that
has visible hazardous defects such as dead wood, cracks, weak branch unions,
decay, cankers, root problems, or poor tree architecture as defined by the
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Northeastern Area’s
publication How to Recognize Hazardous Defects in Trees (NA-FR-01-96).



      HIGH PRIORITY AREA. A group of 3 or more exceptional trees 10
inches DBH or greater with near contiguous canopies or group of any trees
that provide a buffer or screening along an adjacent property or street.



      HIGH PRIORITY TREE. An exceptional tree 15 inches DBH or greater,
or any tree the city has a strong desire to preserve and is declared healthy
by the city’s Natural Resources staff.



      MULTI-STEM TREE. A group of trees that share both a unified crown
and common root stock. The diameter is recorded as the diameter at root
collar.



      NATURAL RESOURCE CORRIDOR DESIGN CRITERIA. The most recently
adopted design criteria for areas that are in natural resources corridors as
shown on the city’s natural resource corridor map.



      NATURAL RESOURCE CORRIDOR MAP. The city’s most recently adopted
natural resource corridor map. This map is incorporated into the city’s
comprehensive plan through the natural resource plan component. Boundaries on
this map are approximations; defined boundaries are determined by city staff.



      REPLACEMENT TREE.



         (a)   A tree that replaces diameter inches of a removed
tree. The number of replacement trees required is based off the number of
replacement inches calculated with the “remove:replace” ratio. Each
replacement tree planted shall count as 2 inches of removed DBH.



         (b)   Example: Planting a three-inch caliper tree
replaces 2 inches of the removed DBH. Planting a 1-1/4 inch caliper tree
replaces 2 inches of the removed DBH.



      RESIDENTIAL BUILDING PERMIT. A building permit required by §
111.02  for the building of an initial dwelling.



      SIGNIFICANT TREE. A living specimen of a woody plant species that
is either an exceptional tree whose diameter is 4 inches or greater DBH; a
common tree whose diameter is 6 inches or greater DBH, or a multi-stem tree
with 2 or more stems measuring 4 inches or greater in diameter measured above
the root collar.



      TREE PRESERVATION PLAN. The tree inventory, site plan, and tree
replacement sheet for a site where an applicant proposes to remove a
significant tree.



      TREE PROTECTION FENCE. Orange snow fencing or polyethylene
laminate safety netting placed at the critical root zone of a tree to be
preserved.



      TREE REPLACEMENT ESTIMATE. The city’s cost for a 2 inch balled
and burlapped tree for the current year. The city is required to get 3 quotes
per year and post the chosen quote in the current fee schedule.



      WOODLAND ALTERATION. Any private or public infrastructure and
utility installation, building construction, excavation, grading, clearing,
filling, or other earth change on any parcel of land, where any cutting,
removal, or killing of a significant tree on any parcel of land will occur.
Residential parcels of land less than 2-1/2 acres in size are subject to the
requirements in this section only if the WOODLAND ALTERATION is for an
initial dwelling.



      WOODLAND ALTERATION PERMIT. A permit to allow woodland alteration.



   (E)   Tree preservation plan requirements.



      (1)   Requirements generally. All applicants are required to
submit and follow the approved tree preservation plan.



      (2)   Requirements of the tree preservation plan. The tree
preservation plan must be completed by a forestry specialist and meet the
following requirements.



         (a)   Tree inventory.



            1.   The tree inventory must include every
significant tree on buildable land on the property where the permit is being
applied for. In addition to trees on said property, significant trees on
adjacent property which have CRZ overlapping onto said property must be
inventoried. Each inventoried tree must be tagged with a unique
identification number.



            2.   In circumstances where larger areas of the
site are not being altered/graded or have no flexibility in planning around
significant trees, the applicant may request permission from the city’s
Natural Resources Department to use a stratified random sample with a fixed
area plot to calculate an estimated tree DBH and species for each stratum.
The survey results must be within less than 10% of standard error for each
stratum. Plots must be marked to allow for replication of survey if necessary.



            3.   The applicant must provide a working digital
copy and hardcopy spreadsheet displaying the following information for each
inventoried tree:



               a.   Identification number;



               b.   Tree size (DBH or DRC);



               c.   Tree species;



               d.   Tree type (common, exceptional, or high
priority);



               e.   On-site or off-site (adjacent property);



               f.   Critical root zone (if being preserved);



               g.   Removed or preserved;



               h.   If tree is within the natural resource
corridor as identified on the natural resource corridor map;



               i.   Whether the tree is within a contiguous
woodland or high priority area; and



               j.   The total diameter inches of both high
priority trees and significant trees inventoried must be displayed.



         (b)   Site plan.



            1.   Generally. A scaled drawing of the site
including:



               a.   The location, identification number,
and tree type (common, exceptional, or high priority) of all inventoried
trees;



               b.   Proposed trees to remove and preserve;



               c.   High priority areas and contiguous
woodland area;



               d.   Critical root zones of all trees being
preserved along with any area within critical root zone that will be impacted;



               e.   Proposed construction/grading limits,
lot lines, building parameter, basic infrastructure, buildable land, and
building footprint/elevation;



               f.   Locations of tree protection fence and
silt fence; and



               g.   Soil stockpile and parking locations
during construction.



            2.   Additional requirements.



               a.   A survey of the lot meeting all
possible requirements of the tree inventory and site plan must be provided to
the builder of the lot. The city must be provided a digital copy of the tree
survey for each individual lot.



               b.   Note areas with oak wilt, Dutch elm
disease, Emerald Ash Borer, invasive plants such as buckthorn or others
listed on the current years State Department of Agriculture’s noxious weed
list.



         (c)   Tree replacement sheet.



            1.   The tree replacement sheet is a scaled
drawing of the site depicting where the replacement trees will be planted.



            2.   The plan must include:



               a.   Calculations for determination of
required replacement trees and landscaping required by division (H) below;



               b.   Locations of all trees and other plants
being installed on-site;



               c.   Plant list including species, size, and
stock type of installed plants;



               d.   Planting details that meet the city’s
tree planting specifications; and



               e.   Easements, right-of-ways, construction
limits, building pads, driveways, and basic infrastructure.



      (3)   Residential building permit tree preservation plan. The
applicant must complete the city’s “residential building-tree
preservation plan” as their tree preservation plan which includes a survey
meeting all requirements of this division (E) to the city.



      (4)   Permit prerequisites. No woodland alteration, grading,
or building permits shall be issued by the city until the applicant has
installed any required tree protection fencing and it has been inspected and
approved by the city.



      (5)   Changes to tree preservation plan. Any changes to the
tree preservation plan shall be submitted in writing to the city by the
applicant for approval. If the change includes any additional significant
tree removal, an additional inspection and approval by the city of the tree
protection fencing will be required.



      (6)   Currentness of tree preservation plan. All information
contained in the tree preservation plan must not be more than 2 years old at
the time of submittal. City staff may grant reasonable exceptions to this
requirement for residential builders of an individual lot.



      (7)   Removal of significant trees. Significant trees required
to be removed pursuant to § 130.16, shall be identified as removed on the
tree preservation plan and must be removed. Significant trees that are
removed for this reason are exempt from the replacement requirements of this
division (E).



   (F)   Allowable tree removal.



      (1)   Generally.



         (a)   Developers and builders are required to save as
many trees as feasible when grading or building a site.



         (b)   When developing the site plan the developer or
builder shall:



            1.   Identify high priority trees and areas (using
the tree inventory) that are most worthy of preservation;



            2.   Locate roads, buildings, utilities, parking
areas, or other infrastructure so as to minimize their impacts on exceptional
and high priority trees;



            3.   Preserve trees in groves or clusters
recognizing that survivability is greater for groups of trees than
individuals;



            4.   Manipulate proposed grading and the limits of
disturbance by changing the elevation/location of building pads, parking
lots, and streets, and consider the use of retaining walls to reduce the
impact of the trees; and



            5.   Review all construction factors that
influence tree survivability.



      (2)   Standards for residential site development.



         (a)   During subdivision, 30% of the inventoried DBH on
the buildable land can be removed for basic infrastructure only, without
replacement. Removal in excess of this 30% DBH requires replacement of 1:1.5
DBH (remove:replace).



         (b)   After subdivision, trees removed within the
building parameter require no replacement. Trees protected within the
building parameter will count towards replacement DBH times two. Trees
removed outside of the building parameter require replacement at 1:1 DBH
(remove:replace) for significant trees and 1:1.5 DBH (remove:replace) for
high priority trees.



      (3)   Standards for commercial/industrial site development.



         (a)   During site development, 60% of the inventoried
DBH on the buildable land for the lot being built on is allowed to be removed
without replacement. Removal in excess of this 60% DBH requires replacement
of 1:1.5 DBH (remove:replace):



            1.   Tree removal beyond the lot being built on is
allowed only for the installation of basic infrastructure. 15% of the
inventoried DBH on the buildable land for that lot may be removed without
replacement; and



            2.   Removal in excess of this 15% requires
replacement of 1:1.5 DBH (remove:replace).



         (b)   For any applicant proposing redevelopment of a
lot, 30% of the inventoried DBH on the buildable land for the lot being
redeveloped is allowed to be removed without replacement. Removal in excess
of this 30% requires replacement of 1:1.5 DBH (remove:replace).



      (4)   Proposal to remove more than 35% of high priority trees.
If an applicant proposes to remove more than 35% of the high priority trees
or 25% of a contiguous woodland, based on DBH, the city must be shown site
plan alternatives considered by the applicant as evidence an attempt to
remove less than said amount of trees was made and an explanation as to why
this plan does not work.



   (G)   Tree preservation requirements.



      (1)   Credits may be given in the city’s landscaping
requirements in division (G)(8) below for preserved trees at a rate of:



         (a)   One preserved common significant tree equals 1
unit of new landscaping;



         (b)   One preserved exceptional significant tree equals
2 units of new landscaping; and



         (c)   One preserved high priority tree equals 4 units of
new landscaping.



      (2)   The applicant must preserve all trees identified to be
preserved on the tree preservation plan.



      (3)   For grading being done between the dates of April 1 and
July 31, the CRZ for an oak tree may be increased due to threat of oak wilt.
During this time, wound dressing will be applied immediately after damage of
an oak tree takes place.



      (4)   A tree shall be considered removed if:



         (a)   More than 30% of the CRZ is compacted over 80% of
Standard Proctor or 200 PSI, cut, filled, or paved;



         (b)   More than 30% of the circumference of the trunk is
damaged;



         (c)   The hydrology in the area of preserved trees
changes due to site grading; or



         (d)   Severe damage to an oak tree takes place between
April 1 and July 31.



      (5)   Tree protection fence shall be placed outside of the CRZ
of trees being preserved. If fencing is not possible, covering and
maintaining the CRZ with geotextile fabric and 6 plus inches of wood-chip
mulch will suffice.



      (6)   There may be no construction activity within the CRZ of
a significant tree located on an adjacent property.



   (H)   Tree replacement standards.



      (1)   A replacement tree shall not be any species presently
under disease or insect epidemics, considered invasive, or a species that
composes a high percentage of the city’s urban forest without prior written
approval from the city. Recommended species can be found in the City’s
Forestry Specification Manual.



      (2)   Replacement trees must meet the following standards at
time of planting:



         (a)   A deciduous shade tree at a minimum of 1-1/4
caliper inches or #20 container; or



         (b)   A coniferous tree of a minimum 5 feet in height or
#20 container; and



         (c)   Must be planted consistent with § 90.05 and §
90.15 and meet specifications in the city’s Forestry Specifications Manual.



      (3)   All replacement trees must be installed during
appropriate season for that planting stock.



      (4)   Replacement trees are not to be installed until exterior
construction activities are complete in that area.



      (5)   If there are greater or equal to 30 trees  that are
required, they shall be composed of no more than 10% of 1 species, 20% of 1
genus, and 30% of 1 family. If there are less than 30 trees are required, 1
species shall make up no more than 25% of the total.



      (6)   Replacement trees shall not be planted in a location
that will interfere with other infrastructure or be in extreme competition
for resources with other trees at maturity.



      (7)   The city may accept other vegetative or environmental
alternatives proposed by an applicant if those alternatives are monetarily or
ecologically equivalent to the value of the replacement trees required by
this section.



      (8)   Replacement trees shall be planted not more than 18
months from the date of the final approved tree replacement sheet as part of
the tree preservation plan. Extensions may be requested in writing to the
city.



      (9)   If the number of replacement trees cannot be met
on-site, the following is required:



         (a)   A cash payment of $400 per replacement tree shall
be provided to the city for the planting of trees that are as close as
possible to the site that payment was received for or to subsidize trees sold
to the city’s residents;



         (b)   Trees may be planted in city-owned or managed land
as approved by the Parks, Recreation and Natural Resources Director; or



         (c)   Replacement trees may be installed on other
properties owned by the applicant within the city. If a buffer area as
defined by the natural resource corridor map is on said property, replacement
trees shall be planted in this area first.



   (I)   Unauthorized significant tree removal.



      (1)   Any person, firm, or corporation who removes or causes
the loss of a significant tree identified to be preserved on an approved tree
preservation plan or without a permit allowing woodland alteration, shall be
required to complete 1 of the following as determined by the city:



         (a)   Installation of replacement trees within the same
development at a 1:2 DBH (remove:replace); or



         (b)   Payment to the city of $500 for every 1 inch of
significant tree removed that was unauthorized. Measurement of each tree will
be at DBH or diameter of the stump, whichever is readily available. This
amount may be taken by the city from the financial security posted by the
applicant for tree replacement, if any. A minimum of $15,000 payment will be
required if measurements are unavailable.



      (2)   This provision also applies to a conservation easement
area that is disturbed during or after development as well as removing a
publicly managed tree of any size without written city authorization.



      (3)   The city may withhold permits from any person, firm, or
corporation who fails to complete the requirements above.



   (J)   Financial security.



      (1)   (a)   The applicant shall provide the city with a
cash escrow, or other form of security that the city deems acceptable, in the
amount of 150% of the total tree replacement estimate.



         (b)   Formula: Number of replacement trees x tree
replacement estimate x 150%= financial security due.



      (2)   The financial security required for the replacement
trees is due prior to the issuance of the grading permit or the commencement
of any woodland alteration activity.



      (3)   All replacement trees must be warrantied to guarantee
survival. The warranty period shall begin upon inspection and acceptance by
city staff of the installed trees for proper planting, size, species, health,
and location. If at any time during the warranty period replacement trees are
found to be unhealthy by city staff, they are required to be replaced with
the same size and species by the applicant at the soonest appropriate
planting time.



         (a)   For commercial/industrial sites and residential
developers, up to 75% of the financial security may be returned upon
inspection and acceptance by the city of installed trees and the submittal of
a city-approved two-year warranty from the landscape contractor who installed
the trees. This warranty must cover tree health issues relating to excess or
insufficient water. The remaining financial security will be held by the city
for 2 years. When reducing the financial security, 75% will be returned
unless city staff feels the trees have a heightened risk of failure.



         (b)   For builders of individual residential lots within
a subdivision who receives a one-year warranty from the landscape contractor
who installed the trees, 100% of the financial security will be returned upon:



            1.   Inspection and acceptance of installed trees
by the city; and



            2.   Providing the lot buyer with the copy of the
one-year warranty from the landscape contractor and contact information to
make a claim on the warranty.



      (4)   (a)   If the financial security has not been returned
in full after the inspection of the installed trees, at the end of a two-year
warranty period, the applicant shall schedule a final inspection with city
staff.



         (b)   Prior to scheduling the inspection, the applicant
shall confirm the following conditions are met:



            1.   All trees have 1 dominate leader, are free of
deadwood, and injured branches;



            2.   All tree wrap is removed;



            3.   All stakes and wires are removed; and



            4.   Trees are in leaf.



         (c)   At the time of final inspection the city shall
decide to:



            1.   Refund the financial security in full; or



            2.   Require the planting of new trees to replace
the replacement trees which do not survive or are declared unhealthy by city
staff. If 25% or more of the replacement trees are required to be replaced,
the appropriate amount of financial security will be held for an additional 2
years for said trees.



      (5)   The financial security will be used by the city only if
the applicant does not install the initial or subsequent replacement trees
required in § 151.113.



      (6)   Any trees required to be removed per § 130.16 from a
site, shall be removed and disposed of according to § 130.16 prior to
release of the financial security.



      (7)   The city shall be exempt from the financial security
requirement of this section.



   (K)   General regulations.



      (1)   If the applicant disagrees with the city staff’s
decision with respect to the interpretation or enforcement of § 151.113, the
applicant may appeal that decision by following the procedure established in
§ 151.016.



      (2)   Land previously planted for commercial tree farm
purposes shall be subject to tree replacement requirements as determined
appropriate by the city with the maximum requirement being the current
allowable tree removal requirements of division (F) above.



      (3)   Inspections required in § 151.113 will be conducted by
staff from the City’s Natural Resources Department or other city staff as
assigned.



   (L)   Effective date. This section becomes effective from and after
its passage and publication.



Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 96, passed
11-11-1982; Ord. 132, passed 9-22-1983; Ord. 158, passed 1-31-1985; Ord. 246,
passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 253, passed 10-14-1988; Ord. 259, passed 11-11-1988;
Ord. 272, passed 8-25-1989; Ord. 338, passed 8-6-1992; Ord. 377, passed
7-7-1994; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 430, passed 2-1-1996; Ord. 815,
passed 3-26-2009; Ord. 883, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 151.114  EXTERIOR LIGHTING.



   (A)   (1)   Exterior lighting shall be designed and constructed
to limit direct illumination and glare upon or into any other lot or street.



      (2)   Reflected glare or spill light shall not exceed
five-tenths footcandle as measured on the property line when abutting any
residential, lot, and 1 footcandle on any property line abutting a business
or industrial lot. Street lights installed in public right-of-way and lights
in city parks shall be excepted from these standards.



   (B)   (1)   Mitigative measures shall be employed to limit glare
and spill light to protect neighboring lots and to maintain traffic safety on
streets.



      (2)   These measures shall include lenses, shields, louvers,
prismatic control devices, and limitations on the height and type of
fixtures. The city also may limit the hours of operation of outdoor lighting
if it is deemed necessary to reduce impacts on the surrounding neighborhood.



   (C)   No flickering or flashing lights shall be permitted except
where required by the Federal Aviation Administration.



   (D)   Direct off-site views of the light source shall be blocked or
screened except for globe or ornamental light fixtures, which may be approved
when it can be demonstrated that the off-site impacts stemming from direct
views of the light source are mitigated by the fixture design or location.



   (E)   The city may require submission of a light distribution plan
if deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the intent of this chapter.



   (F)   In any Industry Zone, light may spill from 1 lot to any other
lot; provided, that it does not extend beyond the boundaries of the industry
zone.



(2013 Code, § 11.60)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979;
Ord. 96, passed 11-11-1982; Ord. 132, passed 9-22-1983; Ord. 158, passed
1-31-1985; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 253, passed 10-14-1988; Ord. 259,
passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 272, passed 8-25-1989; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994;
Ord. 338, passed 8-6-1992; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 430, passed
2-1-1996; Ord. 815, passed 3-26-2009)



§ 151.115  NOISE AND VIBRATION.



   (A)   Noises emanating from any use shall be in compliance with §
130.45, and shall not exceed any standards set by the State Pollution Control
Agency.



   (B)   Any use established or remodeled after the effective date of
this chapter shall be so operated as to prevent vibration discernable at any
point beyond the lot line of the site on which such use is located.



   (C)   Ground vibration and noise caused by trains, aircraft
operations, temporary construction, or demolition, or vehicles other than
those involved in a major commercial recreation use or on private property
shall be exempt from these regulations.



(2013 Code, § 11.60)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 31, passed
10-25--1979; Ord. 96, passed 11-11-1982; Ord. 132, passed 9-22-1983; Ord.
158, passed 1-31-1985; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 253, passed
10-14-1988; Ord. 259, passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 272, passed 8-25-1989; Ord.
338, passed 8-6-1992; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995;
Ord. 430, passed 2-1-1996; Ord. 815, passed 3-26-2009) Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.116  SMOKE AND PARTICULATE MATTER.



   No use shall produce or emit smoke, dust, or particulate matter
exceeding applicable regulations established by the State Pollution Control
Agency.



(2013 Code, § 11.60)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979;
Ord. 96, passed 11-11-1982; Ord. 132, passed 9-22-1983; Ord. 158, passed
1-31-1985; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 253, passed 10-14-1988; Ord. 259,
passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 272, passed 8-25-1989; Ord. 338, passed 8-6-1992;
Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 430, passed
2-1-1996; Ord. 815, passed 3-26-2009) Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.117  ODOR.



   No use shall produce odors exceeding applicable regulations established
by the State Pollution Control Agency.



(2013 Code, § 11.60)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979;
Ord. 96, passed 11-11-1982; Ord. 132, passed 9-22-1983; Ord. 158, passed
1-31-1985; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 253, passed 10-14-1988; Ord. 259,
passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 272, passed 8-25-1989; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994;
Ord. 338, passed 8-6-1992; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 430, passed
2-1-1996; Ord. 815, passed 3-26-2009) Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.118  TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER.



   No use or operation shall emit toxic or noxious matter across the
property line which exceeds applicable regulations of the State Pollution
Control Agency.



(2013 Code, § 11.60)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979;
Ord. 96, passed 11-11-1982; Ord. 132, passed 9-22-1983; Ord. 158, passed
1-31-1985; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 253, passed 10-14-1988; Ord. 259,
passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 272, passed 8-25-1989; Ord. 338, passed 8-6-1992;
Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 430, passed
2-1-1996; Ord. 815, passed 3-26-2009) Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.119  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS OR WASTE, INFECTIOUS WASTE, AND POLLUTANTS.



   (A)   Each use involving hazardous materials or waste, infectious
waste, or pollutants, shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations
of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the office of Safety and Health
Administration, the State Pollution Control Agency, the State Department of
Health, and any other applicable federal, state, and local regulatory
provisions.



   (B)   (1)   Any project for which an EAW is mandatory under Minn.
Rules 4410.4300, shall request an EAW from the responsible governmental unit
specified in that rule.



      (2)   The project shall not be developed until all
environmental issues have been resolved to the satisfaction of the
responsible governmental unit, including incorporating any mitigation
measures into the project.



(2013 Code, § 11.60)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979;
Ord. 96, passed 11-11-1982; Ord. 132, passed 9-22-1983; Ord. 158, passed
1-31-1985; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 253, passed 10-14-1988; Ord. 259,
passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 272, passed 8-25-1989; Ord. 338, passed 8-6-1992;
Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 430, passed
2-1-1996; Ord. 815, passed 3-26-2009)



§ 151.120  RADIATION.



   No operation shall be conducted which exceeds the standards established
by applicable state or federal regulations.



(2013 Code, § 11.60)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978;; Ord. 31, passed
10-25-1979; Ord. 96, passed 11-11-1982; Ord. 132, passed 9-22-1983; Ord. 158,
passed 1-31-1985; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 253, passed 10-14-1988;
Ord. 259, passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 272, passed 8-25-1989; Ord. 338, passed
8-6-1992; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 430,
passed 2-1-1996; Ord. 815, passed 3-26-2009) Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.121  ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCE.



   No use shall produce electromagnetic interference which exceeds
applicable standards established by any applicable federal or state
regulations.



(2013 Code, § 11.60)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979;
Ord. 96, passed 11-11-1982; Ord. 132, passed 9-22-1983; Ord. 158, passed
1-31-1985; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 253, passed 10-14-1988; Ord. 259,
passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 272, passed 8-25-1989; Ord. 338, passed 8-6-1992;
Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 430, passed
2-1-1996; Ord. 815, passed 3-26-2009) Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.122  RECEIVE-ONLY SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS AND OTHER ANTENNA DEVICES.



   Receive-only satellite dish antennas and other antenna devices are
subject to the following requirements:



   (A)   Shall be in compliance with all city building and electrical
code requirements;



   (B)   Shall have verification that the structural design and
mounting system have been approved by a professional engineer;



   (C)   Shall be limited to 1 per building or, if more than 1 antenna
is proposed, the antennas shall be clustered in a single, screened location;



   (D)   Shall not have any advertising message on the antenna
structure;



   (E)   Shall comply with setback requirements for principal
structures and in no event shall be located between the principal structure
and the front lot line;



   (F)   Shall be screened to the greatest extent practicable to
minimize visual impacts on surrounding properties. Screening shall include
landscape materials for ground mounted antennas, and materials compatible
with those utilized on the exterior of the building for roof mounted antennas;



   (G)   Shall be designed and engineered to collapse progressively
within the distance between the antenna and the property line, if the antenna
is located closer to a property line than the height of the antenna; and



   (H)   Shall be in compliance with all applicable Federal
Communications Commission requirements.



(2013 Code, § 11.60)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979;
Ord. 96, passed 11-11-1982; Ord. 132, passed 9-22-1983; Ord. 158, passed
1-31-1985; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 253, passed 10-14-1988; Ord. 259,
passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 272, passed 8-25-1989; Ord. 338, passed 8-6-1992;
Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 430, passed
2-1-1996; Ord. 815, passed 3-26-2009)



§ 151.123  PRESERVATION OF SURFACE WATERS.



   (A)   (1)   (a)   All development shall be planned and
constructed to minimize the impact on natural drainage.



         (b)   Above-ground drainage systems may be constructed
to augment the natural drainage system. The widths of a constructed drainage
system shaft be sufficient to adequately channel runoff from a ten-year storm.



      (2)   (a)   Adequacy shall be determined by the expected
runoff when full development of the drainage area is reached.



         (b)   No fences or structures may be constructed across
the drainage system which will reduce or restrict the flow of water.



      (3)   The bed of the drainage system shall be at such a grade
that will not result in a velocity that will cause erosion of the banks of
the drainage system, and in no event shall exceed 5 feet of horizontal
distance for each foot of vertical distance.



   (B)   (1)   The bed of the drainage system shall be protected
with turf, sod, or concrete. If turf or sod will not function properly,
riprap may be used. Rip rap shall consist of quarried limestone or fieldstone.



      (2)   The riprap shall be no smaller than 2 inches square nor
larger than 2 feet square.



   (C)   The banks or walls of the drainage system shall be protected
with turf, if the flow velocity in the drainage system is such that erosion
of the turf sidewall will occur and the velocity cannot be decreased by means
of velocity control structures, gravel or riprap may be used to replace the
turf.



   (D)   (1)   To prevent sedimentation of drainage systems,
pervious and impervious sediment traps and other sediment control structures
shall be incorporated throughout the contributing watershed.



      (2)   During construction, the city may require temporary
pervious sediment traps, such as a construction of bales of hay with a low
spillway embankment subchapter of sand and gravel that permits a slow
movement of water while filtering sediment.



      (3)   The city also shall utilize permanent impervious
sediment control structures, such as debris basins, desilting basins, or silt
traps to remove sediment from runoff prior to its disposal in any permanent
body of water.



   (E)   (1)   All erosion and velocity control structures shall be
maintained in a condition that will ensure continuous functioning.



      (2)   Sediment basins shall be maintained as the need occurs
to ensure continuous desilting action.



      (3)   The areas utilized for runoff drainage systems and
sediment basins shall not be allowed to exist in an unsightly condition. The
banks of the sediment basins and drainage systems shall be landscaped.



(2013 Code, § 11.60)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979;
Ord. 96, passed 11-11-1982; Ord. 132, passed 9-22-1983; Ord. 158, passed
1-31-1985; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 253, passed 10-14-1988; Ord. 259,
passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 272, passed 8-25-1989; Ord. 338, passed 8-6-1992;
Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 430, passed
2-1-1996; Ord. 815, passed 3-26-2009)



§ 151.124  GROUND WATER PROTECTION.



   (A)   No use may dispose of any waste directly into the ground water
in violation of the requirements of the State Pollution Control Agency.



   (B)   No use shall operate in a manner which will cause alterations
of the existing water table, unless such alteration meets all requirements of
the State Pollution Control Agency.



(2013 Code, § 11.60)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979;
Ord. 96, passed 11-11-1982; Ord. 132, passed 9-22-1983; Ord. 158, passed
1-31-1985; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 253, passed 10-14-1988; Ord. 259,
passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 272, passed 8-25-1989; Ord. 338, passed 8-6-1992;
Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 430, passed
2-1-1996; Ord. 815, passed 3-26-2009)



§ 151.125  SIGHT TRIANGLES.



   (A)   The area between 3 and 10 feet in height shall be maintained
clear of all obstructions at the intersections of streets with other streets
and driveways for safety of pedestrians and people in vehicles. Structures
and landscaping are prohibited within any sight triangle, except that
structures or landscaping are permitted if they do not exceed 1 foot in width
or diameter.



   (B)   Property in the Central Business (B-3) Zone is exempt from the
sight triangle requirements.



      (1)   Street intersections. The chart below specifies the
required clear area for each street intersection. The City Engineer may
require additional triangle area if a traffic study or special conditions
indicate that additional protection is needed.



 


Intersection of Width

 

Major Arterial

 

Minor Arterial

 

Collector

 

Local



Collector
 

B

 

B

 

B

 





Local
 

B

 

B

 

B

 

B



Major Arterial
 

A

 

A

 

B

 

B



Minor Arterial
 

A

 

B

 

B

 

B



Key:

A = 100 feet by 100 feet sight triangle

B = 50 feet by 50 feet sight triangle for lots receiving preliminary plat
approval after March 26, 2009

B = 30 feet by 30 feet sight triangle for lots receiving preliminary plat
approval prior to March 26, 2009



 



      (2)   Processing sight triangles. The following graphic shall
serve as an explanation as to the process for measuring sight triangles.







 



      (3)   Driveway intersections.



         (a)   The street/driveway sight triangle shall be
calculated by measuring a straight line down the edges of the pavement or
curb or projection thereof, and drawing a third straight line connecting the
extremities of the other 2 lines.



         (b)   On the right side of the driveway, as determined
when standing in the driveway facing the street, the sight triangle shall
extend 40 feet down the street and 12 feet from the edge of the street up the
driveway pavement, with a third line connecting the other 2 lines. On the
left side of the driveway, the sight triangle shall extend 65 feet down the
street and 12 feet up the driveway pavement, with a third line connecting the
other 2 lines.



(2013 Code, § 11.60)  (Ord. 1, passed 4-1-1978; Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979;
Ord. 96, passed 11-11-1982; Ord. 132, passed 9-22-1983; Ord. 158, passed
1-31-1985; Ord. 246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 253, passed 10-14-1988; Ord. 259,
passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 272, passed 8-25-1989; Ord. 338, passed 8-6-1992;
Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 434, passed 11-30-1995; Ord. 430, passed
2-1-1996; Ord. 815, passed 3-26-2009)




PARKING




§ 151.140  PURPOSE.



   The purpose for the regulation of off-street parking is to alleviate or
prevent congestion of the public right-of-way and to promote the safety and
general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for
off-street parking of vehicles based on the use of the land.



(2013 Code, § 11.61)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 96, passed
11-11-1982; Ord. 158, passed 1-31-1985; Ord. 185, passed 12-25-1985; Ord.
246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 259, passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 264, passed
5-26-1989; Ord. 279, passed 12-1-1989; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 546,
passed 5-6-1999; Ord. 877, passed 12-3-2013)



§ 151.141  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Application. The provisions of this subchapter apply to the
required and non-required off-street parking in all zones, except that
property within the Central Business (B-3) Zone is exempt from the off-street
parking requirements. These provisions apply to the entire area used for
vehicular circulation and parking.



   (B)   Where may park.



      (1)   Except in the Agricultural Preservation (AG) Zone, a
vehicle may be parked only on a street or alley, or in a properly surfaced
parking facility. Vehicles may be parked on grass or outside a parking
facility when a flood or other emergency prohibits the use of the parking
facility, or when the required parking for a particular use is insufficient
to meet a business rush, such as during the holiday season.



      (2)   A recreational vehicle may be parked for more than 24
hours only on an approved sales lot or self-storage facility, as specified in
the parking provisions relating to residential parking facilities, or in a
campground.



   (C)   Expansion of existing uses. Any existing use or structure
which is altered or enlarged must comply with the provisions of this
subchapter.



   (D)   Reduction of parking spaces. Off-street parking spaces
existing upon the effective date of this chapter shall not be reduced in
number below the requirements set forth in this subchapter for that use.



   (E)   Use of parking space. No required off-street parking space
shall be used for an open sales lot or for open storage.



   (F)   Maintenance. The owner of the principal use, uses, or
structure shall maintain the parking facility and curbing in a neat and
adequate manner.



   (G)   Residential parking facilities.



      (1)   Required. Off-street parking facilities located outside
of required setbacks shall be provided for at least 2 vehicles for all
single-family dwellings. A suitable location for both a garage measuring at
least 20 feet by 24 feet and a ten-foot driveway, which do not require a
variance, shall be provided and indicated as such on a survey or site plan to
be submitted when applying for a building permit to construct a new dwelling
or alter an existing garage.



      (2)   Use. Off-street parking facilities in an Rural
Residential (RR), Low-Density Residential (R-1A), Urban Residential (R-1B),
Old Shakopee Residential (R-1C), Medium-Density (R-2), or Multiple-Family
Residential (R-3) Zone, shall be used solely for the parking of personal
vehicles.



      (3)   Location. Off-street parking facilities in a residential
zone shall not be located in the front yard setback or in a street side yard
setback.



      (4)   Recreational vehicles.



         (a)   In a residential zone, 1 of the exterior driveway
parking spaces for a dwelling or a properly surfaced parking area meeting
parking requirements for the zone may be used for parking or storing an
unoccupied recreational vehicle that is either defined as a recreational
vehicle (RV) under state law or which is a camper and that is less than 35
feet in length. If parked in a location other than the driveway within a
single-family residential zone, RVs and campers shall be setback 5 feet from
an interior side or rear lot line, 15 feet from a street side lot line. RVs
and camper shall not be parked in the front yard unless they utilize an
exterior driveway parking space. No living quarters shall be maintained nor
any business practiced in the recreational vehicle while it is so parked or
stored. The recreational vehicle shall utilize only the existing driveway
into the site. The vehicle shall be owned or leased by the property owner or
resident on which the vehicle is parked.



         (b)   No more than 2 utility trailers, trailers for
recreational vehicles such as snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles (ATVs),
and boats 20 feet or less in length may be stored in a rear or side yard on
lawn or turf or other surface, but must be setback 5 feet from an interior
side or rear lot line, 15 feet from a street side lot line.



         (c)   A camper or RV recreational vehicle brought by a
visitor may be parked or occupied for a period not to exceed 30 days while
visiting the resident of the property.



      (5)   Sales trailers. Sales trailers may not be parked in any
zoning district in the city.



   (H)   Combined parking facilities. Required off-street parking
facilities for more than 1 use, lot, or parcel of land may be provided
through joint parking facility, a shared parking plan, or a cooperative
parking plan. When required off-street parking facilities are provided
off-site, written authority for using such property for off-street parking
during the existence of the use shall be filed with the city. No such parking
facility at its closest point shall be located more then 300 feet from the
use being served.



      (1)   Joint parking. Off-street parking facilities for 2 or
more uses may be provided in a joint facility. The joint parking facility
shall include sufficient spaces to meet the separate requirements for each
use.



      (2)   Shared parking.



         (a)   Off-street parking facilities for 2 or more uses
with substantially different hours of operation may be provided in a shared
facility.



         (b)   Evidence must be submitted showing that the uses
normally are not open, used, or operated during substantially the same hours.
Up to 50% of the required off-street parking facilities for a use may be
provided in a shared parking facility.



         (c)   Shared parking is not a right, and the city shall
have the discretion to give credit up to the 50% limitation based upon its
review of plans, uses, and other information related to the off-street
parking needs.



      (3)   Cooperative parking. Off-street parking facilities for 1
use may be provided on the property of another use in a cooperative facility
when that use has more parking spaces than are required. The excess spaces
may be shared with another use through a cooperative parking plan.



      (4)   Application.



         (a)   An application for approval of a shared parking
plan or a cooperative parking plan shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator. The application shall be signed by the owner or owners of the
entire land area to be included within the cooperative parking plan, the
owner or owners of all structures then existing on such land areas, and all
parties having a legal interest in such land area and structures.



         (b)   The application shall include plans showing the
location of the use or structures for which off-street parking facilities are
required, the location of the off-street parking facilities, and the schedule
of times used by those sharing in common.



      (5)   Review. The application shall be reviewed by the Board
of Adjustment and Appeals. Upon approval of a shared parking plan or a
cooperative parking plan, the plan shall be recorded in the office of the
County Recorder.



      (6)   Residential parking facilities. Required off-street
parking in residential zones shall be on the same lot or parcel of land as
the structure for which parking is required.



(2013 Code, § 11.61)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 96, passed
11-11-1982; Ord. 158, passed 1-31-1985; Ord. 185, passed 12-25-1985; Ord.
246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 259, passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 264, passed
5-26-1989; Ord. 279, passed 12-1-1989; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 546,
passed 5-6-1999; Ord. 609, passed 8-30-2001; Ord. 648, passed 1-2-2003; Ord.
877, passed 12-3-2013)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.142  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Access. Parking facilities shall provide a direct access to a
public alley or street.



   (B)   Traffic flow.



      (1)   Parking facilities shall be designed so that vehicles
may enter, circulate, park, and exit in a convenient and orderly fashion.



      (2)   Backing onto streets is prohibited in multiple-family,
business, and industry zones.



   (C)   Angled parking. Parking spaces oriented at less than 90
degrees to the aisle shall be limited to one-way circulation.



   (D)   Surfacing.



      (1)   Except for parking facilities for single-family
dwellings within the Agricultural Preservation (AG), Rural Residential (RR),
Low-Density Residential (R-1A), Urban Residential (R-1B), and Old Shakopee
Residential (R-1C) Zones, the entire parking facility shall be surfaced with
asphalt or concrete.



      (2)   Parking facilities for only 1 or 2 vehicles may be
surfaced with other material which is dust-free and impervious to penetration
by water.



   (E)   Setback.



      (1)   In all multiple-family residential, business, and
industry zones, a minimum 15-foot setback shall be required between any
parking facility and a street.



      (2)   A minimum five-foot setback shall be required between
any parking facility and any other property line.



      (3)   These parking setbacks shall be landscaped in accordance
with the requirements listed in §§ 151.105 through 151.125.



   (F)   Handicap facilities. Required handicap spaces and ramps shall
be provided as specified in the State Building Code.



   (G)   Minimum size of parking spaces.



      (1)   Each parking space shall be not less than 9 feet wide.



      (2)   Other minimum dimensional requirements for the design of
parking facilities are shown in the following table, Table 1 - Parking Lot
Design. Parking spaces beyond the minimum required number may be smaller or
of different dimensions.



Table 1



Parking Lot Design







 



 


Angle of Parking




Dimension

 

Diagram

 

45 Degrees

 

60 Degrees

 

75 Degrees

 

90 Degrees





Space width, parallel to aisle
 

A

 

12.7

 

10.4

 

9.3

 

9.0



Space length of line
 

B

 

25.0

 

22.0

 

20.0

 

18.0



Space depth
 

C

 

17.5

 

19.0

 

19.5

 

18.0



Aisle width between space lines
 

D

 

12.0

 

16.0

 

23.0

 

24.0



Space depth, interlock
 

E

 

15.3

 

17.5

 

18.8

 

24.0



Module, edge of pavement to interlock
 

F

 

44.8

 

52.5

 

61.3

 

64.0



Module interlocking
 

G

 

42.6

 

51.0

 

61.0

 

64.0



Module, interlocking to curb face
 

H

 

42.8

 

50.2

 

58,8

 

60.5



Bumper overhang
 

I

 

1.0

 

1.0

 

1.0

 

1.0



Offset
 

J

 

6.3

 

2.7

 

0.5

 

0.0



Cross aisle, 1 way
 

K

 

14.0

 

14.0

 

14.0

 

14.0



Cross aisle, 2 way
 

K

 

24.0

 

24.0

 

24.0

 

24.0





 



   (H)   Bumper overhang.  To receive a reduction in space depth for
parking stalls adjacent to walkways or sidewalks, a clear space in the
sidewalk or walkway of at least 5 feet in width must be maintained that is
free of sign posts, bumper overhangs, bollards, or other obstructions.
Screening such as trees, shrubs, bushes, or fencing must be located and
maintained in a manner that allows at least 1.0 foot of clear space between
the parking area and the screening both at the time of installation and at
full and mature size for plantings.



(2013 Code, § 11.61)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 96, passed
11-11-1982; Ord. 158, passed 1-31-1985; Ord. 185, passed 12-25-1985; Ord.
246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 259, passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 264, passed
5-26-1989; Ord. 279, passed 12-1-1989; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 546,
passed 5-6-1999; Ord. 877, passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 914, passed 9-1-2015)



§ 151.143  REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES.



   (A)   Floor area. The term FLOOR AREA for the purpose of calculating
the number of required off-street parking spaces, shall be the total floor
area of all levels of a building, minus hallways, utility spaces, storage
areas for uses not involving warehousing, and other accessory spaces.



   (B)   Calculating space. When determining the number of required
off-street parking spaces results in a fraction, each fraction of one-half or
more shall constitute another space.



   (C)   Benches. In public assembly places where seating is provided
on benches, pews, or other similar items, each 22 inches of such seating
shall be counted as 1 seat for the purpose of determining required parking.



   (D)   Uses not listed. When the parking requirements for a use are
not specified, the Zoning Administrator shall determine which listed use or
uses are the most similar to the proposed use. The parking requirements for
that listed use or uses shall apply to the proposed use.



   (E)   Required off-street parking. Each use must provide, at a
minimum, the number of required off-street parking spaces listed on Table 2
in this division (E). For lots or parcels of land containing more than 1 use,
the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces for each use must be
provided.



 


Table 2
Number of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Per Unit of Measurement




Use or Use Category

 

Number






Business/Industry



Airports
 
1 per 4 seats in waiting area, plus 1 per employee on largest shift


Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics
 
1 per 500 square feet


Bowling alley
 
5 per bowling lane


Breweries
 
1 per 500 square feet of floor area or employee on largest shift, whichever
is greater


Brewpubs
 
1 per 3 seats, plus 1 per 50 square feet of congregation area


Bus terminals
 
1 per 500 square feet


Car washes
 
3 per stall


Cemeteries
 
4 minimum


Commercial feedlots
 
1 per employee on largest shift


Concrete or asphalt plants
 
1 per employee on largest shift


Day care facility
 
1 per 5 children


Distilleries
 
1 per 500 square feet of floor area or employee on largest shift, whichever
is greater, plus 1 per 50 square feet congregation area


Dry cleaning plants
 
1 per 300 square feet


Financial institutions
 
1 per 200 square feet of floor area


Forestry and nursery uses
 
1 per 500 square feet of floor area


Funeral homes
 
1 per employee on largest shift


Furniture and appliance stores
 
1 per 400 square feet of floor area


Gas stations
 
1 per 6 gas pumps, plus 1 per 150 square feet


Grain elevators
 
1 per employee on largest shift


Industrial or technical training schools
 
1 per 3 students, plus 1 per employee on largest shift


Junkyards
 
1 per employee on largest shift


Kennels
 
1 per 400 square feet


Landscaping service and contractors
 
1 per employee on largest shift, plus 1 per 500 square feet of sales area


Manufacturing and processing facilities
 
1 per 500 square feet of floor area, or employee on largest shift, whichever
is greater


Medical, dental clinics
 
1 per 200 square feet of floor area


Motor freight terminals
 
1 per 1,000 square feet, plus 1 per 200 square feet of office area


Offices
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area


Open sales lots, uses with exterior storage of goods for sale
 
1 per 500 square feet of sales area


Printing or publishing facilities
 
1 per employee on largest shift


Private lodges and clubs
 
1 per 4 seats


Railroad operations
 
1 per employee on largest shift


Recycling or composting facilities
 
1 per 1,000 square feet of floor area, or employee on largest shift,
whichever is greater


Research, experimental or testing facilities
 
1 per employee on largest shift


Restaurants (Class I)
 
1 per 3 seats


Restaurants (Class II)
 
1 per 50 square feet of floor area, plus 1 per 3 seats


Retail centers
 
1 per 200 square feet of flood area


Retail establishments
 
1 per 150 square feet of floor area


Riding academies
 
1 per 4 horse stalls


Seasonal produce stands
 
3 minimum


Self-storage facilities
 
1 per 10 storage units, plus 1 per employee on largest shift, plus 1 per
resident manager


Service garages for major vehicle repair
 
4 minimum, plus 1 per service stall


Taprooms
 
1 per 3 seats, plus 1 per 50 square feet of congregation area


Tasting area, winery, distillery
 
1 per 3 seats, plus 1 per 50 square feet of congregation area


Taverns
 
1 per 50 square feet of floor area


Taxi stands
 
1 per employee


Theaters, auditoriums, or sports arenas
 
1 per 4 seats


Truck or trailer rental facilities
 
1 per 400 square feet


Uses having a drive-up or drive-through window
 
1 driving lane


Vehicle, marine, implement, garden supply, building and material sates
 
6 minimum, plus 1 per 500 square feet of floor area over 1,000 square feet


Vehicle rental facilities
 
1 per rental vehicle, plus 1 per 500 square feet of floor area


Vending machine establishments
 
1 per vending machine


Warehouses
 
1 per employee largest shift


Wholesaling establishments
 
1 per 1,000 square feet of floor area, or employee on largest shift,
whichever is greater


Wineries
 
1 per 500 square feet of floor area or employee on largest shift, whichever
is greater



Education, Cultural, and Institutional



Athletic field
 
1 per 8 seats minimum


Churches, auditoriums, funeral homes
 
1 per 4 seats in main assembly area


Commercial recreation
 
15 commercial, plus 50 per acre of developed recreation area


Golf courses, sports facility, fitness club

 
 
20 minimum, plus 1 per 300 square feet or floor area over 1,000 square feet


Hospitals
 
1 per 2 hospital beds


Middle, elementary, and nursery schools

 
 
1 per classroom, plus 1 per 50 student design capacity


Nursing homes
 
4 minimum, plus 1 per 500 square feet of floor area over 1,000 square feet


Public buildings, community centers, public libraries, art galleries,
museums, post office
 
10 minimum, plus 1 per 300 square feet of floor area over 1,000 square feet


Public recreation
 
1 per 3 persons attending, design capacity


Senior high schools
 
1 per 7 student design capacity, plus 1 per classroom



Residential and Lodging



Bed and breakfast inns
 
1 per guest room

1 per operator


Motels, hotels - excluding restaurants and night clubs
 
1 per guest room, plus 1 per 2 employees


Multiple-family dwellings
 
2.25 per dwelling


Senior citizen housing and congregate housing
 
1 per dwelling


Single-family, two-family dwellings
 
2 per dwelling


Multiple-family dwellings
 
2.25 per dwelling




 



(2013 Code, § 11.61)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 96, passed
11-11-1982; Ord. 158, passed 1-31-1985; Ord. 185, passed 12-25-1985; Ord.
246, passed 6-17-1988; Ord. 259, passed 11-11-1988; Ord. 264, passed
5-26-1989; Ord. 279, passed 12-1-1989; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 546,
passed 5-6-1999; Ord. 877, passed 12-3-2013)




DRIVEWAYS




§ 151.155  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the regulation of driveways is to alleviate or prevent
congestion of the public right-of-way and to promote the safety and general
welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for driveways
based on the use of the land.



(2013 Code, § 11.62)  (Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 753 passed
3-30-2006; Ord. 789, passed 1-3-2008)



§ 151.156  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)    Application. The provisions of this subchapter apply to the
required and non-required driveways in all zones.



   (B)   Use of driveway. No required off-street driveway shall be used
for an open sales lot or for open storage.



   (C)   Maintenance. The owner of the principal use, uses, or
structure shall maintain the driveway and curbs in a neat and adequate manner.



   (D)   Shared driveways. Driveways serving more than 1 lot or parcel
of land may be approved by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals except when
said plans are part of the platting process, at which time such driveways
shall be approved by the Planning Commission. The Board of Adjustment and
Appeals in approving shared driveways shall require the following:



      (1)   A property owner’s association or maintenance
agreement for the driveway must be executed designating the party responsible
for maintaining the driveway, and granting that party the right to assess all
properties benefitting from the driveway for the cost of maintenance. The
agreement also shall grant the city the right to enter and maintain the
driveway when it deems necessary to maintain safe access, and to charge the
cost of such maintenance back to the property owners.



      (2)   When the proposed shared driveway is an existing
driveway, the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall review the condition of
the driveway and make a determination as to whether the driveway must be
upgraded to ensure proper and safe access. If the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals determines that the driveway must be upgraded, the homeowner’s
association or property owners will be required to execute a developer’s
agreement with the city for the improvement of the driveway.



(2013 Code, § 11.62)  (Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 506, passed
12-2-1997; Ord. 753 passed 3-30-2006; Ord. 789, passed 1-3-2008) Penalty, see
§ 151.999



§ 151.157  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Access. No vehicle shall be allowed to access a lot or parcel
of land except at the approved driveway location.



   (B)   Turn around area. Construction of on-site turn around
facilities is required for multiple-family, business, and industrial uses in
order to eliminate any backing out onto the street.



   (C)   Traffic flow. Driveways shall be designed so that vehicles may
enter, circulate, park, and exit parking facilities in a convenient and
orderly fashion. The traffic generated by any use shall be channeled and
controlled in a manner that will avoid congestion on the streets, traffic
hazards, and excessive traffic through residential areas, particularly
commercial vehicles.



   (D)   Surfacing. Except for driveways for single-family dwellings
within the Agricultural Preservation (AG), Rural Residential (RR),
Low-Density Residential (R-1A), Urban Residential (R-1B), and Old Shakopee
Residential (R-1C) Zones, the entire driveway shall be surfaced with asphalt
or concrete. Driveways leading to parking spaces for only 1 or 2 vehicles,
and driveways in excess of 50 feet in length in the Agricultural Preservation
(AG) and Rural Residential (RR) Zones, may be surfaced with other material
which is dust-free and impervious to penetration by water.



   (E)   Curb cuts. The number and size of driveways intersecting with
city streets shall be in accordance with Ch. 90 and as approved by the City
Engineer. Driveways onto county roads are regulated by the County Engineer.
Driveways onto state and federal highways are regulated by the State
Department of Transportation.



   (F)   Driveway setback. Driveways shall be setback a minimum of 5
feet from any side or rear lot line, except in the Old Shakopee Residential
(R-1C) Zone driveways may be setback 3 feet from a side property line if the
property was a lot of record prior to May 3, 1977, and there are no
underlying easements in the location of the driveway.



   (G)   Number of driveways. A maximum of 1 driveway per 200 feet of
frontage shall be allowed for multiple-family, business, and industrial uses.



   (H)   Driveway widths. Driveways widths shall be as approved by the
City Engineer.



   (I)   Driveway location. Driveways shall be located outside the
sight triangle and as far as possible from any street corner. Driveway
locations shall be selected to cause the least interference with the movement
of traffic on streets.



   (J)   Emergency vehicles. All driveways shall have a minimum width
of 10 feet with a pavement strength capable of supporting emergency vehicles.



   (K)   Maximum driveway grade. No driveway grade shall exceed 10%
within 25 feet of the property line, or such other grade as approved by the
City Engineer.



(2013 Code, § 11.62)  (Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 753 passed
3-30-2006; Ord. 789, passed 1-3-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999




LOADING FACILITIES




§ 151.170  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the regulation of off-street loading is to alleviate or
prevent congestion of the public right-of-way and to promote the safety and
general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for
loading and unloading from vehicles based on the use of the land.



(2013 Code, § 11.63)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 96, passed
11-11-1982; Ord. 158, passed 1-31-1985; Ord. 264, passed 5-26-1989; Ord. 279,
passed 12-1-1989; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994)



§ 151.171  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Application. The provisions of this subchapter apply to the
required and non-required off-street loading facilities in all zones, except
that property within the Central Business (B-3) Zone is exempt from the
off-street loading requirements.



   (B)   Expansion of existing uses. Any existing use or structure
which is altered or enlarged must comply with the provisions of this
subchapter.



   (C)   Calculation. All loading space requirements shall be in
addition to any parking space or driveway requirements.



   (D)   Use of loading space. No required loading space shall be used
for an open sales lot or exterior storage.



   (E)   Maintenance. The owner of the principal use, uses, or
structure shall maintain the loading space.



(2013 Code, § 11.63)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 96, passed
11-11-1982; Ord. 158, passed 1-31-1985; Ord. 264, passed 5-26-1989; Ord. 279,
passed 12-1-1989; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994)



§ 151.172  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Access. Loading spaces shall have a direct access to a public
alley or street.



   (B)   Traffic flow. Loading spaces shall be designed so that
vehicles may enter and exit in a convenient and orderly fashion. Backing onto
streets is prohibited in multiple-family, business, and industry zones. The
loading spaces shall be located to cause the least interference with the
movement of traffic on streets.



   (C)   Surfacing. All loading spaces shall be surfaced with asphalt
or concrete.



   (D)   Setback. All loading spaces shall be setback a minimum of 25
feet from any street corner. Loading spaces are prohibited in the front yard
setback.



   (E)   Minimum size of loading spaces.



      (1)   Unless otherwise specified, the first space required
shall be not less than 12 feet in width and 50 feet in length. Additional
spaces shall be not less than 12 feet in width and 50 feet in length.



      (2)   All loading spaces shall maintain a height of 14 feet or
more.



(2013 Code, § 11.63)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 96, passed
11-11-1982; Ord. 158, passed 1-31-1985; Ord. 264, passed 5-26-1989; Ord. 279,
passed 12-1-1989; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994)



§ 151.173  REQUIRED NUMBER OF LOADING SPACES.



   Each use specified below shall have, as a minimum, the listed number of
loading spaces.



   (A)   Auditorium, convention hall, public buildings, hospitals,
schools, hotels, sports arena. One loading space 25 feet in length for each
building having 1,000 to 10,000 square feet of floor area, plus 1 loading
space 50 feet in length for each 10,000 to 100,000 square feet of floor area.



   (B)   Retail establishments, offices. One loading space 25 feet in
length for each building having 6,000 square feet or more of floor area; plus
1 loading space 50 feet in length for each 25,000 to 100,000 square feet of
floor area.



   (C)   Manufacturing, fabrication, processing, and warehousing.



      (1)   One loading space 25 feet in length for each building
having 3,000 square feet of floor area; plus 1 loading space 50 feet in
length for each 25,000 to 100,000 square feet of floor area, plus 1 loading
space for each 50,000 square feet of floor area over the first 100,000 square
feet of floor area.



      (2)   At least half of the loading spaces for buildings above
100,000 square feet of floor area shall be 50 feet in length.



(2013 Code, § 11.63)  (Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 96, passed
11-11-1982; Ord. 158, passed 1-31-1985; Ord. 264, passed 5-26-1989; Ord. 279,
passed 12-1-1989; Ord. 377, passed 7-7-1994)




SIGNS




§ 151.185  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this section is to provide the opportunity for creative
and effective communication using signage, while demonstrating concern for
the appearance of the city on the part of those designing, displaying, or
otherwise utilizing signs, and at the same time assuring that the public is
not endangered, annoyed, or distracted by the unsafe, disorderly,
indiscriminate, or unnecessary use of signs.



(Ord. 898, passed 12-16-2014)



§ 151.186  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CIVIC GROUP. Civic groups are people joined together to network with
each other and serve the community. Examples of civic groups include, but are
not limited to, Lions Club, Toastmasters, garden clubs, Friends of the
Library, and Rotary Club.



   IDEOLOGICAL and NON-COMMERCIAL SIGNS. A sign that does not name or
advertise a product, service, or business, but only expresses a viewpoint,
opinion, idea, or non-commercial message, such as a public service message or
a message relating to politics, religion, or charity. Any sign allowed under
this subchapter may contain ideological or non-commercial copy in lieu of any
other copy.



   SIGN. Any letter, work, symbol, device, poster, picture, statuary,
reading matter, or representation in the nature of an advertisement,
announcement, message, or visual communication whether painted, pasted,
printed, affixed, or constructed which is displayed in view of the general
public for informational or communicative purpose.



   SIGN, ADVERTISING. Any non-governmental sign located outdoors which
advertises or directs attention to a business, profession, product, service,
commodity, entertainment, event, or other activities not necessarily offered,
sold, or rented upon the premises where the sign is located or to which it is
attached.



   SIGN, ALPHA/NUMERIC MONOCHROME. A sign or portion of a sign that can
display electronic non-pictorial text. In the case of gas stations, pricing
boards for gasoline/diesel shall not be counted toward allowable signage area.



   SIGN AREA. The entire area within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of the actual sign surface This excludes any
supports, uprights, or structures on which any sign is supported unless such
supports, uprights, or structures are an integral part of the display or
sign. Where the sign is double-faced, the SIGN AREA shall be calculated by
measuring only 1 of the faces, meaning that the maximum sign area allowed
shall be permitted on each face of the sign. Where the sign has more than 2
sides, all faces shall be limited to the total area permitted on double-faced
signs, meaning that the total sign area allowed will decrease with additional
faces.



   SIGN, AREA IDENTIFICATION. A free standing sign, located at the
entrance to or within the identified premises, which identifies the name of a
neighborhood, residential subdivision, multiple-family residential complex,
shopping center or area, industrial area, office complex, planned unit
development, or any combination of the above, but which does not advertise
any business within the area.



   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. A sign erected on private property for the purpose
of directing vehicular and pedestrian traffic to facilities or functions open
to the general public.



   SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTERS. A sign or portion of a sign that can
electronically display any combination of words, graphics, pictorial text,
and multiple colors. In the case of gas stations, pricing boards for
gasoline/diesel shall not be counted toward allowable signage area.



   SIGN, FLASHING. A directly or indirectly illuminated sign or portion
thereof that exhibits changing light or color effect by any means, so as to
provide intermittent illumination that changes light intensity in sudden
transitory bursts, and creates the illusion of intermittent flashing light by
streaming, graphic bursts, showing movement, or any mode of lighting which
resembles zooming, twinkling, or sparkling.



   SIGN, FREE STANDING. A sign which is placed in the ground and not
affixed to any part of any structure. A FREE STANDING SIGN may be of any of
the following types:



      (1)   FREE STANDING GROUND SIGN. A sign which is mounted on
free standing shafts, posts, or walls which are 7 feet or less in height and
are attached to the ground;



      (2)   FREE STANDING PYLON SIGN. A sign which is mounted on
free standing shafts, posts, or walls which extend more than 7 feet in height
and are attached to the ground; and



      (3)   SANDWICH BOARD SIGN. A sign which has 2 single face
areas that are attached on only 1 end so as to create a triangular stance,
but which is not permanently affixed to the ground.



   SIGN, GOVERNMENT. A sign which is erected by or with the approval of a
governmental unit.



   SIGN, ILLUMINATED. A sign which has an artificial light source directed
upon it or 1 which has an interior light source.



   SIGN, INSTITUTIONAL. A sign or bulletin board which identifies the name
and other characteristics of a public or private institution on the site
where the sign is located.



   SIGN, MURAL. Any mural or pictorial scene painted or attached on the
wall of a structure or painted on a sign board affixed to a wall, and which
has as its primary purpose artistic effect and an ideological or
non-commercial message.



   SIGN, NAMEPLATE. A sign indicating the name of a building, building
occupant, development, project, or any sign which serves as a directory of
building occupants.



   SIGN, PORTABLE. A sign so designed as to be movable from 1 location to
another and which is not permanently attached to the ground or any structure.



   SIGN, PUBLIC INFORMATION. A sign conveying information of general
interest to the public, such as time, temperature, date, atmospheric
conditions, or upcoming civic, community, cultural, social, or athletic
events.



   SIGN, TEMPORARY. Any sign intended to be displayed for a limited period
of time only.



   SIGN, WALL. Any sign which is attached or affixed to the exterior wall
of any building, and projects from the wall 18 inches or less.



   SIGN, WINDOW. A sign attached to, placed upon, or painted on the
interior or exterior of a window or door of a building and which is intended
for viewing from the exterior of such building.



(Ord. 898, passed 12-16-2014)



§ 151.187  SIGNS NOT REGULATED.



   This subchapter is not intended to and does not regulate the following
types of signs:



   (A)   Signs that are located on the interior of a building or
structure;



   (B)   Signs that can only be viewed from within the lot or parcel of
land on which they are located and not from a street or other public
right-of-way;



   (C)   National flags, flags of political subdivisions, 1
campus/business flag per site for each principal use per site, only when
displayed in conjunction with national or political subdivision flags and not
exceeding the area of the national/political subdivision, or 60 square feet,
whichever is less;



   (D)   Governmental signs; permanent governmental signs for control
of traffic and other regulatory/notification purposes and street signs are
exempt from the provision of this subchapter; and



   (E)   Murals; works of art that do not contain a commercial message.



(Ord. 898, passed 12-16-2014; Ord. 902, passed 2-17-2015)



§ 151.188  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   The following regulations shall apply in all zoning districts and
overlay zones unless otherwise specifically noted elsewhere in this
subchapter.



   (A)   The following signs are prohibited unless specifically
permitted by another provision in this subchapter.



   (B)   Signs that are not expressly permitted by this subchapter are
deemed to be prohibited:



      (1)   Roof signs, which include signs mounted on a roof
surface or projecting above the roof line of a structure and whether attached
to the structure or cantilevered over the structure;



      (2)   Revolving and moving signs;



      (3)   Flashing signs;



      (4)   Portable signs including signage trailers and other
similar moveable signs;



      (5)   Projecting signs in zoning districts other than the B-3
Zone/Historic Town Center Overlay Zone, in which they are specifically
permitted. If a wall sign projects more than 18 inches from the face of the
building, it is deemed to be a projecting sign;



      (6)   Signs attached to utility poles, trees, rocks, and other
similar natural and human-made surfaces;



      (7)   Signs within public right-of-way are prohibited except
for the following:



         (a)   Signs erected by a government agency including,
for example, street, warning, directional, and other official, non-commercial
signs;



         (b)   Public announcement signs for city-wide or free
community events sponsored by civic groups. Such signs shall not require
application for or issuance of a sign permit, and shall be removed within 7
days of the event;



         (c)   Directional real estate signs for community-wide
annual events such as the “Parade of Homes”. Such signs shall be removed
within 7 days of the event; and



         (d)   Other temporary signs as identified in this
subchapter.



      (8)   Signs that are designed to resemble official traffic or
other official signs and are intended to be viewed from public roadways but
which are not official traffic or other official signs;



      (9)   Illuminated signs that exhibit any of the following:
blinking; flashing; rotation; or is determined to interfere with safe traffic
operations;



      (10)   Signs that obstruct the vision of pedestrians,
cyclists, or motorists traveling on or entering on to public streets;



      (11)   Exterior signs that obstruct any window, door, fire
escape, stairway, or opening intended to provide light, air, ingress, or
egress for any structure;



      (12)   Offensive signs containing any indecent or obscene
material; and



      (13)   Signs advertising products or services off premises,
except that advertising signs that exist on the effective date of this
subchapter shall be considered legal, nonconforming, and subject to §
151.017.



(Ord. 898, passed 12-16-2014)



§ 151.189  COMMERCIAL, MAJOR RECREATION, INDUSTRIAL, AND BUSINESS PARK SIGN
REGULATIONS.



   Table 1 (Sign Standards) and Table 2 (Temporary Signs) shall apply to
signs in the city’s overlay districts as depicted on the sign overlay zone
map and in the industrial and business park zones.



   (A)   Alpha/numeric, monochrome signs allowed in Contemporary
Commercial, Traditional Commercial, and Major Recreation Overlay Zones. One
alpha/numeric monochrome sign shall be allowed per parcel subject to the
following conditions.



      (1)   Only 1 type of electronic signage is permitted per
parcel. Either an alpha/numeric monochrome sign can be used or an electronic
message center sign may be used.



      (2)   The alpha/numeric monochrome sign shall be limited to 32
square feet in area (per side for double sided signs). The sign area for the
alpha/numeric monochrome sign shall count against the overall signage area
allowed for the use. In the Major Recreation Zone, the area of alpha/numeric
monochrome signs may be increased through PUD approval.



      (3)   The alpha/numeric monochrome sign may not change more
often than once every 8 seconds.



      (4)   Alpha/numeric monochrome signs must have a light sensing
device that will adjust the brightness of the display as the natural ambient
light conditions change.



      (5)   Alpha/numeric monochrome signs shall be limited to 500
NITS from sunset to sunrise. These signs shall be limited to 7500 NITS from
sunrise to sunset. Additionally, the sign shall not exceed three-tenths foot
candles above ambient light levels 100 feet from the sign face.



      (6)   Only 1 alpha/numeric monochrome sign shall be allowed
per sign face.



      (7)   The images and messages displayed must be static, and
the transition from 1 static display to another must be instantaneous without
any special effects.



      (8)   The images and messages displayed must be complete in
themselves, without continuation in content to the next image or message or
to any other sign.



      (9)   If there is a violation of brightness or frequency of
message changing standards, the adjustment must be made within 1 business day
upon written or verbal notification from the city.



      (10)   Alpha/numeric monochrome signs must be designed and
equipped to freeze the device in 1 position if a malfunction occurs. The
displays must also be equipped with a means to immediately discontinue the
display if it malfunctions, and the sign owner/operator must immediately stop
the display when notified by the city that it is not in compliance with this
subchapter.



   (B)   Electronic message center signs allowed in the Contemporary
Commercial, Traditional Commercial, and Major Recreation Zones. One
electronic message center sign shall be allowed per parcel subject to the
following conditions:



      (1)   Only 1 type of electronic signage is permitted per
parcel. Either an alpha/numeric monochrome sign can be used or an electronic
message center sign may be used.



      (2)   The electronic message center sign shall be limited to
32 square feet in area (per side for double sided signs). The sign area for
the electronic message center sign shall count against the overall signage
area allowed for the use. In the Major Recreation Zone, the area of
alpha/numeric monochrome signs may be increased through PUD approval.



      (3)   The electronic message center sign may not change more
often than once every 8 seconds.



      (4)   All electronic message center signs must have a light
sensing device that will adjust the brightness of the display as the natural
ambient light conditions change.



      (5)   Electronic message center signs shall be limited to 500
NITS from sunset to sunrise. These signs shall be limited to 7500 NITS from
sunrise to sunset. Additionally, the sign shall not exceed three- tenths-foot
candles above ambient light levels 100 feet from the sign face.



      (6)   The electronic message center sign shall be located a
minimum of 125 feet from the sign structure to the boundary of a residential
use.



      (7)   Only 1 electronic message center sign shall be allowed
per sign face.



      (8)   The images and messages displayed must be static, and
the transition from 1 static display to another must be instantaneous without
any special effects.



      (9)   The images and messages displayed must be complete in
themselves, without continuation in content to the next image or message or
to any other sign.



      (10)   If there is a violation of brightness or frequency of
message changing standards, the adjustment must be made within 1 business day
upon written or verbal notification from the city.



      (11)   Electronic message center signs must be designed and
equipped to freeze the device in 1 position if a malfunction occurs. The
displays must also be equipped with a means to immediately discontinue the
display if it malfunctions, and the sign owner/operator must immediately stop
the display when notified by the city that it is not in compliance with this
subchapter.



   (C)   Mural signs. Mural signs may be permitted in the Contemporary
Commercial, Traditional Commercial, and Major Recreation Zones with a
conditional use permit.



   (D)   Business complex signs.



      (1)   In the Traditional Town Center Overlay Zone, business
complex signs shall be allowed as follows:



         (a)   Shall be allowed up to 30 square feet per tenant,
for the front of the building;



         (b)   Shall be allowed up to 30 square feet per tenant
for a side of the building other than the front; and



         (c)   Total allowable signage for a business complex is
to be calculated using the above requirements. Placement of wall signs for
business complexes may be allowed on front and non-front walls at the
discretion of the property owners so long as the total amount of signage does
not exceed the allowable amount of signage established in divisions (E)(1)(a)
and (E)(1)(b) above. Divisions (E)(1)(a) and (E)(1)(b) above are thus not to
be construed to automatically limit each and every tenant to 30 square feet
per tenant.



      (2)   In the Contemporary Commercial and Traditional
Commercial Corridors, business complex signs shall be allowed as follows:



         (a)   Shall be allowed a maximum of 200 square feet per
tenant for the front of the building;



         (b)   Shall be allowed a maximum of 100 square feet per
tenant for a side of the building other than the front; and



         (c)   Total allowable signage for a business complex is
to be calculated using the above requirements. Placement of wall signs for
business complexes may be allowed on front and non-front walls at the
discretion of the property owners so long as the total amount of signage does
not exceed the allowable amount of signage established in  divisions
(D)(2)(a) and (D)(2)(b) above. Divisions (D)(2)(a) and (D)(2)(b) above are
thus not to be construed to automatically limit each and every tenant to 30
square feet per tenant.



   (E)   Process for sign adjustment.



      (1)   Common signage plan.



         (a)   If the owners of 2 or more contiguous lots
(disregarding intervening streets and alleys); the owner of a single lot with
more than 1 building (not including any accessory building); or the
occupants/owners of bays in a commercial building with 2 or more bays file
with the city, for approval by the City’s Board of Adjustment and Appeals,
a common signage plan, up to a 50% increase in the maximum total sign area
shall be allowed for each building or lot included. This bonus shall be
allocated as the owner(s)/occupants elect. The owners/occupants may also seek
an upward deviation in the permitted sign height.



         (b)   The common signage plan shall specify standards
for consistency among all signs on the lot(s)/buildings affected by the plan
with regard to color scheme, lettering or graphic style, lighting, location,
or each sign on the buildings, materials, and sign proportions.



         (c)   Other provisions of a common signage plan may
contain other restrictions as the owner(s)/occupants of the lots,
development, and/or buildings may reasonably determine, and which are filed
with the city as part of the common signage plan.



      (2)   Sign adjustments. Adjustments to the requirements and
standards for the height, number, type, lighting, area, and/or location of a
sign or signs established by this subchapter may be approved by the Board of
Adjustments and Appeals. In order to approve any sign standard adjustment,
the following criteria of either divisions (E)(2)(a), (E)(2)(b), or (E)(2)(c)
below shall be satisfied, and in all cases the necessary criteria of division
(F)(2)(d) below shall be satisfied:



         (a)   There are site conditions that require a sign
adjustment to allow the sign to be reasonably visible from a street
immediately adjacent to the site;



         (b)   The sign adjustment will allow a sign that relates
in size, shape, materials, color, illumination, and character to the function
and architectural character of the building or property on which the sign
will be located;



         (c)   The sign adjustment will allow a sign of
exceptional design or a style that will enhance the surroundings or that is
more consistent with the architecture and design of the site; and



         (d)   The sign adjustment will not result in a sign that
is inconsistent with the purpose of the zoning district in which the property
is located or the current land use.



   (F)   PUD overlay zoning districts. Signage within PUD overlay
districts shall comply with the requirements of the underlying zoning
district as identified in this chapter, unless otherwise requested and
specified in the PUD approval.



   (G)   Governmental, institutional, and recreational signs; message
boards. A place of worship, public building, institution, or public
recreation facility shall be allowed the following:



      (1)   One sign or message board per entrance up to a maximum
of 4 per structure;



      (2)   The message board shall not exceed 30 square feet in
area per sign side;



      (3)   The message board shall not exceed 8 feet maximum
height; and



      (4)   May be single or double-faced.



(Ord. 898, passed 12-16-2014; Ord. 902, passed 2-17-2015)



§ 151.190  LOCATION OF SIGNS.



   (A)   Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs may advertise only a
business(es), commodity(ies), or service(s) that is/are located, offered for
sale, or performed on the lot(s) or parcel(s) of land where the sign is
located, and must be located at least 10 feet from any right-of-way line.



   (B)   Awnings, canopies, and the like. Awnings, canopies, marquees,
and other similar structures that are attached to/projecting over the
entrance to a building shall be considered a part of the structure to which
they are attached. One sign is permitted on each side and front of an awning,
canopy, or marquee. An awning, canopy, or marquee shall not be considered
part of the wall area for purposes of calculating permissible wall sign area.
Limitations on the size of signs on awnings, canopies, and marquees apply
regardless of the number of tenants located within the building.



   (C)   Location to right-of-way lines. All signs shall be located at
least 10 feet from any right-of-way line.



   (D)   Public information signs. Public information signs shall be
counted as part of the allowable signage provided within the all zones.



   (E)   Address signs. Identification numbers are required in all
zoning districts and should be clearly visible from the street. Address signs
do not reduce permitted sign area, and do not require sign permits.



   (F)   Off-premises signage.



      (1)   Off-premises signs shall be allowed for the purpose of
advertising temporary and/or seasonal community events open to the general
public.



      (2)   Off-premises signs shall comply with the following:



         (a)   Shall obtain a temporary sign permit;



         (b)   Shall be limited to total display time of 130 days
per calendar year;



         (c)   Shall be located along Highway 169 frontage;



         (d)   Shall provide written consent from the property
owner;



         (e)   Shall be limited to 150 square feet in size;



         (f)   Shall be a one-sided sign;



         (g)   Shall not be mounted on trucks or semi-trailers;



         (h)   Shall not exceed 20 feet in height;



         (i)   Shall be located within one-half mile of Highway
169 interchanges;



         (j)   Shall be limited to 1 sign per event and location;
and



         (k)   Shall be setback 10 feet from the property line.



   (G)   Directional signs. Permanent directional signs are permitted
according to the following:



      (1)   One directional sign per driveway entrance/exit;



      (2)   Shall have at least 50% of the copy area related to
directional message;



      (3)   Eight square feet maximum; and



      (4)   Four feet maximum height.



(Ord. 898, passed 12-16-2014; Ord. 933, passed 6-21-2016)



§ 151.191  ADDITIONAL TRADITIONAL TOWN CENTER, TRADITIONAL COMMERCIAL
CORRIDOR, AND CONTEMPORARY COMMERCIAL OVERLAY ZONE SIGNAGE REGULATIONS.



   The following additional regulations shall apply to the above-named
overlay zones.



   (A)   Sandwich board signs. Sandwich board signs are permitted
subject to the following:



      (1)   Shall not exceed 12 square feet per sign face;



      (2)   Must be placed on the sidewalk directly in front of the
establishment during hours of operation only;



      (3)   Must not interfere with pedestrian traffic; and



      (4)   A sign permit is not required.



   (B)   Nameplates. One nameplate sign per occupant, not to exceed 2
square feet shall be allowed. Multi-tenant buildings shall be allowed 1 sign
not to exceed 12 square feet. No sign shall have more than 2 display
surfaces. A sign permit is not required.



   (C)   Area identification signs. Area identification signs shall be
permitted, subject to the following:



      (1)   One monument style sign;



      (2)   Shall not exceed 50 square feet copy and graphic area;



      (3)   Ten feet maximum height;



      (4)   Shall be located at a primary entrance to the project
area;



      (5)   City shall not be responsible for maintenance of sign;
and



      (6)   Shall be setback at least 10 feet from any right-of-way
line.



   (D)   Awnings. Awnings shall comply with the following conditions:



      (1)   All portions of any awning sign shall be at least 8 feet
above any sidewalk;



      (2)   A valance attached to an awning may extend 12 inches
below the roof of the awning at the point of attachment, but in no case shall
any portion of a valance be less than 7 feet in height above a sidewalk;



      (3)   Awnings may extend over public property not more than 7
feet from the face of a supporting building, but no portion shall extend
nearer than 2 feet to the face of the nearest curb line measured
horizontally, nor interfere with public placements in the right-of-way;



      (4)   In no case shall the awning extend over public property
more than two-thirds of the distance from the property line to the nearest
curb in front of the building;



      (5)   Awning supports shall not extend down into public
property; and



      (6)   Signs placed on awnings shall be counted as part of the
total allowable signage allowed.



   (E)   Projecting signs. The following additional regulations shall
apply to projecting signs, which are allowed only in the Traditional Town
Center Overlay Zone:



      (1)   Shall be hung at right angles from a building face;



      (2)   The use of guy wires, cables, or chains as supports or
bracing is prohibited;



      (3)   The sign and bracket shall not project from the building
face greater than 60 inches or within 24 inches of the back of curb,
whichever is less;



      (4)   The sign and bracket shall be setback a minimum of 48
inches from light poles or any other public utility structure;



      (5)   The sign and bracket must meet all minimum clearance
requirements from overhead electric conductors in the National Electrical
Safety Code;



      (6)   The lowest point of the sign or bracket shall provide a
minimum of 8 feet of clearance above grade;



      (7)   The top of the sign or bracket shall not be higher than
the building wall or parapet of the building it is attached to;



      (8)   No face of the sign shall exceed 16 square feet; and



      (9)   The sign must be constructed of wood, porcelain, metal,
stone, glass, masonry, tile, or similar material.



(Ord. 898, passed 12-16-2014)



§ 151.192  ADDITIONAL TRADITIONAL COMMERCIAL, CONTEMPORARY COMMERCIAL, AND
MAJOR RECREATION OVERLAY ZONE REGULATION.



   The following additional regulations shall apply to the Traditional
Commercial, Contemporary Commercial, and Major Recreation Overlay Zones.



   (A)   Placement of wall signs. Placement of wall signs may be
allowed on front and non-front walls at the discretion of property owners so
long as the total amount of signage does not exceed what is established in
this subchapter.



   (B)   Gasoline pump island signs.



      (1)   Gasoline pump island canopies shall be allowed up to 2
signs in addition to those otherwise permitted on the principal structure.



      (2)   Canopy signs shall not exceed 10 feet in length or 20
square feet in area each.



      (3)   If 2 signs are used, they shall not be placed on the
same side of the canopy.



      (4)   Lettering on the signs shall not exceed 2 feet in height
or the average height of the letters on the sign attached to the principal
structure, whichever is less.



      (5)   Canopy signs shall be placed to provide a six-inch
minimum border between the top, bottom, and sides of the canopy face. The
sign area is determined by measuring the text only. Stripes or colors are not
included in the sign area computation.



      (6)   Shall be located a minimum of 75 feet from any
residential zoned property.



   (C)   Area identification signs. Area identification signs shall be
permitted, subject to the following:



      (1)   One monument style sign;



      (2)   Shall not exceed 50 square feet;



      (3)   Shall be located at a primary entrance to the project
area;



      (4)   Ten feet maximum height;



      (5)   The city shall not be responsible for maintenance of
sign; and



      (6)   Shall be setback at least 10 feet from any right-of-way
line.



(Ord. 898, passed 12-16-2014)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.193  ADDITIONAL OFFICE, BUSINESS PARK, AND INDUSTRIAL ZONE SIGN
REGULATIONS.



   The following additional signs shall be permitted in Office Business
(B-2), Business Park (BP), Light Industrial (I-1), and Heavy Industrial (I-2)
Zones. Placement of wall signs within the Office Business (B-2, Light
Industrial (I-1), Heavy Industrial (I-2), and Business Park (BP) Zones may be
allowed on front and non-front walls at the discretion of property owners so
long as the total amount of signage does not exceed the total amount of wall
signage permitted by this subchapter.



   (A)   Area identification signs. Area identification signs shall be
permitted subject to the following:



      (1)   One monument style sign;



      (2)   Shall not exceed 50 square feet copy and graphic area;



      (3)   Ten feet maximum height;



      (4)   Shall be located at a primary entrance to the project
area; and



      (5)   The city shall not be responsible for maintenance of
sign.



   (B)   Public information signs. One wall or monument style sign,
subject to the above regulations, shall be permitted for each building.



   (C)   Governmental, institutional, and recreational signs. A place
of worship, public building, institution, or public recreation facility shall
be allowed the following:



      (1)   One sign or message board per entrance up to a maximum
of 4 per structure;



      (2)   Shall not exceed 30 square feet in area;



      (3)   Shall be setback at least 10 feet from any right-of-way
line;



      (4)   Eight feet maximum height; and



      (5)   May be single- or double-faced.



(Ord. 898, passed 12-16-2014)



§ 151.194  ADDITIONAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE REGULATIONS.



   The following signs shall be permitted in the city’s residential
zones:



   (A)   Nameplate signs are permitted for single-family or two-family
dwellings, not to exceed two



square feet. Nameplate signs shall not require a sign permit.



   (B)   Area identification signs shall be permitted subject to the
following:



      (1)   One monument sign will be permitted per project area;



      (2)   Shall not exceed 24 square feet of copy and graphic area;



      (3)   Six feet maximum height;



      (4)   Shall be located at a primary entrance to the project
area; and



      (5)   The city shall not be responsible for maintenance of
area identification signs.



   (C)   All signs identifying the presence of a residential security
system are permitted not to exceed 1 square foot. One sign is permitted per
driveway connection to a public right-of-way or where 1 private driveway
converges into another.



   (D)   Governmental, place of worship, and public recreational signs
as follows:



      (1)   Governmental/public buildings, places of worship, and
public recreation facilities shall be allowed the following:



         (a)   One sign or message board per entrance up to a
maximum of 4 per structure subject to the following:



            1.   Each sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in
area per sign face;



            2.   Eight feet maximum height; or



            3.   May be single- or double-faced.



         (b)   If the entity has multiple facilities that provide
public activities, wall or freestanding signage shall be allowed subject to
the following:



            1.   Sign face shall not exceed 100 square feet in
area for 1 side;



            2.   Eight feet height maximum;



            3.   May be single- or double-faced;



            4.   Shall be limited to 1 sign; and



            5.   Shall be placed in a location with a minimum
lot size of 10 acres.



      (2)   Sign copy shall be limited to describing information and
activities occurring on-site or at the entity’s other facilities only, or
copy as allowed under § 151.187.



   (E)   Commercial recreation signs shall be permitted subject to the
following:



      (1)   One sign or message board per entrance up to a maximum
of 4 per structure for a commercial recreation facility;



      (2)   Shall not exceed 30 square feet in area;



      (3)   Shall be setback at least 10 feet from any right-of-way
line;



      (4)   Eight feet maximum height; and



      (5)   May be single- or double-faced.



   (F)   Public information signs shall be permitted subject to the
following provisions:



      (1)   Such signs are permitted only in conjunction with the
following uses: public buildings; public or private schools; churches and
other places of worship; and public recreational facilities;



      (2)   The sign shall be setback a minimum of 10 feet from any
right-of-way line, and shall be located outside any sign triangle as
determined by the City Engineer;



      (3)   The sign shall not exceed 8 feet in height;



      (4)   The sign shall not exceed 1 sign per entrance to the
structure, up to a maximum of 2 signs per structure;



      (5)   The sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area; and



      (6)   The message on the sign may change periodically, but
shall not change any more frequently than once per 8 seconds.



   (G)   Signage within the Planned Residential District (PRD) Zone
shall be allowed consistent with the regulations of the underlying use.



(Ord. 898, passed 12-16-2014; Ord. 933, passed 6-21-2016)



§ 151.195  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Sign permit. Except as specifically exempted in this
subchapter, it is unlawful for any person to install, erect, relocate,
maintain, or modify any sign without first obtaining a sign permit.



   (B)   Application.



      (1)   Applications for sign permits shall be made in writing
to the Zoning Administrator or designee upon forms provided by the city.



      (2)   Each application for a sign permit shall set forth the
following:



         (a)   Correct legal description of the tract of land
upon which the sign presently exists or is proposed to be located;



         (b)   Location of sign on said parcel;



         (c)   The manner of construction;



         (d)   Dimensions of the sign;



         (e)   Materials used in the sign;



         (f)   Complete description and sketch or photograph of
the sign; and



         (g)   Fees as set forth in the city’s adopted fee
schedule.



   (C)   Enforcement procedures. The following actions may be taken
when an illegal sign is erected.



      (1)   The property owner shall be notified via certified mail
that the illegal signage is to be removed by a date certain.



      (2)   If the signage has not been removed within 10 days of
receipt of notice, the violation shall be reported to the appropriate city
department for citation and subsequent prosecution if required.



      (3)   (a)   The city may at any time and without notice
impound signs that have been installed on public property or within any
public right-of-way or easement.



         (b)   The sign owner may retrieve the signs according to
the following:



            1.   A fee must be paid to the city consistent
with the fees established in the city’s adopted fee schedule relative to
the applicable staff person’s hourly rate for time to impound said sign(s).
For each subsequent impoundment in a calendar year, the specified fee shall
be doubled;



            2.   The sign may be retrieved from a designated
impound area during routine business hours and within 10 days from the date
of impounding. After 10 days, the city will dispose of the sign; and



            3.   The city may not be held liable for any
damage to impounded signs.



      (4)   If construction or installation of the sign has not
commenced within 120 days from the date of issuance of the permit, said
permit shall become void. There shall be no refund of permit application fee
for a voided sign permit.



   (D)   Abandoned signs and signs in disrepair. An abandoned sign or
sign in disrepair is prohibited and shall be removed by the owner of the
premises within 30 days after notification. If compliance with the provisions
of this subchapter are not achieved within 30 days after notification, the
city may remove the sign. If an abandoned sign remains in good condition and
without holes or other evidence of disrepair or damage, the sign shall not be
considered as abandoned for a period of 1 year.



(Ord. 898, passed 12-16-2014)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.196  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   Signs, including their structures, that existed on the date of this
subchapter and which do not comply with the provisions of this subchapter,
are considered nonconforming and shall be regulated as a nonconforming use
under § 151.017.



(Ord. 898, passed 12-16-2014)



§ 151.197  SIGN STANDARDS.



 


Table 1: Sign Standards




Sign Type

 

(A)
Traditional Town Center

 

(B)
Traditional Commercial Corridor

 

(C)
Contemporary Commercial

 

(D)
Major Recreation

 

(E)
Office and Business Park

 

(F)
Light and Heavy Industrial





Wall


Maximum area *
 
Up to 80 square feet or 10% of the wall area where the sign is to be located,
whichever is greater
 
Up to 120 square feet or 10% of the wall area where the sign is to be
located, whichever is greater
 
Up to 120 square feet or 10% of the wall area where the sign is to be
located, whichever is greater
 
Up to 120 square feet or 10% of the wall area where the sign is to be
located, whichever is greater
 
5% of the wall area where the sign is to be located
 
5% of the wall area where the sign is to be located


Maximum height
 
May not be roof mounted or extend above the roof line of the structure
 
May not be roof mounted or extend above the roof line of the structure
 
May not be roof mounted or extend above the roof line of the structure
 
May not be roof mounted or extend above the roof line of the structure
 
May not be roof mounted or extend above the roof line of the structure
 
May not be roof mounted or extend above the roof line of the structure


Lighting (a)
 
E/I
 
E/I
 
E/I
 
E/I
 
E/I
 
E/I


Projecting
 
 
 
Not permitted
 
Not permitted
 
Not permitted
 
Not permitted
 
Not permitted


Maximum area
 
24 square feet per sign face
 
 
 
 
 
120 square feet per sign face, applies to signs intended to be viewed from
public roadways
 
 
 
 


Maximum height/ projection
 
No more than 60 inches from the building face, or 24 inches from the back of
the curb, whichever is less
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Lighting (a)
 
E/I
 
 
 
 
 
E/I
 
 
 
 


Freestanding


Type
 
Not permitted
 
1 sign per street frontage, M or P
 
1 sign per street frontage, M or P
 
1 sign per facility or street frontage, M or P
 
1 sign per street frontage, M
 
1 sign per street frontage, M


Maximum area
 
 
 
Up to 125 square feet per sign face
 
Up to 125 square feet per sign face
 
Up to 125 square feet per sign face
 
125 square feet per sign face
 
125 square feet per sign face


Allowable height
 
 
 
30 feet from the grade at the proposed location
 
30 feet from the grade at the proposed location; may be varied through the
sign adjustment process specified in the text
 
45 feet from the grade at the proposed location; may be varied by through the
sign adjustment process specified in the text
 
12 feet from grade at the proposed location
 
12 feet from grade at the proposed location


Lighting (a)
 
 
 
E/I
 
E/I
 
E/I
 
E/I
 
E/I


Window


Maximum coverage area
 
Up to 50% of available window area
 
Up to 50% of available window area
 
Up to 50% of available window area
 
Not permitted
 
Not permitted
 
Not permitted


Alpha, numeric monochrome and electronic message center signs (see §
151.189(A) and (B) for additional requirements)


Maximum area
 
Not permitted
 
1, 32 square feet sign per parcel (32 square feet per side for double- faced
sign)
 
1, 32 square feet sign per parcel (32 square feet per side for double- faced
sign)
 
Maximum of 1 sign per parcel; may use up to the permitted 32 square feet for
freestanding or wall signs, and size may be varied by PUD approval (e.g.,
ValleyFair, Canterbury Park)
 
Not permitted
 
Not permitted


Wall height
 
 
 
Same as for other wall signs
 
Same as for other wall signs
 
Same as for other wall signs
 
 
 
 


Freestanding height
 
 
 
Same as for other freestanding signs
 
Same as for other freestanding signs
 
Same as for other freestanding signs
 
 
 
 


Maximum brightness
 
 
 
500 NITS from sunset to sunrise; 7500 NITS from sunrise to sunset
 
500 NITS from sunset to sunrise; 7500 NITS from sunrise to sunset
 
500 NITS from sunset to sunrise; 7500 NITS from sunrise to sunset
 
 
 
 


Frequency of change
 
 
 
Once every 8 seconds
 
Once every 8 seconds
 
Once every 8 seconds
 
 
 
 



(a)   E = external, I = internal (which includes channel lit and neon), B
= backlit illumination is not permitted



(b)   M = monument, P = pole, O = temporary off-premise sign



(c)   Single pole support only



*   This is a major change from the current standard which ties sign area
to linear feet of building walls on which wall signs are permitted





 



(Ord. 898, passed 12-16-2014; Ord. 933, passed 6-21-2016)



§ 151.198  TEMPORARY SIGNS.



 


Table 2: Temporary Signs




Sign Type

 

(A)
Traditional Town Center

 

(B)
Traditional Commercial Corridor

 

(C)
Contemporary Commercial

 

(D)
Major Recreation

 

(E)
Office and Business Park

 

(F)
Light and Heavy Industrial





Grand opening/special event


Maximum area *
 
Up to 2 banners, 32 square foot per side
 
Up to 2 banners, 32 square foot per side
 
Up to 2 banners, 64 square foot per side
 
10% of the area of the wall on which the sign is to be located
 
Not permitted
 
Not permitted


Where displayed
 
Affixed to the building, or on the lot in a location that meets applicable
setbacks (e.g., from roadways)
 
Affixed to the building, or on the lot in a location that meets applicable
setbacks (e.g., from roadways)
 
May not be roof mounted or extended above the roof line of the structure
 
May not be roof mounted or extended above the roof line of the structure
 

 



Duration
 
No more than 30 days per event
 
No more than 30 days per event
 
No more than 30 days per event
 
No more than 30 days per event
 

 



Real estate


Maximum area
 
32 square feet per sign side
 
32 square feet per sign side
 
32 square feet per sign side
 
32 square feet per sign side
 
32 square feet per sign side
 
32 square feet per sign side


Where displayed
 
1 per street frontage
 
1 per street frontage
 
1 per street frontage
 
1 per street frontage
 
1 per street frontage
 
1 per street frontage


Duration
 
To be removed within 7 days of the sale or lease of the property
 
To be removed within 7 days of the sale or lease of the property
 
To be removed within 7 days of the sale or lease of the property
 
To be removed within 7 days of the sale or lease of the property
 
To be removed within 7 days of the sale or lease of the property
 
To be removed within 7 days of the sale or lease of the property


Ideological and non- commercial signs
 
Permitted without a permit fee in all zones


Maximum area
 
Not applicable
 
Not applicable
 
Not applicable
 
Not applicable
 
Not applicable
 
Not applicable


Where displayed
 
In a location that meets applicable setbacks (e.g. roads)
 
In a location that meets applicable setbacks (e.g. roads)
 
In a location that meets applicable setbacks (e.g. roads)
 
In a location that meets applicable setbacks (e.g. roads)
 
In a location that meets applicable setbacks (e.g. roads)
 
In a location that meets applicable setbacks (e.g. roads)


Duration
 
Not applicable
 
Not applicable
 
Not applicable
 
Not applicable
 
Not applicable
 
Not applicable


Political campaign signs


Maximum area
 
Not applicable
 
Not applicable
 
Not applicable
 
Not applicable
 
Not applicable
 
Not applicable


Where displayed
 
May not be displayed in public rights-of- way or on publicly owned property;
shall be placed at least 30 feet from any street corner, and should not
obstruct the view of traffic or pedestrians
 
May not be displayed in public rights-of- way or on publicly owned property;
shall be placed at least 30 feet from any street corner, and should not
obstruct the view of traffic or pedestrians
 
May not be displayed in public rights-of- way or on publicly owned property;
shall be placed at least 30 feet from any street corner, and should not
obstruct the view of traffic or pedestrians
 
May not be displayed in public rights-of- way or on publicly owned property;
shall be placed at least 30 feet from any street corner, and should not
obstruct the view of traffic or pedestrians
 
May not be displayed in public rights-of- way or on publicly owned property;
shall be placed at least 30 feet from any street corner, and should not
obstruct the view of traffic or pedestrians
 
May not be displayed in public rights-of- way or on publicly owned property;
shall be placed at least 30 feet from any street corner, and should not
obstruct the view of traffic or pedestrians


Duration
 
*From 46 days before to 10 days after an election;* with the consent of the
property owner; may  be displayed between a primary and general election
 
*From 46 days before to 10 days after an election;* with the consent of the
property owner; may  be displayed between a primary and general election
 
*From 46 days before to 10 days after an election;* with the consent of the
property owner; may  be displayed between a primary and general election
 
*From 46 days before to 10 days after an election;* with the consent of the
property owner; may  be displayed between a primary and general election
 
*From 46 days before to 10 days after an election;* with the consent of the
property owner; may  be displayed between a primary and general election
 
*From 46 days before to 10 days after an election;* with the consent of the
property owner; may  be displayed between a primary and general election




 



(Ord. 898, passed 12-16-2014)



§ 151.199  SIGN OVERLAY DISTRICTS.







Note: To view the Sign Overlay Districts Map in PDF, click HERE



(Ord. 898, passed 12-16-2014)



§ 151.200  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   The subchapter be in effect from and after the date of its passage and
publication.



(Ord. 898, passed 12-16-2014)




WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (WECS)




§ 151.210  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish regulations for the
installation and operation of wind energy conversion systems (WECS) within
the city, not otherwise subject to siting and oversight by the state under
the State Power Plant Siting Act, M.S. §§ 116C.51 through 116C.697, as they
may be amended from time to time.



(2013 Code, § 11.71)



§ 151.211  DEFINITIONS.



   The definitions in § 151.002 apply herein. For the purpose of this
subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGGREGATED PROJECT. A wind energy project that is developed and
operated in a coordinated fashion but may have multiple entities separately
owning 1 or more of the individual WECS within the larger project. Associated
infrastructure, such as power lines and transformers that service the
facility may be owned by a separate entity but are also included as part of
the AGGREGATED PROJECT.



   COMMERCIAL WECS. A WECS of 40 kilowatts or more in total generating
capacity.



   FALL ZONE. The area, defined by the furthest distance from the tower
base, in which a tower will collapse in the event of a structural failure.
This area is and should be less than the total height of the tower.



   FEEDER LINE. Any power line that carries electrical power from 1 or
more wind turbines or individual transformers associated with individual wind
turbines to the point of interconnection with the electric power grid. In the
case of interconnection with the high voltage transmission systems, the point
of interconnection shall be the substation serving the WECS.



   METEOROLOGICAL TOWER. Towers that are erected primarily to measure wind
speed and directions, plus other data relevant to siting a WECS. For purposes
of this subchapter, the term METEOROLOGICAL TOWER does not mean towers and
equipment used by airports, the State Department of Transportation, or other
similar applications to monitor weather conditions.



   NACELLE. The part of a WECS that contains the key components of the
wind turbine, including the gearbox, yaw system, and the electrical generator.



   NON-COMMERCIAL WECS. A WECS of less than 40 kilowatts (KW) in total
generating capacity.



   ROTOR DIAMETER. The diameter of the circle described by the moving
rotor blades of a WECS.



   SUBSTATIONS. Any electrical facility designed to convert electricity
produced by a wind turbine to a voltage greater than 35,000 volts (35
kilovolts) for interconnection with high voltage transmission lines.



   TOTAL HEIGHT. The highest point, above-ground level, reached by a rotor
tip or any other part of the WECS.



   TOWER. Vertical structures that support the electrical generator, rotor
blades, or meteorological equipment.



   TOWER HEIGHT. The total height of the WECS exclusive of the rotor
blades.



   TRANSMISSION LINE. Those electrical power lines that carry voltages of
at least 69,000 volts (69 kilovolts) and are primarily used to carry electric
energy over medium to long distances rather than directly interconnecting and
supplying electric energy to retail customers.



   WECS - WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM. An electrical generating facility
comprised of 1 or more wind turbines and accessory facilities, including, but
not limited to, power lines, transformers, substations, and meteorological
towers that operate by converting the kinetic energy of wind into electrical
energy. The energy may be used on-site or may be distributed into the
electrical grid.



(2013 Code, § 11.71)



§ 151.212  APPLICATION PROCESS, BUILDING PERMITS, FEES, AND INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Application.



      (1)   Applications for approval to construct a WECS shall
include the following information:



         (a)   The name(s) of the project applicant;



         (b)   The name(s) of the property owner;



         (c)   The legal description and address of the project;



         (d)   A description of the project including the number,
type, name plat generating capacity, tower height, rotor diameter, and total
height of all wind turbines and means of interconnecting with the electrical
grid;



         (e)   The proposed site layout, including the location
of property lines, wind turbines, electrical wires, interconnection points
with the electrical grid, and all related accessory structures. The site
layout shall include distances and shall be drawn to scale;



         (f)   An engineer’s certification; and



         (g)   Documentation of land ownership or legal control
of the property.



      (2)   The application for a commercial WECS shall also include:



         (a)   The latitude and longitude of individual wind
turbines;



         (b)   A USGS topographical map, or map with similar
date, of the property and surrounding area, including any other WECS within
10 rotor diameters of the proposed WECS;



         (c)   The location of wetlands, scenic, and natural
areas within 1,320 feet of the proposed WECS;



         (d)   An acoustical analysis prepared by an acoustics
engineer;



         (e)   A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) permit
application;



         (f)   The location of all known communication towers
within 2 miles of the proposed WECS;



         (g)   A decommissioning plan; and



         (h)   A description of potential impacts on nearby WECS
and wind resources on adjacent properties.



   (B)   Process. WECS applications that require a conditional use
permit or variance(s) will be processed under the procedures for such
approvals contained within this subchapter.



   (C)   Building permits.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct
in place, place or re-erect, replace, or repair any tower without first
making application to the Building Inspections Department and securing a
building permit therefore as required in this division (C).



      (2)   (a)   At the time of application, the applicant shall
provide sufficient information to indicate that construction, installation,
and maintenance of the WECS will not create a safety hazard or damage to the
property of other persons.



         (b)   Specifically, before issuance of a building
permit, the following information shall be submitted by the applicant:



            1.   Proof that the proposed tower complies with
regulations administered by the Federal Aviation Administration;



            2.   A report for a state-licensed professional
engineer that demonstrates the WECS compliance with structural and electrical
standards; and



            3.   Commercial WECS shall include a shadow
flicker analysis study with the application submission.



      (3)   Only 1 tower shall exist at any 1 time on any 1 parcel
of property zoned for, and used for, residential purposes. More than 1 tower
may be allowed by conditional use permit so long as the installation complies
with the other applicable provisions of this subchapter.



      (4)   Any city cost or testing or verification of compliance
shall be borne by the applicant.



   (D)   Fees. The fee(s) to be paid in connection with WECS shall be
as prescribed in the city’s most recently adopted fee schedule.



   (E)   Inspections. WECS may be inspected by an official of the
Building Department to determine compliance with original construction
standards. Deviation from the original construction for which a permit is
obtained constitutes a violation of this subchapter. Notice of violations
will be sent by registered mail to the owner of the WECS and the property
owner upon which the WECS is located who will have 30 days from the date
notification is issued to make repairs. Upon completion of the repairs, the
owner/applicant shall notify the building official that the repairs have been
made.



(2013 Code, § 11.71)



§ 151.213  PERMITTED, CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED, AND PROHIBITED WIND ENERGY
CONVERSION SYSTEMS (WECS).



   (A)   Conditionally permitted WECS.



      (1)   Noncommercial WECS shall be permitted in all zoning
districts upon the issuance of a conditional use permit subject to the
provisions of this subchapter and the provisions of the underlying zoning
district in which the WECS is to be located.



      (2)   Commercial WECS are permitted in all zoning districts,
except as noted in division (B) below, upon issuance of a conditional use
permit and are subject to the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   Annual review of conditional use permits. All WECS conditional
use permits shall be subject to an annual review by city staff. Information
related to annual CUP reviews shall be provided to the city’s Board of
Adjustment and Appeals.



   (C)   Prohibited WECS. All WECS are prohibited in the environmental
overlay districts, i.e., the Floodplain and Shoreland Overlay Districts, as
well as conservation easements.



(2013 Code, § 11.71)



§ 151.214  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Safety design standards.



      (1)   Engineering certification. For all WECS, the
manufacturer’s engineer or another qualified engineer shall certify that
the turbine, foundation, and tower design of the WECS is within accepted
professional standards, given local soil and climate conditions.



      (2)   Clearance.



         (a)   Noncommercial WECS. Rotor blades must maintain at
least 12 feet of clearance between their lowest point and the ground.



         (b)   Commercial WECS. Rotor blades must maintain at
least 15 feet of clearance between their lowest point and the ground.



      (3)   Rotor safety. Each commercial WECS shall be equipped
with both a manual and an automatic braking device capable of stopping the
WECS operation in high winds (40 miles or greater).



      (4)   Lightning protection. Each WECS shall be grounded to
protect against natural lightning strikes in conformance with the National
Electrical Code.



      (5)   Warnings. For all commercial WECS, a sign or signs shall
be posted on the tower, transformer, and substation warning of high voltage,
stating the manufacturer’s name and listing an emergency phone number.
Fencing for security purposes may also be required as a condition of CUP
approval.



   (B)   Standards.



      (1)   Total height of WECS towers.



         (a)   Noncommercial WECS towers shall have a total
height of no more than 60 feet.



         (b)   Commercial WECS towers shall have a total height
of no more than 175 feet.



         (c)   WECS may be permitted that are roof-mounted, but
if roof-mounted shall be limited to no more than 10 feet in height above the
roof unless a determination is made in the conditional use permit that a
different height is appropriate.



      (2)   Tower configuration.



         (a)   All towers that are part of a WECS, except
meteorological towers, shall be installed with a tubular, monopole type tower.



         (b)   Meteorological towers may be secured by guy wires.



      (3)   Setbacks. The following setbacks shall be applied to
WECS towers, but are not applicable to roof-mounted WECS that are not towers.



 




 

Noncommercial WECS

 

Commercial WECS

 

Meteorological Towers



Neighboring dwellings
 

1.1 times the total height, plus 10 feet

 

1.25 times the total height

 

The fall zone as certified by a professional engineer, plus 10 feet or 1.1
times the total height







Other existing WECS
 

NA

 

To be determined through the CUP review based on relative size of existing
and proposed WECS, alignment of WECS relative to predominant winds,
topography, extent of wake interference on existing WECS, and other setbacks
required; may be waived for multiple turbine project

 





Other rights-of-way       
 

The lesser of 1.1 times the total height, plus 10 feet or the distance of the
fall zone as certified by a professional engineer, plus 10 feet

 

The lesser of 1.1 times the total height, plus 10 feet or the distance of the
fall zone as certified by a professional engineer, plus 10 feet

 

The fall zone as certified by a professional engineer, plus 10 feet or 1.1
times the total height



Other structures
 

The fall zone as certified by a professional engineer, plus 10 feet or 1.1
times the total height

 

The fall zone as certified by a professional engineer, plus 10 feet or 1.1
times the total height      

 

The fall zone as certified by a professional engineer, plus 10 feet or 1.1
times the total height



Property lines
 

1.1 times the total height, plus 10 feet

 

1.1 times the total height, plus 10 feet

 

The fall zone as certified by a professional engineer, plus 10 feet or 1.1
times the total height



Road rights-of-way
 

The fall zone as certified by a professional engineer, plus 10 feet or 1.1
times the total height

 

The fall zone as certified by a professional engineer, plus 10 feet or 1.1
times the total height

 

The fall zone as certified by a professional engineer, plus 10 feet or 1.1
times the total height




 



      (4)   Color and finish.



         (a)   All wind turbines and towers that are part of a
WECS shall be white, grey, or another non-reflective, neutral color;



         (b)   Blades may be black in order to facilitate
deicing; and



         (c)   Finishes shall be matte or non-reflective.



      (5)   Lighting. Lighting, including lighting intensity and
frequency of strobe, shall adhere to but not exceed requirements established
by Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) permits and regulations. No
additional lighting, other than building security lighting, is permitted.



      (6)   WECS sites. The design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent reasonably possible, use materials, colors,
textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the WECS to the natural
setting and then existing environment.



      (7)   Signs. The manufacturer’s or owner’s name and/or
logo may be placed on the nacelle of the WECS. No other signage shall be
permitted.



      (8)   Feeder lines. All communications and feeder lines, equal
or less than 34.5 kilovolts in capacity, installed as part of a WECS, shall
be buried where reasonably feasible. Feeder lines installed as part of a WECS
shall not be considered an essential service.



      (9)   Waste disposal. All solid and hazardous wastes,
including, but not limited to, crates, packaging materials, damaged, or worn
parts, as well as used oils and lubricants, shall be removed from the site
promptly and disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state, and
federal regulations.



      (10)   Maximum vibration.



         (a)   Any WECS shall not produce vibrations through the
ground that are perceptible by humans beyond the property on which it is
located.



         (b)   Noncommercial WECS shall not be placed in a manner
that causes shadow flicker onto neighboring property. Whether shadow flicker
would be caused will be determined based on a shadow report submitted to the
city for review.



         (c)   Applications for conditional use permits for both
noncommercial and commercial WECS shall include data and/or analysis of both
vibration and flicker impacts.



      (11)   Discontinuation and decommissioning. A WECS shall be
considered a discontinued use after 1 year without energy production, unless
a plan is developed and submitted to the city outlining the steps and
schedule for returning the WECS to service.



         (a)   All WECS and accessory buildings shall be removed
in their entirety including all footings and foundations within 90 days of
the discontinuation of use.



         (b)   Each commercial WECS shall submit a
decommissioning plan outlining the anticipated means and cost of removing the
WECS at the end of its serviceable life or upon becoming a discontinued use.
The plan shall also identify the financial resources that will be available
to pay for the decommissioning and removal of the WECS and accessory
facilities. The decommissioning plan shall be submitted as part of the
conditional use permit application.



         (c)   The city shall require financial surety in the
form of a cash escrow, irrevocable letter of credit, or performance bond to
ensure that decommissioning of the commercial WECS is completed.



(2013 Code, § 11.71)



§ 151.215  OTHER APPLICABLE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Noise. All WECS shall comply with the MPCA and city standards
for noise.



   (B)   Electrical Codes and standards. All WECS and accessory
equipment and facilities shall comply with the National Electrical Code and
other applicable standards.



   (C)   Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). All WECS shall comply
with FAA standards and permit requirements.



   (D)   Building Code. All WECS shall comply with the State Building
Code as adopted by the state and the city.



   (E)   Interference.



      (1)   The applicant shall minimize or mitigate interference
with electromagnetic communications, such as radio, telephone, microwaves, or
television signals caused by WECS .



      (2)   The applicant shall notify all communication tower
operators within 2 miles of the proposed WECS location upon application to
the city for a permit to operate a WECS .



      (3)   No WECS shall be constructed so as to interfere with
public safety telecommunications as determined by the city’s public safety
departments.



(2013 Code, § 11.71)



§ 151.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or
provision of this chapter, when the person performs an act thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, or who knowingly makes or submits any false statement
or document in connection with any application or procedure required by this
chapter. Upon conviction thereof, such person shall be punished as for a
misdemeanor.



(2013 Code, § 11.99)



   (C)   (1)   Violation of the provisions of §§ 151.085 through
151.094, or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants
of variances or conditional uses) shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable as defined by law.



      (2)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. Such actions may include, but are not limited to, the following.



         (a)   In responding to a suspected violation of §§
151.085 through 151.094, the Zoning Administrator and local government may
utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it including, but
not limited to, prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits,
orders for corrective measures, or a request to the National Flood Insurance
Program for denial of flood insurance availability to the guilty party. The
community must act in good faith to enforce these official controls and to
correct violations of §§ 151.085 through 151.094, to the extent possible so
as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.



         (b)   When a violation of §§ 151.085 through 151.094
is either discovered by or brought to the attention of the Zoning
Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall immediately investigate the
situation and document that nature and extent of the violation of the
official control. As soon as is reasonably possible, this information will be
submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural Resources and Federal
Emergency Management Agency Regional office along with the community’s plan
of action to correct the violation to the degree possible.



         (c)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the
suspected party of the requirements of §§ 151.085 through 151.094 and all
other official controls and the nature and extent of the suspected violation
of these controls. If the structure and/or use is under construction or
development, the Zoning Administrator may order the construction or
development immediately halted until a proper permit or approval is granted
by the community. If the construction or development is already completed,
then the Zoning Administrator may either:



            1.   Issue an order identifying the corrective
actions that must be made within a specified time period to bring the use or
structure into compliance with the official controls; or



            2.   Notify the responsible party to apply for an
after-the-fact permit/development approval within a specified period of time
not to exceed 30 days.



         (d)   If the responsible party does not appropriately
respond to the Zoning Administrator within the specified period of time, each
additional day that lapses shall constitute an additional violation of §§
151.085 through 151.094 and shall be prosecuted accordingly. The Zoning
Administrator shall also upon the lapse of the specified response period
notify the landowner to restore the land to the condition which existed prior
to the violation of §§ 151.085 through 151.094.



(2013 Code, § 11.56)



   (D)   In addition to any other remedy allowed by this code of
ordinances or state or federal law, grading that is done in violation of §
151.110 be subject to the penalties and fees as approved by the City Council.



(2013 Code, § 11.60)



(Ord. 31, passed 10-25-1979; Ord. 337, passed 3-27-1992; Ord. 377, passed
7-7-1994; Ord. 384, passed 10-20-1994)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2018 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



   I.   ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS



   II.   ANNEXATIONS



   III.   LAND CONVEYANCES



   IV.   NUMBERING LOTS, HOUSES, AND BUILDINGS; STREET NAMINGS



   V.   STREET AND ALLEY VACATIONS



   VI.   SEWER DISTRICTS AND SEWER CONNECTION EASEMENTS



   VII.   AUTHORIZATIONS AND FRANCHISES



TABLE I:  ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




38
 
4-15-1980
 
Lots 1-10, Block 39, Lots 1-10, Block 175, vacated alley in Block 39, and
vacated Webster Street between 2nd and 3rd Avenues, Original Shakopee Plat


39
 
4-15-1980
 
Lot 6 and east 20 feet of Lot 7, Block 34, Original Shakopee Plat


41
 
5-6-1980
 
Part of NE-1-4 and SE-1-4, 3-115-22


42
 
5- 6-1980
 
Part of NE-1-4 and SE-1-4, 3-115-22


44
 
7-1-1980
 
Part of Government Lot 5, 6-115-22, and part of Government Lots 4 and 5,
6-115-22


45
 
9-2-1980
 
Part of E-1-2 of SE-1-4, 2-115-22, and part of NE-1-4, of NE-1-4, 11-115-22


46
 
9-2-1980
 
Lot 2, Block 2, Cretex Industrial Park


74
 
9-1-1981
 
Two parcels in SE-1-4, 3-115-22; three parcels in SW-1-4, 2-115-22; Lot 1,
Block 1, Case 1st Addition; Lots 1-3, Block 1 and Lot 1, Block 3, Cretex
Industrial Park 1st Addition; and Lot 1, Block 1, Howe 1st Addition


110
 
11-16-1982
 
Part of E-1-2 of NW-1-4, 8-115-22


142
 
3-19-1984
 
Part of north 340.42 feet of E-1-2 of SW-1-4, 5-115-22


149
 
8-7-1984
 
Protective areas (shoreland)


151
 
9-25-1984
 
Five tracts in SE-1-4, 6-115-22; two tracts in SW-1-4, 5-115-22; one tract in
SE-1-4, 6-115-22; one tract in SW-1-4, 5-115-22; five tracts in NW-1-4 of
SW-1-4, 5-115-22; tract in SE-1-4 of SW-1-4 and SW-1-4 of SW-1-4, 5-115-22;
tract in NE-1-4 of SW-1-4 and SE-1-4 of SW-1-4, 5-115-22; tract in SW-1-4,
5-115-22; two tracts in NE-1-4 of SW-1-4, 5-115-22; tract in SE-1-4 of
SW-1-4, 5-115-22; and tract in SW-1-4 of SW-1-4 and NW-1-4 of SW-1-4, 5-115-22


162
 
3-19-1985
 
Protected water areas removed


167
 
4-16-1985
 
Lot 2, Block 1, Halls First Addition


184
 
9-3-1985
 
Removes certain parcels from I-1 Light Industrial District and places same in
R-1 Rural Residential District


191
 
3-4-1986
 
Part of S-1-2 of SE-1-4 of NE-1-4, 7-115-22


204
 
7-25-1986
 
Parcels in 5-115-22, 4-115-22, 9-115-22, 8-115-22, Koskovich Valley Park 1st
Addition, DCCO First Addition, Prahmcoll 1st Addition, and Canterbury Park
2nd Addition


206
 
9-2-1986
 
Parcels in mandatory PUD


213
 
1-20-1986
 
Lots 1-10, Block 40, and Lots 1-10, Block 174


215
 
3-3-1986
 
Parcels in URD District


232
 
10-6-1987
 
Parcels in 7-115-22


234
 
10-6-1987
 
Parcels lying north of Bluff Street between Dakota and Prairie Streets and
between Naumkeag Street and Marschall Road


243
 
5-3-1989
 
Lots 8 to 12, Block 3, Koeper’s Addition, and area east of Lot 8 extending
to west line of Lot 10, Block 175, Original Plat


252
 
9-20-1988
 
Lots 1-5, Block 3, Koeper’s Addition and parcel immediately east of Lot 5


267
 
6-20-1989
 
N-1-2 of NW-1-4, 11-115-22, and part of SW-1-4, 2-115-22 from Light
Industrial Zone to Heavy Industrial Zone


301
 
12-27-1990
 
Lots 1, 3, 4, and 5, Block 1, Eagle Creek Junction 1st Addition from R-4 to
R-3


303
 
1-31-1991
 
Lots 2 and 6, Block 1, Eagle Creek Junction 1st Addition, and the parcel at
1796 Eagle Creek Boulevard from R-4 to R-3


313
 
8-15-1991
 
Lots 2, 3, and 4, Block 1, Eagle Creek Junction 2nd Addition, lying
southeast, east, and northeast of a described line from R-4 to R-3


318
 
10-10-1991
 
A triangle in the W-1-2 of northeast 1-4,11-115-23, south of Highway 169, and
part of the south 166.20 feet of Outlot C, Husman Addition from R-4 to B-1


331
 
5-21-1992
 
East 30 feet of vacated Polk Street from B-1 to R-2; Outlot A, Minnesota
Valley 5th Addition from R-2 to R-2, and unplatted land southeast of Outlot A
from R-2 to R-4


335
 
6-4-1992
 
Property south of Vierling Drive, west of County Road 16, north of Highway101
Bypass, and east of commercially zoned land from R-2 to R-3


336
 
7-23-1992
 
Lot 10, Block 25, Original Shakopee Plat from B-1 to B-3


339
 
8-6-1992
 
Lots 1-9, Block 25, Original Shakopee Plat from B-1 to B-3


347
 
12-3-1992
 
Three parcels in the north 1-2 of SW 1-4 6-115-22; Lot 4, Block 317,
Wermerskirchen s Addition; Lot 2, Block 1, Clifton 1st Addition; and part of
Minnesota Street and Dakota Street from R-4 and R-2 to R-3


353
 
3-25-1993
 
Southeast 1-4 northeast 1-4, north 21.15 feet of northeast 1-4 of southeast
1-4, and south 1-2 of northeast 1-4 of northeast 1-4, 18-115-22 from AG to R-4


354
 
4-15-1993
 
East 10 AC of northeast 1-4 of southeast 1-4 lying north of centerline of
Vierling Drive, 7-115-22 from B-1 to R-2


371
 
3-3-1994
 
Part of SW 1-4, 7-115-22;from AG to R-2


379
 
7-7-1994
 
Lots 1-3, Cretex Industrial Park 1st Addition from B-1 to I-2


382
 
8-25-1994
 
Part of south 1-2 of northeast 1-4 and of north 1-2 of southeast
1-4,12-115-23 from AG to R-2


384
 
10-20-1994
 
Mapping formerly I-1 and I-2 areas to I-1 and I-2 under new ordinance


388
 
11-10-1995
 
Part of NW 1-4 of SE 1-4, 5-115-22 from RTD to I-1


389
 
11-24-1994
 
Mapping most of city under new ordinance


395
 
12-29-1994
 
Mapping area of city around Dean Lake under new ordinance


405
 
3-2-1995
 
Re-zoning a small part of SW 1-4; 7-115-22


407
 
3-11-1995
 
Making ordinance effective as to Valley Fair property


413
 
4-27-1995
 
Creating PUD Overlay Zone No. 1 on Valley Fair property; part of Government
Lot 1, 33-116-22; part of east 1-2, 4-115-22; part of Government Lot 2,
3-115-22; Lot 3, 3-115-22; and part of north 1-2 SW 1-4, 3-115-22


415
 
5-11-1995
 
Creating PUD Overlay Zone No. 2 on west View 7th Addition


417
 
9-14-1995
 
Creating PUD Overlay Zone No. 3 on Canterbury Park property; part of
northeast 1-4 southeast 1-4, 5-115-22; south 1-2 southeast 1-4, 5-115-22; SW
1-4 SW 1-4, 4-115-22; part of NW 1-4, 9-115-22; and part of east 1-2
northeast 1-4, 8-115-22


418
 
7-6-1995
 
Creating PUD Overlay Zone No. 4 on parts of Outlots D & E, Husman Addition


421
 
8-24-1995
 
Re-zoning land north of 5th Avenue, south of 2nd Avenue, east of Harrison
Street, and west of Marschall Road from R-2 to R-1C and R-3


422
 
8-24-1995
 
Re-zoning part of NW 1-4 SW 1-4, 5-115-22 from R-3 to B-1


423
 
8-24-1995
 
Mapping area of city around Canterbury Park under new ordinance


424
 
8-24-1995
 
Deleting mandatory PUD Overlay Zone


428
 
11-2-1995
 
Creating PUD Overlay Zone No. 5 on Prairie Bend property; part of SW 1-4 SW
1-4 and NW 1-4 SW 1-4, 5-115-22; and part of east 5-8 of north 1-2 southeast
1-4, 6-115-22


431
 
11-2-1995
 
Re-zoning Prairie House 2nd Addition from B-1 to MR


433
 
12-14-1995
 
Creating PUD Overlay Zone No. 6 on St. Francis Medical Campus; southeast 1-4
northeast 1-4, part of northeast 1-4 southeast 1-4, and south 1-2 of
northeast 1-4 northeast 1-4, 118-115-22


436
 
12-14-1995
 
Replacing site plan for PUD Overlay Zone No. 4


442
 
1-11-1996
 
Re-zoning SW 1-4 SW 1-4, 20-115-22 from RR to AG


443
 
1-11-1996
 
Re-zoning Prairie House 2nd Addition to PUD Overlay Zone No. 1


447
 
3-28-1996
 
Re-zoning part of SW 1-4 southeast 1-4, 7-115-22 and NW 1-4 of NW 1-4
northeast 1-4, 18-115-22 from AG to B-1


449
 
4-4-1996
 
Creating PUD Overlay Zone No. 8 on part of northeast 1-4 SW 1-4 5-115-22;
part of southeast 1-4 SW 1-4 5-115-22; west 1-2 SW 1-4 5-115-22; and Outlot
A, Prahmcoll 1st Addition


459
 
7-1-1996
 
Re-zoning SW 1-4 of NW 1-4 and the north 30 acres of west 1-2 of SW 1-4, of
17-115-22 from AG to R-1B


461
 
8-6-1996
 
Re-zoning south 1-2 of NW 1-4 of NW 1-4, 17-115-22 from AG to R-1B and R-2


464
 
10-1-1996
 
Re-zoning Outlot D, Prairie Estates 1st Addition from AG to R-1 B and B-1


465
 
12-12-1996
 
Re-zoning Outlots A, B, C, and D, Lots 1 and 2, Canterbury Park 2nd Addition,
plus Lot 1, Block 1 Canterbury Park 4th Addition, plus east 1-2 of SW 1-4,
9-115-22 west from M-R to Planned Unit Development Overlay Zone No. 9


466
 
10-17-1996
 
Re-zoning south 1-2 of southeast 1-4 of southeast 1-4, 12-115-23 from R-1B to
Planned Unit Development Overlay Zone No. 7


469
 
5-15-1997
 
Re-zoning southeast 1-4 of SW 1-4, except north 2 rods thereof and except
south 72 feet to east 66 feet of north 105 feet thereof, 5-115-22 from R-1B
to Planned Unit Development Overlay Zone No. 10


473
 
2-13-1997
 
Re-zoning south 1-2 of SW 1-4, 11-115-23, except portion platted Davies
Addition and Davies 2nd Addition, and except that part of south 1-2 of SW
1-4, 11- 115N-23W, shown as Parcel 43A on State Department of Transportation.
Right-of-way Plat No. 70-16 and SW 1-4 of southeast 1-4, 11-115N-23W, except
that part shown as Parcel 49 on State Department of Transportation.
Right-of-way Plat No. 70-15 from R-1B to Planned Unit Development Overlay
Zone No. 11


476
 
2-13-1997
 
Re-zoning Lot 2, Block 1, Wiggins 1st Addition from R-1C to R-2


477
 
2-27-1997
 
Re-zoning Lots 1-4, Block 32, east Shakopee from B-1 to R-2


481
 
4-17-1997
 
Re-zoning Outlot A, south Parkview Addition from R-1B to R-2


483
 
5-6-1997
 
Re-zoning Outlot C, Prairie Estates 1st Addition from AG to B-1 and R-2


489
 
7-1-1997
 
Re-zoning


493
 
8-14-1997
 
Re-zoning land located north of 12th Avenue and East of Country Road 83


499
 
9-4-1997
 
Re-zoning land located south of Highway 169 and East of County Road 17
(Marschall Road)


503
 
10-16-1997
 
Re-zoning land located south of Highway 169, west of County Road 18, and
north of County Road 16


507
 
1-1-1998
 
Re-zoning land located south of 17th Avenue Extended and west of County Road
17


508
 
12-4-1997
 
Re-zoning land located south of the West 3rd Avenue and County Road 69
Intersection


510
 
2-5-1998
 
Re-zoning land located north of Valley View Road and east of County Road 17


516
 
6-25-1998
 
Re-zoning land generally located southwest of Gorman Street and south of
Municipal Services Building Site


524
 
10-22-1998
 
Re-zoning land located south of Crossroads Center and north of Highway 169


530
 
10-29-1998
 
Re-zoning the north one-half of Block 169, Shakopee City Plat


534
 
12-31-1998
 
Amends Ord. 493 by replacing legal description


535
 
12-31-1998
 
Re-zoning land generally located south of U.S. 169, east of Marschall Road,
north of 17th Avenue, Extended, and immediately east of Longmeadow Addition


532
 
1-28-1999
 
Re-zoning land located north of County Road 16 and west of Canterbury Park


536
 
1-28-1199
 
Re-zoning land located south of 4th Avenue and west of CSAH 83


540
 
2-25-1999
 
Prohibiting approval of new residential plats, planned unit developments, and
conditional use permits


555
 
7-15-1999
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of US 169, and east of CSAH 83


556
 
9-30-1999
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of CSAH 42 and east of CSAH 17
(Marschall Road)


559
 
11-11-1999
 
Re-zoning land generally located north and south of County Road 16, east of
County Road 83, and west of Dean Lake


687
 
2-1-2000
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of Sixth Avenue and east of CSAH69


565
 
2-24-2000
 
Re-zoning land generally located at the southwest corner of County Road 17
and Highway 169


569
 
8-31-2000
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of 5th Avenue and west of Adams Street


573
 
8-10-2000
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of Valley View Road and east of County
Road 17


577
 
9-14-2000
 
Re-zoning land generally located south of Highway 169 and west of 17th Avenue


584
 
11-6-2000
 
Not published - superceded by Ord. 611


588
 
12-28-2001
 
Re-zoning land generally located south of 17th Avenue and west of CSAH
17-Marschall Road


592
 
3-1-2001
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of CSAH 16 and west of Roundhouse from
Highway Business (B-1) to Multiple-Family Residential (R-3)


593
 
3-1-2001
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of Bluff Avenue and west of CSAH
Marschall Road


595
 
4-26-2001
 
Zoning land generally located at 2011 10th Avenue west (south of CSAH 69,
north of 10th Avenue) to Medium-Density Residential (R-2)


596
 
5-3-2001
 
Re-zoning land generally located south of Highway 169, north of Dublin Lane,
and east of Brittany Court from Agricultural Preservation (AG) to Planned
Residential (PRD)


602
 
7-26-2001
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of Valley View Road, east of Pheasant
Run, and west of County Road 83 from Agricultural Preservation (AG) to Urban
Residential (R-1B)


604
 
8-2-2001
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of Valley View Road, and east of
County Road 17 from Agricultural Preservation (AG) to Urban Residential (R-1B)


611
 
9-27-2001
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of 17th Avenue extended and east of
Dublin Square and Sunpath Elementary from Agricultural Preservation (AG) to
Urban Residential (R-1B)


612
 
10-11-2001
 
Re-zoning property from Major Recreation Planned Unit Development (MR-PUD) to
Light Industrial (I-1)


619
 
2-28-2002
 
Re-zoning land generally located south of 17 Avenue, north of Valley View
Road, and east of Sunpath Elementary from Agricultural Preservation (AG) to
Urban Residential (R-1B)


622
 
3-28-2002
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of 17th Avenue and south of STH 169
from Agricultural Preservation (AG) to Planned Residential (PRD)


624
 
4-11-2002
 
Re-zoning land generally located south of Newport Avenue, west of Evergreen
Lane, and east of County Road 79 from Agricultural Preservation (AG) to Urban
Residential (R-1B)


632
 
6-27-2002
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of 17th Avenue and east of Dublin
Square from Agricultural Preservation (AG) to Urban Residential (R-1B)


635
 
8-15-2002
 
Re-zoning land generally located east of CSAH 79, west of CSAH 17, and north
of CSAH 78 from Agricultural Preservation (AG) to Urban Residential (R-B)


636
 
8-15-2002
 
Re-zoning land generally located south and west of CSAH 18 from Light
industrial (I-1) to Planned Residential (PRD)


637
 
8-15-2002
 
Re-zoning land generally located south of Highway 169 and north and east of
CSAH 18 from Light Industrial (I-1) to Highway Business (B-1) and Community
Commercial (CC)


640
 
9-26-2002
 
Re-zoning land generally located south of 17th Avenue and east of
Independence Drive from Agricultural Preservation (AG) to Urban Residential
(R-1B)


645
 
11-14-2002
 
Re-zoning land generally located south of 3rd Avenue and east of Adams Street
from Old Shakopee Residential (R-1C) to Light Industry (I-1)


650
 
12-26-2002
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of 4th Avenue, east of Fuller Street,
and west of Holmes Street from Old Shakopee Residential (R-1C) to Central
Business (B-3)


655
 
1-30-2003
 
Re-zoning Lots 2, 3, 4, Block 9, Keepers addition from Old Shakopee
Residential (R1-C) to Medium-Density Residential (R2)


654
 
2-27-2003
 
Re-zoning land generally located east of CSAH 18 and south of CSAH 16 from
Rural Residential (RR) to Urban Residential (R-1B)


658
 
3-27-2003
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of CSAH 16 and south of the
southbridge Development from Light Industrial (I-1) and Agriculture
Preservation (AG) to Urban Residential (R-1B)


661
 
3-27-2003
 
Re-zoning land generally located east of Beckrich Park Estates, west of CSAH
17, and north of CSAH 78 from Agricultural Preservation (AG) to Rural
Residential (RR) and Urban Residential (R-1B)


664
 
5-15-2003
 
Re-zoning land generally located east of the intersection of 17th Avenue and
Independence Drive from Agricultural Preservation (AG) to Planned Residential
District (PRD)


667
 
5-29-2003
 
Re-zoning certain property from Agricultural Preservation (AG) to Planned
Residential District (PRD)


668
 
5-29-2003
 
Re-zoning land generally located east of Marschall Road and south of Eagle
Creek Boulevard from Multiple-Family Residential (R-3) to Neighborhood
Commercial (NC)


669
 
6-12-2003
 
Re-zoning land generally located south of Highway 169, east of King Avenue,
and north of 18th Avenue from Agricultural Preservation (AG) to
Medium-Density Residential (R2)


671
 
6-26-2003
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of Valley View Road and west of CSAH
83 from Agricultural Preservation (AG) to Urban Residential (R-1B)


673
 
6-26-2003
 
Re-zoning land generally located south of Valley View Road, east of Pheasant
Run, and west of Williams Street from Rural Residential (RR) to Urban
Residential (R-1B)


674
 
6-26-2003
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of Eagle Creek Boulevard, east of
Marschall Road, and west of Roundhouse Street from Highway Business (B-1) to
Medium- Density Residential (R2)


675
 
7-10-2003
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of CSAH 16, east of Pike Lake Road,
and west of Foothill Trail from Agricultural Preservation (AG) Zone Light
Industrial (I-1) to Urban Residential (R-1B)


682
 
10-16-2003
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of Valley View Road, east of Mathias
Road, and west of Pheasant Run Street from Agricultural Preservation (AG) to
Urban Residential (R-1B)


683
 
10-30-2003
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of Valley View Road, east of Mathias
Road, and south of Wilhelm Court from Agricultural Preservation (AG) to Urban
Residential (R-1B)


684
 
10-30-2003
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of Second Avenue west, east of Scott
Street, and west of Atwood Street from Highway Business (B-1) to Central
Business (B-3)


685
 
10-30-2003
 
Re-zoning land generally located south of Seventeenth Avenue, east of Sarazin
Street, and west of Independence Drive from Agricultural Preservation (AG) to
Urban Residential (R-1B)


686
 
11-13-2003
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of Valley View Road, east of Mathias
Road, and south of Wilhelm Court from Agricultural Preservation (AG) to Urban
Residential (R- 1B)


691
 
11-27-2003
 
Re-zoning land generally located south of Trunk Highway 169, north of CSAH
16, east of CSAH 83, and west of Dean Lake from Business Park (BP) to
Medium-Density Residential (R-2)


695
 
2-5-2004
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of Second Avenue west, east of Scott
Street, and west of Atwood Street from Highway Business (B-1) to Central
Business (B-3)


705
 
5-27-2004
 
Re-zoning land generally, located north of Carriage Circle, and east of
Barrington Drive from Rural Residential (RR) to Urban Residential (R-1B)


707
 
6-17-2004
 
Re-zoning land generally located south of STH 169 and west of CSAH 79 to
Urban Residential (R-1B)


711
 
8-26-2004
 
Re-zoning land generally located south of 4th Avenue and east of Roundhouse
Street from Multiple-Family Residential (R-3) to Medium-Density Residential
(R-2)


712
 
8-26-2004
 
Re-zoning land generally located north of Valley View Road and west of County
Road 83 from Agricultural Preservation (AG) to Urban Residential (R-1B)


717
 
12-30-2004
 
Re-zoning land generally located south of STH 169 and east of CSAH 15 to
Urban Residential (R-1B)


722
 
1-27-2005
 
Re-zoning land generally located south of Highway 169 and west of Townline
Road to Urban Residential (R-1B)


723
 
3-17-2005
 
Re-zoning land generally located south of County Road 78 and west of County
Road 17 from Rural Residential (RR) to Urban Residential (R-1B)


727
 
4-14-2005
 
Re-zoning land located north of County Road 16 and west of Riverside Fields
from Agricultural Preservation (AG) Zone Light Industrial (I-1) Zone to Urban
Residential (R-1B) Zone


729
 
4-28-2005
 
Re-zoning land located north of County Road 16 and west of County Road 18
from Rural Residential (RR) to Urban Residential (R-1B) Zone


731
 
6-2-2005
 
Re-zoning land located north of County Road 16, south of the southbridge
Development, and west of Pike Lake Road from Agricultural Preservation (AG)
Zone to Urban Residential (R-1B) Zone


732
 
7-14-2005
 
Zoning land located south of Highway 169 and north of 17th Avenue extended to
Medium-Density Residential (R2) and Highway Business (Bl) Zone


735
 
7-28-2005
 
Zoning land generally located north of CSAH 16 and east of Pike Lake Road
extended from Agricultural Preservation (AG) and Light Industrial (I-1) to
Urban Residential (R-1B) Zone


739
 
11-10-2005
 
Re-zoning property from Agricultural Preservation (AG) Zone to Urban
Residential (R-1B) Zone


745
 
2-23-2006
 
Re-zoning property from Rural Residential (RR) Zone to Urban Residential
(R-1B) Zone


746
 
2-2-2006
 
Re-zoning land located north of CSAH 16 and west of Glacier Estates from
Rural Residential (RR) Zone to Urban Residential (R-1B) Zone


751
 
3-30-2006
 
Re-zoning land located southeast of Lake O’Dowd and east of Vista Ridge
Lane from Agricultural Preservation (AG) Zone to Rural Residential (RR) Zone


755
 
4-27-2006
 
Re-zone property from Agricultural Preservation (AG) Zone to Low-Density
Residential (R-1A) and Urban Residential (R-1B) Zone


757
 
6-15-2006
 
Re-zoning land located west of CSAH 17-Marschall Road and south of CSAH 78
from Agricultural Preservation (AG) Zone to Low-Density Residential (R-1A)
Zone


758
 
5-11-2006
 
Re-zoning land located south of Highway 169, east of Brittany Village 5th
Addition, and west of Kellarney Hills Subdivision from Agricultural
Preservation (AG) Zone to Medium-Density (R-2) Zone and Urban Residential
(R-1B) Zone


799
 
7-3-2008
 
Re-zone property to Urban Residential (R-1B), Medium-Density Residential
(R2), and Highway Business (B1) Zone


765
 
7-6-2006
 
Re-zoning land located west of CSAH 17-Marschall Road and south of CSAH 78
from Agricultural Preservation (AG) Zone to Low-Density Residential (R-1A)
Zone


784
 
7-26-2007
 
Re-zoning land in Beckrich Park Estates from Rural Residential (RR) to
Sewered Rural Residential (SRR)


814
 
2-26-2009
 
Realigning a zoning boundary on property north of 17 Avenue and west of
Marystown Road (CSAH 15)


817
 
4-30-2009
 
Re-zoning property from Multiple-Family Residential (R3) Zone to Office (B2)
Zone


818
 
4-30-2009
 
Re-zone property from Major Recreation (MR) Zone to Heavy Industry (I-2) Zone


857
 
8-23-2012
 
Re-zoning property from Agricultural Preservation (AG) to Urban Residential
(R-1B)


835
 
9-2-2010
 
Re-zone property from Highway Business (B1) Zone to Light Industry (I-1) Zone


856
 
9-6-2012
 
Reconfiguration of zoning boundary between Urban Residential (R-1B) and
Low-Density Residential (R-1A) to correspond within the property lines
created with the platting of Valley Creek Crossing Second Addition


858
 
11-29-2012
 
Re-zoning property from Business Park (BP) to Highway Business (B1)


868
 
5-7-2013
 
Amending the zoning map by re-zoning land to Heavy Industrial (I-2) from
Highway Business B-1


875
 
10-1-2013
 
Approving a request to re- zone property from Light Industrial (I-1) Zone to
Highway Business (B-1) Zone


921
 
10-20-2015
 
Rezoning land located at 2544 Lakeview Drive from Rural Residential (RR) Zone
to Low Density Residential (R1A) Zone


926
 
2-2-2016
 
Rezoning Outlot A, Southbridge Crossings East 3rd Addition from Highway
Business (B-1) Zone to High Density Residential (R-4) Zone


929
 
2-16-2016
 
Rezoning property at 2525 Jennifer Lane from Agricultural Preservation (AG)
Zone to Urban Residential (R-1B) Zone


930
 
3-15-2016
 
Rezoning properties adjacent to Hilldale Drive East from Rural Residential
(RR) to Sewered Rural Residential (SRR)


931
 
3-15-2016
 
Rezoning Outlot I, Canterbury Park Sixth Addition from Major Recreation (MR)
Zone to Light Industry (I-1) Zone


936
 
6-21-2016
 
Rezoning property located at the southeast quadrant of the intersection of
Vierling Drive West and Adams Street South from Urban Residential (R-1B) to
Highway Business (B- 1) and Multiple-Family Residential (R-3)


960
 
4-18-2017
 
Rezoning property located south of U.S. Highway 169, west of CSAH
15/Marystown Road and west/northwest of 17th Avenue to Urban Residential
(R-1B) and Medium Density Residential (R-2) zones, and Highway Commercial
(B-1) Zone


965
 
6-20-2017
 
Rezoning properties in West Vierling acres first addition from Multiple
Family Residential (R-3) to High Density Residential (R-4)


968
 
9-16-2017
 
Rezoning property located west of CSAH 15/Marystown Road and west/northwest
of 17th Avenue to Medium Density Residential (R-2) Zone


973
 
10-17-2017
 
Rezoning property located at 1395 Wood Duck Trail from Agricultural
Preservation (AG) Zone to Urban Residential (R-1B) Zone


974
 
11-21-2017
 
Rezoning property located south and east of CSAH 69/Old Brickyard Road, west
of Vierling Drive, and north of U.S. Highway 169 to Highway Business (B-1)
Zone


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II:  ANNEXATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




100
 
9-12-1950
 
Tracts of land in 31-116-22, 5-115-22, and 6-115-22


171
 
10-8-1957
 
A tract of land in the NE-1-4 of NE-1-4, 11-115-23, and a tract in Government
Lots 7 and 9 and the SE-1-4 of the SE-1-4, 2-115-23


178
 
8-12-1958
 
The part of NE-1-4 of NE-1-4, 11-115-23, included within the Plat of
Notermann’s Addition


202
 
3-10-1962
 
The tract of land excepted from the re-plat of Notermann’s Addition annexed
by Ord. 178


230
 
6-8-1965
 
NE-1-4 of SE-1-4 and SE-1-4 of NE-1-4, 11-115-23


231
 
6-8-1965
 
Part of W-1-2 of NE-1-4, 11-115-23


234
 
10-13-1965
 
Part of NE-1-4 of NE-1-4, 11-115-23, bounded by the Hussman’s Addition on
the north and east; the Notermann’s Addition on the south; and on the west
by territory annexed by Ord. 231


244
 
2-8-1966
 
Tracts of land in Government Lots 5 and 6, 6-115-22


273
 
10-26-1967
 
That part of Eagle Creek Township described as the east 5-8th of the N-1-2 of
the SE-1-4, 6-115-22


335
 
12-14-1971
 
A tract of land in the SE-1-4 of the SE-1-4, 11-115-23, and a tract in the
NW-1-4 of SW-1-4, 12-115-23


371
 
9-9-1975
 
A tract of land in the E-1-2 of the NW-1-4, 12-115-23


372
 
9-9-1975
 
A tract in the NW-1-4 of SE-1-4; a tract in the NE-1-4 of SW-1-4; and a tract
in the NW-1-4 of SW-1-4,11-114-23


247
 
8-16-1988
 
Parcel in SE-1-4 of NE-1-4, 12-115-23


439
 
11-30-1995
 
Remainder of southeast 1-4 NW 1-4, 12-115-23


576
 
8-24-2000
 
That part of the east half of the northwest quarter of Section 11, Township
115 North, Range 23 west lying northerly of the north right- of-way line of
former T.H. 300 (now 10th Avenue west) and southerly of the south right of
way line of Scott County Road 69, approximately four acres


652
 
1-30-2003
 
Tracts of land in Section 13, Township 115 north, Range 23 west and Section
12, Township 115 north, Range 23 west


657
 
3-20-2003
 
Certain property located at the southeast quadrant of STH 169 and CSAH 15-
Marystown Road


679
 
8-28-2003
 
Certain property located at the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of
Section 13, Township 115, Range 23, the county, together with that part of
the north half of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said
Section 13


706
 
6-3-2004
 
That part of southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 13,
Township 115, Range 23 and of the north half of southeast quarter of
northeast quarter of said Section 13, together with south half of southeast
quarter of northeast quarter of said Section 13; together with that part of
northwest quarter of southeast quarter of said Section 13; excepting a parcel
previously conveyed in Doc. No. 363111


713
 
8-26-2004
 
That part of southwest quarter of northwest quarter of Section 13, Township
115, Range 23


734
 
7-28-2005
 
The east 12 feet of the south seven rods (115.5 feet) of the northwest
quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 13, Township 115 north, Range 23
west, the county, and that part of the southwest quarter of the northwest
quarter of Section 13, Township 115 North, Range 23 west, the county


761
 
6-29-2006
 
Lot 1, B1ock 1, Theis Highlands 1st Addition; Outlot A, Theis Highlands 1st
Addition; all that part of the east half of the northeast quarter of Section
14, Township 115, Range 23; all that part of the west half of the northeast
quarter of Section 14, Township 115, Range 23; all that part of the east half
of the northeast quarter of Section 14, Township 115, Range 23; the south
half of the southwest quarter of Section 14, Township 115, Range 23; the
northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 14, Township 115, Range
23; and a parcel in the southeast corner of the northeast quarter of the
southwest quarter of Section 14, Township 115, Range 23


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE III:  LAND CONVEYANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




253
 
6-28-1966
 
Authorizing the conveyance of that tract designated as “Park” on the Plat
of Southview Addition (2013 Code, § 25.12)


290
 
12-17-1968
 
Authorizing the conveyance of a tract of land to the County Historical
Society, Inc. (2013 Code, § 25.12)


313
 
8-25-1970
 
Authorizing the conveyance of certain lands to the Metropolitan Sewer Board 
(2013 Code, § 25.12)


316
 
1-26-1971
 
Authorizing the conveyance of a part of the SE-1-4 of NE-1-4, Section
6-115-22, to Viking Steel Products, Inc. (2013 Code, § 25.12)


351
 
3-27-1973
 
Authorizing the conveyance of certain lands known as Riverside Park to the
state (2013 Code, § 25.12)


352
 
3-13-1973
 
Authorizing the conveyance of certain lands to the county for use of the
County Library Board (2013 Code, § 25.12)


153
 
12-11-1984
 
Amending Ord. 290 (2013 Code, § 25.12)


 
 




 



TABLE IV:  NUMBERING LOTS, HOUSING, AND BUILDINGS; STREET NAMINGS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




29
 
6-14-1927
 
Prescribing the numbering of lots, houses, and buildings (2013 Code, §25.13)


184
 
5-12-1959
 
Changing the names and designations of certain streets (2013 Code, §25.13)


249
 
4-26-1966
 
Renaming that part of Old Highway No. 169 south of Third Street and the
extension thereof to Tenth Street as Harrison Street (2013 Code, §25.13)


295
 
1-14-1969
 
Renaming County Road 17 to Gorman Street (2013 Code, §25.13)


392
 
3-22-1977
 
Naming streets in Hauer’s Addition to Hauer Trail and Jasper Road, County
Road No. 16 as Eagle Creek Boulevard, and County Road No. 17 as Marschall
Road (2013 Code, §25.13)


3
 
4-11-1978
 
Renaming Old County Road No. 21 as McKenna Road (2013 Code, §25.13)


228
 
8-181987
 
Renaming 13th Avenue as Vierling Drive (2013 Code, §25.13)


280
 
12-5-1989
 
Renaming a portion of Heritage Drive as Sapphire Lane (2013 Code, §25.13)


289
 
5-15-1990
 
Renaming Lakeview Drive as Stonebrooke Drive (2013 Code, §25.13)


316
 
8-29-1991
 
Renaming a portion of Roundhouse Circle as Sarazin Street (2013 Code, §25.13)


378
 
7-7-1994
 
Renaming a portion of Indigo Lane to Mound Street (2013 Code, §25.13)


386
 
9-20-1994
 
Renaming a portion of Vierling Drive to 13th Avenue (2013 Code, §25.13)


399
 
2-16-1995
 
Renaming Homestead Way to Homestead Street (2013 Code, §25.13)


425
 
8-15-1995
 
Renaming Homestead Way to Homestead Street, Wagon Wheel Circle, and Homestead
Court (2013 Code, §25.13)


426
 
9-5-1995
 
Renaming Whitney Avenue to Whitney Street (2013 Code, §25.13)


432
 
11-21-1995
 
Renaming Koeper Avenue to Fuller Street (2013 Code, §25.13)


553
 
7-15-1999
 
Renaming of Carlise Curve to Carlisle Curve within Southbridge 1st Addition


574
 
8-10-2000
 
Renaming Berksshire Circle to Berkshire Circle (2013 Code, §25.13)


575
 
8-24-2000
 
Renaming portion of street known as Park Place as it runs east and west from
Valley Park Drive to Broadband Boulevard (2013 Code, §25.13)


690
 
12-4-2003
 
Renaming Viking Steel Drive between CSAH 101 and Fourth Avenue to Sarazin
Street (2013 Code, §25.13)


754
 
4-27-2006
 
Renaming Cambridge Court to Langston Court in Stonebrooke 4th Addition (2013
Code, §25.13)


783
 
6-28-2007
 
Renaming Koeper Avenue to Fuller Street and Townline Avenue to Spencer Street
(2013 Code, §25.13)


867
 
4-11-2013
 
Approving the  naming of Scott County Road 21 from County State Aid Highway
42 to County State Aid Highway 17


 
 




 



TABLE V:  STREET AND ALLEY VACATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




50
 
10-9-1894
 
Vacating certain streets, alleys, and levees in the Plat of East Shakopee
(2013 Code, § 25.11)


246
 
4-26-1966
 
Vacating an alley on certain public streets
(2013 Code, § 25.11)


264
 
2-28-1967
 
Vacating an alley in Block 9, Koeper’s Addition and a part of Jefferson
Street
(2013 Code, § 25.11)


271
 
11-14-1967
 
Vacating a part of Jackson Street
(2013 Code, § 25.11)


274
 
11-14-1967
 
Amending Ord. 246
(2013 Code, § 25.11)


282
 
7-8-1968
 
Vacating all the part of alley abutting and north of Lot 4, Block 3, Jasper
and Smith Addition
(2013 Code, § 25.11)


283
 
7-9-1968
 
Vacating certain portions of Cass Street and Clay Street, all of alley in
Block 41, between Lots 1 and 10 of Block 42, and south half of alley abutting
Lot 2, Block 42
(2013 Code, § 25.11)


302
 
8-12-1969
 
Vacating a portion of alley in Block 31, East Shakopee
(2013 Code, § 25.11)


345
 
10-10-1972
 
Vacating a portion of Shawmut Street
(2013 Code, § 25.11)


347
 
12-12-1972
 
Amending Ord. 246
(2013 Code, § 25.11)


359
 
1-8-1974
 
Vacating a part of Cavanaugh Drive and other streets, drives, and alleys in a
part of SE-1-4 of NE-1-4, Section 6-115-22
(2013 Code, § 25.11)


 
 




 



TABLE VI:  SEWER DISTRICTS AND SEWER CONNECTION EASEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




8
 
5-10-1921
 
Establishing and creating Sewer District No. 9 and provides for construction
of sewerage system
(2013 Code, §25.09)


16
 
8-2-1922
 
Creating Sewer District No. 10
(2013 Code, §25.09)


26
 
7-13-1926
 
Creating Sewer District No. 11
(2013 Code, §25.09)


32
 
9-27-1927
 
Creating Sewer District No. 12
(2013 Code, §25.09)


33
 
10-18-1927
 
Creating Sewer District No. 13
(2013 Code, §25.09)


34
 
10-18-1927
 
Creating Sewer District No. 14
(2013 Code, §25.09)


259
 
10-11-1966
 
Granting a 20-foot easement to Gerrico, Inc. for the purpose of connecting to
public sewerage system
(2013 Code, §25.10)


255
 
3-12-1968
 
Creating Sewer District No. 66-1
(2013 Code, §25.09)


256
 
3-12-1968
 
Creating Sewer District No. 66-2
(2013 Code, §25.09)


284
 
9-10-1968
 
Creating Sewer District No. 20 (SW-68-5)
(2013 Code, §25.09)


303
 
8-12-1969
 
Granting a 20-foot easement to Burmahi, Inc. for the purpose of constructing
and maintaining a private sewer outlet
(2013 Code, §25.10)


 
 




 



TABLE VII:  AUTHORIZATIONS AND FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




64
 
5-13-1941
 
Grant of authority to railroad to Chicago, St. Paul, Minneapolis and Omaha Co.
(2013 Code, §25.01)


73
 
8-11-1942
 
Grant of authority to railroad to Chicago, St. Paul, Minneapolis and Omaha Co.
(2013 Code, §25.01)


217
 
5-12-1964
 
Grant of authority to railroad to Chicago and Northwestern Railway Co.
(2013 Code, §25.01)


222
 
3-21-1965
 
Granting a gas franchise to Minnesota Valley Natural Gas Company
(2013 Code, §25.08)


245
 
3-8-1966
 
Authorizing joint use of pole contract between the city and Northern States
Power Company
(2013 Code, §25.02)


337
 
3-17-1972
 
Granting an electric franchise to Northern States Power Company
(2013 Code, §25.07)


100
 
9-7-1982
 
Granting a cable franchise to Zyistra-United Cable Television Company
(2013 Code, §25.06)


157
 
12-18-1984
 
Granting a gas franchise to Minnegasco, Inc.
(2013 Code, §25.08)


166
 
4-16-1985
 
Amending Ord. 100
(2013 Code, §25.06)


194
 
4-18-1986
 
Amending Ord. 100
(2013 Code, §25.06)


242
 
3-8-1988
 
Amending Ord. 100
(2013 Code, §25.06)


291
 
8-7-1990
 
Granting a gas franchise to Western Utilities, Inc.
(2013 Code, §25.08)


308
 
3-15-1991
 
Amending Ord. 100
(2013 Code, §25.06)


344
 
12-10-1992
 
Amending Ord. 100
(2013 Code, §25.06)


453
 
8-22-1996
 
Amending Ord. 100
(2013 Code, §25.06)


605
 
8-16-2001
 
Granting an electric franchise to Minnesota Valley Electric Cooperative
(2013 Code, §25.07)


607
 
8-16-2001
 
Granting an electric franchise to Northern States Power Company
(2013 Code, §25.07)


641
 
9-26-2002
 
Amending Ord. 100
(2013 Code, §25.06)


709
 
9-26-2002
 
Amending Ord. 100
(2013 Code, §25.06)


939
 
8-3-2016
 
Granting a cable franchise to CenturyLink


948
 
11-1-2016
 
Granting a gas franchise to Northern States Power Company


 
 
 
 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Minnesota Statutes





References to 2013 Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES



 

M.S. Section
 
Code Section




12.25
 
33.03


12.31
 
33.02


15.73
 
90.32


Ch.18G
 
130.15


Ch. 18J
 
130.15


35.67
 
130.03


35.68
 
130.03


35.69
 
130.03


65B.48
 
110.030


65B.48, subd. 5
 
72.26


Ch. 80A
 
113.02


84.872
 
72.07


86B.005
 
151.005


86B.201
 
151.005


86B.205
 
151.005


88.16 - 88.171
 
130.06


89.001
 
130.15


89.01
 
130.15


89.51 - 89.64
 
130.15


89.551, § 2, subd. 3b
 
130.15


93.44 to 93.51
 
151.066


Ch. 103F
 
151.065, 151.085


103F.201 et seq.
 
151.070


Ch. 103G
 
151.012 - 151.014, 151.088


103G.005
 
151.069


103G.005, subd. 14
 
151.066


103G.005, subd. 15
 
54.14, 151.066


103G.005, subd. 19
 
151.002


103G.222 - 103G.2375
 
54.03


116C.51 - 116C.697
 
151.210


144.391
 
110.055


144.50 - 144.60
 
116.02, 151.002


Ch. 144G
 
151.012


Ch. 147
 
116.03


Ch. 148
 
116.03


157.15, subd. 9
 
110.186, 110.188


161.45
 
90.32, 90.51


Ch. 168
 
Ch. 70; 30.20, 70.01


168.002, subd. 31
 
72.01


Ch. 169
 
30.20; Ch. 70; 70.01, 72.31, 72.32, 130.41


169.045
 
72.25


169.045, subd.7
 
72.31


169.346
 
71.09


169.522
 
72.29


169.68
 
130.45


169A.20
 
72.03


Ch. 171
 
Ch. 70


205.07
 
30.09


216B.02
 
90.32


216B.02, subd. 4
 
90.32


216B.02, subd. 6
 
90.32


216B.36
 
90.51


Ch. 216D
 
90.35, 90.43


216D.01 - 216D.09
 
90.38, 90.43, 90.51


216D.04, subd. 3
 
90.32


222.37
 
90.51


237.16
 
90.30


237.162
 
90.30, 90.32, 90.45, 90.51


237.162, subd. 3
 
90.32


237.162, subd. 4
 
90.32


237.162, subd. 10
 
90.32


237.162, subd. 11
 
90.32


237.162, subd. 12
 
90.32


237.162, subd. 13
 
90.32, 90.37


237.162, subd. 16
 
90.32


237.163
 
90.30, 90.32, 90.45, 90.51, 90.57


237.163, subd. 2(b)
 
90.31


237.163, subd. 3(b)
 
90.38


237.163, subd. 3(c)
 
90.38


237.163, subd. 4(c)
 
90.44, 90.46


237.163, subd. 5(f)
 
90.44


237.163, subd. 6
 
90.57


237.163, subd. 6(g)
 
90.38


237.79
 
90.30


237.81
 
90.30


Ch. 238
 
90.32


238.02, subd. 3
 
90.32


238.084
 
90.51


238.086
 
90.30


278.01 - 278.03
 
113.05


278.01 - 278.13
 
110.160


300.06
 
90.35


301B.01
 
90.51


303.06
 
116.04


307.08
 
151.066


Ch. 308A
 
90.32


325F.731
 
113.02


325F.731 - 325F.744
 
113.04


325F.733
 
113.02


325F.734 to 325F.742
 
113.02


326B.101 to 326B.16
 
111.01, 111.13


326B.121
 
111.01, 111.99


326B.133
 
111.01


326B.148
 
111.01


327C.095
 
111.17


333.01
 
116.04


333.02
 
116.04


Ch. 340A
 
114.35


340A.301, subd. 6b
 
114.01, 114.15, 114.35


340A.301, subd. 6d
 
114.01, 114.15, 114.35


340A.301, subd. 7(b)
 
151.002


340A.409, subd. 1(1)
 
114.09


340A.503, subd. 1(a)(1)
 
130.20


347.51
 
130.03


347.515
 
130.03


347.52
 
130.03


Ch. 349
 
130.66


349.11 - 349.60
 
113.05


349.166
 
130.66


Ch. 349A
 
113.05


364.03, subd. 2
 
110.034, 110.160, 110.162


364.03, subd. 3
 
110.034, 110.160, 110.162


364.06
 
30.08


364.09
 
30.08


412.151
 
31.05


415.02
 
Adopting Ordinance


415.021
 
Adopting Ordinance


Ch. 429
 
90.50, 150.11, 150.13, 150.36


429.081
 
54.54


429.101
 
130.15, 130.17


444.075
 
50.02, 53.01, 53.09


444.075, subd. 3
 
52.14, 53.08


Ch. 453
 
90.32


Ch. 453A
 
90.32


459.20
 
151.005


Ch. 462
 
90.50, 151.065 - 151.067, 151.085


462.357
 
130.67


462.357, subd. 2(b)
 
151.009


463.26
 
111.08


466.01 - 466.15
 
90.07


466.04
 
114.12, 151.110


469.184
 
34.01


471.57
 
34.05


471.924
 
113.04


473.121, subd. 24
 
52.14


Ch. 505
 
150.02, 150.64, 151.071


505.021
 
151.071


518B.01
 
130.67


609.02, subd. 7a
 
130.03


609.02, subd. 8
 
130.03


609.293 - 609.352
 
130.67


609.523
 
113.09


609.685, subd. 1
 
110.064


609.746 - 609.749
 
130.67


609.79
 
130.67


624.20
 
130.10


626.862
 
10.20, 71.09


631.48
 
10.99


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 2013 CODE



 

2013 Code Section
 
2015 Code Section




1.01
 
10.05


1.04
 
10.21


1.06
 
10.22


1.11
 
10.23


1.12
 
10.24


1.13
 
10.25


2.01
 
30.01


2.02
 
31.01


2.03
 
31.02


2.04
 
31.03


2.05
 
32.15


2.06
 
30.02


2.07
 
30.03


2.08
 
30.04


2.10
 
30.05


2.11
 
33.01 - 33.12


2.12
 
33.13


2.13
 
31.04


2.14
 
31.05


2.22
 
32.01


2.30
 
32.03


2.31
 
32.16


2.32
 
32.17


2.36
 
32.18


2.37
 
32.19


2.39
 
30.06


2.40
 
30.07


2.41
 
30.08


2.50
 
32.02


2.52
 
32.20


2.53
 
32.21


2.54
 
32.22


2.57
 
32.23


2.70
 
30.20 - 30.23


2.71
 
34.01


2.80
 
34.02


2.81
 
34.03


2.82
 
34.04


2.83
 
34.05


2.99
 
30.99, 31.99, 32.99, 34.99


3.01
 
50.01


3.02
 
50.02


3.03
 
50.03


3.10
 
52.01 - 52.11


3.12
 
52.12


3.13
 
52.13


3.15
 
51.01 - 51.13


3.20
 
52.14


3.41
 
52.15


3.42
 
53.01 - 53.08, 53.99


3.43
 
53.09


3.99
 
51.99, 52.99, 53.99


4.01
 
111.01


4.03
 
111.02


4.04
 
111.03


4.05
 
111.04


4.06
 
111.05


4.07
 
111.06


4.08
 
111.07


4.09
 
111.08


4.10
 
111.09


4.19
 
111.10


4.26
 
111.11


4.27
 
111.12


4.40
 
111.13


4.41
 
111.14


4.50
 
111.15


4.60
 
111.16, 111.99


4.61
 
111.17


4.99
 
111.99


5.01
 
114.01


5.02
 
114.02


5.03
 
114.03


5.04
 
114.04


5.05
 
114.05


5.06
 
114.06


5.07
 
114.07


5.08
 
114.08, 114.99


5.09
 
114.09


5.091
 
114.10


5.092
 
114.11


5.10
 
114.12


5.11
 
114.12


5.12
 
114.12


5.13
 
114.12


5.14
 
114.13


5.16
 
114.12


5.30
 
114.14


5.32
 
114.15


5.34
 
114.16


5.35
 
114.17


5.36
 
114.18


5.40
 
114.19


5.45
 
114.20


5.46
 
114.21


5.50
 
114.22


5.70
 
114.23


5.99
 
114.99


6.01
 
110.001


6.02
 
110.002


6.03
 
110.003


6.04
 
110.004


6.05
 
110.005


6.06
 
110.006


6.07
 
110.007


6.08
 
110.008


6.09
 
110.009


6.10
 
110.010


6.20
 
110.011


6.21
 
112.01 - 112.08


6.22
 
110.025 - 110.027, 110.029 - 110.043


6.23
 
110.055 - 110.067, 110.999


6.24
 
110.080 - 110.089, 110.999


6.25
 
110.100 - 110.102


6.26
 
110.115 - 110.117, 110.999


6.27
 
110.130 - 110.141


6.28
 
113.01 - 113.11, 113.99


6.42B
 
115.30 - 115.40


6.43
 
110.012


6.44
 
110.013


6.45
 
116.01 - 116.07


6.99
 
110.999, 112.99, 116.99


7.01
 
90.01


7.02
 
90.02


7.03
 
90.03


7.04
 
90.04


7.05
 
90.05


7.06
 
90.06


7.07
 
90.07


7.08
 
90.08


7.09
 
90.09


7.10
 
90.10


7.11
 
90.11


7.12
 
90.12


7.13
 
90.13


7.14
 
90.14


7.15
 
90.15


7.18
 
90.16


8.01
 
70.01


8.02
 
70.02


8.03
 
70.03


8.04
 
70.04


8.05
 
70.05


8.06
 
70.06, 72.99


8.07
 
70.07, 70.99


8.30
 
72.01 - 72.12


8.31
 
72.25 - 72.32; Ch. 73, Schd. I


8.99
 
70.99, 72.99


9.01
 
71.01


9.02
 
71.02


9.03
 
71.03


9.04
 
71.04


9.05
 
71.05


9.06
 
71.06


9.07
 
71.07


9.08
 
71.08


9.09
 
71.09


9.30
 
71.10


9.31
 
71.11


9.40
 
71.12


9.41
 
71.13


9.42
 
71.14


9.43
 
71.15


9.44
 
71.16


9.45
 
71.17


9.50
 
71.18; Ch. 74, Schd. I


9.99
 
71.99


10.02
 
130.01


10.03
 
130.02


10.05
 
130.35


10.20
 
130.36


10.21
 
130.03


10.22
 
130.04


10.23
 
130.37


10.25
 
130.38


10.27
 
130.05


10.29
 
130.06, 130.99


10.32
 
130.40


10.33
 
130.41


10.34
 
130.42


10.35
 
130.07


10.36
 
130.08


10.37
 
130.09


10.38
 
130.10, 130.99


10.49
 
130.65


10.51
 
130.43


10.52
 
130.44


10.53
 
130.11


10.54
 
130.12


10.57
 
130.13


10.59
 
130.14


10.60
 
130.45, 130.99


10.61
 
130.66


10.62
 
130.46, 130.99


10.63
 
130.47


10.70
 
130.15


10.71
 
130.16


10.72
 
130.48


10.73
 
130.17


10.74
 
130.18


10.77
 
130.67


10.78
 
130.68


10.79
 
130.19


10.81
 
130.20


10.99
 
130.99


11.01
 
151.001


11.02
 
151.002


11.03
 
151.003


11.20
 
151.004


11.22
 
151.030


11.24
 
151.031


11.25
 
151.032


11.26
 
151.033


11.28
 
151.034


11.30
 
151.035


11.32
 
151.036


11.33
 
151.037


11.34
 
151.038


11.35
 
151.039


11.36
 
151.040


11.37
 
151.041


11.38
 
151.042


11.40
 
151.043


11.42
 
151.044


11.44
 
151.045


11.46
 
151.046


11.47
 
151.047


11.50
 
151.048


11.52
 
151.049


11.54
 
151.065 - 151.073


11.55
 
151.005


11.56
 
151.085 - 151.094, 151.999


11.58
 
151.050


11.60
 
151.105 - 151.125, 151.999


11.601
 
151.110


11.61
 
151.140 - 151.143


11.62
 
151.155 - 151.157


11.63
 
151.170 - 151.173


11.71
 
151.210 - 151.215


11.80
 
151.006


11.81
 
151.007


11.82
 
151.008


11.83
 
151.009


11.84
 
151.010


11.85
 
151.011


11.86
 
151.012


11.87
 
151.013


11.88
 
151.014


11.89
 
151.015


11.90
 
151.016


11.91
 
151.017


11.99
 
151.999


12.01
 
150.01


12.02
 
150.02


12.03
 
150.03


12.04
 
150.04


12.05
 
150.05


12.06
 
150.06


12.07
 
150.07


12.08
 
150.08


12.09
 
150.09


12.10
 
150.10


12.11
 
150.35


12.12
 
150.36


12.13
 
150.37


12.14
 
150.38


12.15
 
150.39


12.16
 
150.40


12.17
 
150.11


12.18
 
150.11


12.19
 
150.11


12.20
 
150.11


12.21
 
150.12


12.22
 
150.13


12.23
 
150.14


12.24
 
150.55


12.25
 
150.56


12.26
 
150.57


12.27
 
150.58


12.28
 
150.59


12.29
 
150.60


12.30
 
150.61


12.31
 
150.62


12.32
 
150.63


12.33
 
150.64


12.34
 
150.65


12.35
 
150.66


12.39
 
150.15


12.40
 
150.16


12.41
 
150.17


12.42
 
150.18


12.43
 
150.19


12.44
 
150.20


12.45
 
150.21


12.47
 
150.99


14.01
 
91.01


14.02
 
91.02


14.03
 
91.03


14.99
 
91.99


25.01
 
TSO Table VII


25.02
 
TSO Table VII


25.06
 
TSO Table VII


26.07
 
TSO Table VII


26.08
 
TSO Table VII


25.09
 
TSO Table VI


25.11
 
TSO Table V


25.12
 
TSO Table III


25.13
 
TSO Table IV


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




50
 
10-9-1894
 
TSO Table V


8
 
5-10-1921
 
TSO Table VI


16
 
8-2-1922
 
TSO Table VI


26
 
7-13-1926
 
TSO Table VI


29
 
6-14-1927
 
TSO Table IV


32
 
9-27-1927
 
TSO Table VI


33
 
10-18-1927
 
TSO Table VI


34
 
10-18-1927
 
TSO Table VI


64
 
5-13-1941
 
TSO Table VII


73
 
8-11-1942
 
TSO Table VII


100
 
9- 12-1950
 
TSO Table II


171
 
10-8-1957
 
TSO Table II


178
 
8-12-1958
 
TSO Table II


184
 
5-12-1959
 
TSO Table IV


202
 
3-10-1962
 
TSO Table II


217
 
5-12-1964
 
TSO Table VII


222
 
3-21-1965
 
TSO Table VII


230
 
6-8-1965
 
TSO Table II


231
 
6-8-1965
 
TSO Table II


234
 
10-13-1965
 
TSO Table II


244
 
2-8-1966
 
TSO Table II


245
 
3-8-1966
 
TSO Table VII


246
 
4-26-1966
 
TSO Table V


253
 
6-28-1966
 
TSO Table III


259
 
10-11-1966
 
TSO Table VI


264
 
2-28-1967
 
TSO Table V


273
 
10-26-1967
 
TSO Table II


271
 
11-14-1967
 
TSO Table V


274
 
11-14-1967
 
TSO Table V


255
 
3-12-1968
 
TSO Table VI


256
 
3-12-1968
 
TSO Table VI


282
 
7-8-1968
 
TSO Table V


283
 
7-9-1968
 
TSO Table V


284
 
9-10-1968
 
TSO Table VI


290
 
12-17-1968
 
TSO Table III


295
 
1-14-1969
 
TSO Table IV


303
 
8-12-1969
 
TSO Table VI


313
 
8-25-1970
 
TSO Table III


316
 
1-26-1971
 
TSO Table III


335
 
12-14-1971
 
TSO Table II


336
 
3-15-1972
 
111.16


337
 
3-17-1972
 
TSO Table VII


345
 
10-10-1972
 
TSO Table V


347
 
12-12-1972
 
TSO Table V


352
 
3-13-1973
 
TSO Table III


351
 
3-27-1973
 
TSO Table III


359
 
1-8-1974
 
TSO Table V


371
 
9-9-1975
 
TSO Table II


372
 
9-9-1975
 
TSO Table II


384
 
1-11-1977
 
52.14


392
 
3-22-1977
 
TSO Table IV


16
 
1-25-1978
 
110.012


1
 
4-1-1978
 
10.05, 10.21, 10.22, 30.01, 30.04, 30.07, 30.20 - 30.23, 30.99, 31.03, 31.99,
32.02, 32.03, 32.15 - 32.17, 32.19, 32.20, 32.22, 32.99, 33.13, 34.02, 34.99,
50.02, 51.99, 52.09, 52.99, 53.99, 70.02 - 70.06, 70.99, 71.01 - 71.15,
71.99, 72.03 - 72.12, 72.99; Ch. 73, Schd. I; 90.01 - 90.03, 90.05, 90.06,
90.08 - 90.14, 151.105 - 151.125, 110.008, 110.011, 110.100 - 110.102,
110.999, 111.04, 111.15, 111.99, 112.99, 114.03, 114.04, 114.10, 114.12,
114.13, 114.15, 114.19, 114.20, 114.22, 114.23, 115.99, 116.99, 130.01 -
130.06, 130.11, 130.12, 130.15, 130.18, 130.20, 130.35 - 130.38, 130.40 -
130.44, 130.48, 130.99, 151.001, 151.002


3
 
4-11-1978
 
TSO Table IV


6
 
5-16-1978
 
114.12, 114.19, 114.20, 114.22


6
 
5-25-1978
 
114.06


8
 
6-29-1978
 
130.04


12
 
9-21-1978
 
130.14


18
 
3-15-1979
 
32.15


31
 
10-25-1979
 
32.21, 151.002 - 151.004, 151.006, 151.007, 151.009, 151.011 - 151.017,
151.030, 151.031, 151.034 - 151.036, 151.038, 151.040 - 151.043, 151.045,
151.046, 151.105 - 151.125, 151.140 - 151.143, 151.170 - 151.173, 151.999


34
 
11-15-1979
 
90.06


36
 
1-17-1980
 
151.002


35
 
1-31-1980
 
151.002, 151.011, 151.015


38
 
4-15-1980
 
TSO Table I


39
 
4-15-1980
 
TSO Table I


41
 
5-6-1980
 
TSO Table I


42
 
5-6-1980
 
TSO Table I


44
 
7-1-1980
 
TSO Table I


43
 
7-3-1980
 
111.10


45
 
9-2-1980
 
TSO Table I


46
 
9-2-1980
 
TSO Table I


50
 
1-1-1981
 
10.05


51
 
1-1-1981
 
30.02, 30.05, 32.15


53
 
2-26-1981
 
33.11


56
 
2-26-1981
 
130.09


59
 
5-14-1981
 
151.046


60
 
5-14-1981
 
151.034 - 151.036, 151.038


64
 
6-18-1981
 
114.02, 114.19, 114.22


65
 
6-18-1981
 
30.20 - 30.23


66
 
6-18-1981
 
130.04


67
 
6-18-1981
 
111.03, 111.05, 111.07


74
 
9-1-1981
 
TSO Table I


73
 
9-10-1981
 
91.03, 91.99


77
 
10-29-1981
 
52.09


75
 
11-12-1981
 
111.03


76
 
11-12-1981
 
50.03


69
 
11-19-1981
 
90.07


79
 
11-26-1981
 
110.003, 110.009


82
 
12-24-1981
 
34.03


87
 
2-16-1982
 
90.07


88
 
2-25-1982
 
110.012


89
 
2-25-1982
 
52.11


85
 
3-4-1982
 
110.080 - 110.089, 110.999


86
 
3-4-1982
 
110.115 - 110.118, 110.999


91
 
4-15-1982
 
130.03


93
 
5-27-1982
 
151.012, 151.013, 151.014


95
 
5-27-1982
 
90.07


94
 
7-8-1982
 
114.12


97
 
7-15-1982
 
151.012 - 151.014


100
 
9-7-1982
 
TSO Table VII


101
 
9-16-1982
 
130.16


102
 
9-16-1982
 
34.01


106
 
9-30-1982
 
151.007


107
 
10-28-1982
 
71.18; Ch. 74, Schd. I


96
 
11-11-1982
 
151.006, 151.011, 151.038, 151.043, 151.045, 151.046, 151.105 - 151.125,
151.040 - 151.043, 151.170 - 151.173


110
 
11-16-1982
 
TSO Table I


108
 
11-18-1982
 
130.45, 130.99


115
 
3-2-1983
 
111.03


116
 
4-14-1983
 
151.007


117
 
4-28-1983
 
151.043


118
 
6-30-1983
 
114.05


120
 
7-28-1983
 
10.05


121
 
8-4-1983
 
30.20 - 30.23, 34.04


124
 
8-4-1983
 
114.09, 114.12, 114.17, 114.21


126
 
8-4-1983
 
70.03


127
 
8-4-1983
 
71.18; Ch. 74, Schd. I


128
 
8-4-1983
 
130.03


129
 
8-11-1983
 
111.03


132
 
9-22-1983
 
151.105 - 151.125, 151.040 -  151.043


134
 
10-6-1983
 
34.05


137
 
10-27-1983
 
90.06


138
 
11-24-1983
 
151.045, 151.046


139
 
12-15-1983
 
30.20 - 30.23


140
 
12-29-1983
 
71.10


141
 
1-26-1984
 
70.99, 72.99


142
 
3-19-1984
 
TSO Table I


145
 
5-24-1984
 
130.45, 130.99


147
 
6-14-1984
 
110.025 - 110.027, 110.029 - 110.043


148
 
6-28-1984
 
31.05


149
 
8-7-1984
 
TSO Table I


151
 
9-25-1984
 
TSO Table I


150
 
10-4-1984
 
151.040


153
 
12-11-1984
 
TSO Table III


157
 
12-18-1984
 
TSO Table VII


154
 
12-27-1984
 
114.15


158
 
1-31-1985
 
151.002, 151.040, 151.046, 151.105 - 151.125, 151.040 - 151.043, 151.170 -
151.173


159
 
2-28-1985
 
151.002, 151.034 - 151.036, 151.038, 151.140 - 151.143


160
 
3-14-1985
 
114.02


162
 
3-19-1985
 
TSO Table I


163
 
3-28-1985
 
151.003


166
 
4-16-1985
 
TSO Table VII


167
 
4-16-1985
 
TSO Table I


170
 
6-27-1985
 
90.07


174
 
6-27-1985
 
71.16


171
 
7-4-1985
 
71.18; Ch. 74, Schd. I


172
 
7-16-1985
 
130.46


176
 
8-8-1985
 
53.08


177
 
8-22-1985
 
10.05


179
 
8-22-1985
 
114.02, 114.09, 114.12, 114.15


182
 
8-29-1985
 
130.36, 130.66


184
 
9-3-1985
 
TSO Table I


185
 
12-25-1985
 
151.140 - 151.143


213
 
1-20-1986
 
TSO Table I


186
 
1-30-1986
 
151.045


187
 
1-30-1986
 
72.01 - 72.12


215
 
3-3-1986
 
TSO Table I


191
 
3-4-1986
 
TSO Table I


189
 
3-13-1986
 
130.66


194
 
4-18-1986
 
TSO Table VII


193
 
5-29-1986
 
114.09


195
 
6-12-1986
 
114.02, 114.09


202
 
7-1-1986
 
91.03


199
 
7-10-1986
 
110.010, 110.025 - 110.027, 110.029 - 110.043


203
 
7-10-1986
 
151.038, 151.045, 151.046


201
 
7-17-1986
 
130.46


198
 
7-24-1986
 
114.01, 114.08, 114.09, 114.11, 114.12, 114.14, 114.15, 114.18


204
 
7-25-1986
 
TSO Table I


204
 
7-31-1986
 
151.004, 151.044


206
 
9-2-1986
 
TSO Table I


206
 
9-11-1986
 
151.002


207
 
10-16-1986
 
130.36


212
 
1-15-1987
 
110.013


215
 
3-12-1987
 
151.004


216
 
4-23-1987
 
110.013


214
 
5-14-1987
 
110.130 - 110.042


217
 
5-28-1987
 
71.18; Ch. 74, Schd. I


221
 
6-30-1987
 
111.03


225
 
7-27-1987
 
114.01


222
 
7-30-1987
 
32.19


223
 
8-13-1987
 
130.36


228
 
8-18-1987
 
TSO Table IV


224
 
8-27-1987
 
10.23


226
 
8-27-1987
 
114.02, 114.08, 114.12


229
 
8-27-1987
 
114.19


225
 
8-28-1987
 
111.06


232
 
10-6-1987
 
TSO Table I


234
 
10-6-1987
 
TSO Table I


230
 
10-22-1987
 
115.30 - 115.40


237
 
11-26-1987
 
114.15


238
 
12-24-1987
 
114.02


239
 
12-24-1987
 
114.16


240
 
2-26-1988
 
53.08


242
 
3-8-1988
 
TSO Table VII


244
 
6-17-1988
 
114.20


246
 
6-17-1988
 
151.002, 151.007, 151.009, 151.011 - 151.015, 151.038, 151.040, 151.043,
151.046, 151.105 - 151.125, 151.140 - 151.143


247
 
8-16-1988
 
TSO Table II


251
 
8-26-1988
 
151.008


252
 
9-20-1988
 
TSO Table I


253
 
10-14-1988
 
151.007, 151.105 - 151.125, 151.040 - 151.043


254
 
10-14-1988
 
10.05


255
 
10-14-1988
 
31.02


256
 
10-14-1988
 
114.14, 114.15, 114.19


259
 
11-11-1988
 
151.105 - 151.125, 151.040 - 151.043


261
 
1-31-1989
 
111.13


263
 
4-28-1989
 
90.04


243
 
5-3-1989
 
TSO Table I


264
 
5-26-1989
 
151.002, 151.030, 151.031, 151.034 - 151.036, 151.038, 151.040, 151.043 -
151.046, 151.143, 151.170 - 151.173


267
 
6-20-1989
 
TSO Table I


265
 
6-23-1989
 
130.09


268
 
7-21-1989
 
34.04


269
 
8-11-1989
 
110.013


271
 
8-25-1989
 
114.02


272
 
8-25-1989
 
151.105 - 151.125, 151.040 - 151.043


275
 
9-22-1989
 
151.002, 151.007, 151.040


273
 
10-13-1989
 
51.01 - 51.13


277
 
11-21-1989
 
114.12


276
 
12-1-1989
 
111.06


277
 
12-1-1989
 
114.15


278
 
12-1-1989
 
70.01


279
 
12-1-1989
 
151.030, 151.040, 151.043, 151.045, 151.046, 151.140 - 151.143, 151.170 -
151.173


280
 
12-5-1989
 
TSO Table IV


284
 
1-1-1990
 
32.18


274
 
1-2-1990
 
31.04


282
 
1-5-1990
 
151.007


281
 
2-1-1990
 
71.18; Ch. 74, Schd. I


288
 
2-16-1990
 
151.030


289
 
5-15-1990
 
TSO Table IV


290
 
6-5-1990
 
32.23


291
 
8-7-1990
 
TSO Table VII


283
 
8-17-1990
 
110.013


292
 
9-7-1990
 
151.040


293
 
10-19-1990
 
31.01


294
 
10-19-1990
 
32.15


296
 
10-19-1990
 
114.19


298
 
10-26-1990
 
130.03


297
 
11-30-1990
 
130.66


301
 
12-27-1990
 
TSO Table I


303
 
1-31-1991
 
TSO Table I


305
 
2-6-1991
 
32.23


307
 
3-1-1991
 
114.15


308
 
3-15-1991
 
TSO Table VII


309
 
5-24-1991
 
111.11, 111.12


311
 
6-14-1991
 
32.23


314
 
7-25-1991
 
130.36


313
 
8-15-1991
 
TSO Table I


316
 
8-29-1991
 
TSO Table IV


317
 
8-29-1991
 
10.05


318
 
10-10-1991
 
TSO Table I


320
 
10-31-1991
 
151.040


304
 
11-7-1991
 
151.030, 151.031


321
 
12-12-1991
 
71.18; Ch. 74, Schd. I


323
 
12-12-1991
 
32.23


324
 
12-12-1991
 
51.01 - 51.13


325
 
1-9-1992
 
111.06


326
 
1-9-1992
 
111.13


327
 
1-16-1992
 
114.16


328
 
1-30-1992
 
151.044


330
 
2-27-1992
 
51.01 - 51.13


332
 
4-16-1992
 
114.20


331
 
5-21-1992
 
TSO Table I


334
 
5-21-1992
 
151.046


335
 
6-4-1992
 
TSO Table I


336
 
7-23-1992
 
TSO Table I


337
 
7-23-1992
 
10.05, 10.23, 30.02, 30.03, 30.05, 30.20 - 30.23, 30.99, 31.05, 31.99, 32.02,
32.03, 32.15 - 32.18, 32.22, 32.99, 33.11, 33.13, 34.04, 34.99, 51.99, 52.09,
52.99, 53.99, 70.99, 71.18, 71.99, 72.01 - 72.12, 72.99; Ch. 74, Schd. I;
90.03, 90.07, 90.10, 91.99, 110.001, 110.002, 110.006, 110.007, 110.011,
110.025 - 110.027, 110.029 - 110.043, 110.080 - 110.089, 110.115 - 110.118,
110.130 - 110.142, 110.999, 111.10, 111.16, 111.99, 112.99, 114.01, 114.02,
114.04, 114.08 - 114.10, 114.12, 114.15, 114.99, 115.30 - 115.40, 115.99,
116.99, 130.02, 130.03, 130.06, 130.12, 130.14, 130.15, 130.44, 130.45,
130.99, 151.002, 151.009, 151.140 - 151.143, 151.155 - 151.157, 151.170 -
151.173, 151.999


338
 
8-6-1992
 
71.17, 90.05, 130.08, 130.11, 151.040 - 151.043, 151.105 - 151.125


339
 
8-6-1992
 
TSO Table I


341
 
8-27-1992
 
90.04


340
 
10-8-1992
 
32.02, 32.23


342
 
10-29-1992
 
151.044


343
 
10-29-1992
 
130.36


346
 
11-3-1992
 
71.18; Ch. 74, Schd. I


347
 
12-3-1992
 
TSO Table I


344
 
12-10-1992
 
TSO Table VII


348
 
12-10-1992
 
114.02


350
 
12-10-1992
 
71.18; Ch. 74, Schd. I


345
 
12-12-1992
 
130.66


349
 
12-15-1992
 
110.013


352
 
1-7-1993
 
110.999, 112.99, 115.99, 116.99


353
 
3-25-1993
 
TSO Table I


355
 
3-25-1993
 
32.15


354
 
4-15-1993
 
TSO Table I


365
 
6-24-1993
 
52.09


357
 
7-22-1993
 
130.47, 130.99


124
 
8-4-1993
 
114.02


360
 
8-5-1993
 
130.04


361
 
8-19-1993
 
111.03, 111.09


362
 
9-30-1993
 
111.03


363
 
10-28-1993
 
71.18; Ch. 74, Schd. I


364
 
11-25-1993
 
71.18; Ch. 74, Schd. I


267
 
1-13-1994
 
90.05


365
 
2-10-1994
 
130.13


370
 
2-10-1994
 
110.013


372
 
2-15-1994
 
32.02


371
 
3-3-1994
 
TSO Table I


376
 
4-28-1994
 
113.01, 113.11, 113.99


377
 
7-7-1994
 
151.001 - 151.004, 151.006 - 151.017, 151.125, 151.030 - 151.031, 151.033 -
151.036, 151.038, 151.040, 151.042 - 151.044, 151.046, 151.049, 151.050,
151.155 - 151.157, 151.173, 151.999


378
 
7-7-1994
 
TSO Table IV


379
 
7-7-1994
 
TSO Table I


380
 
7-28-1994
 
114.18


382
 
8-25-1994
 
TSO Table I


385
 
9-6-1994
 
113.01 - 113.11, 113.99


386
 
9-20-1994
 
TSO Table IV


384
 
10-20-1994
 
151.999, TSO Table I


389
 
11-24-1994
 
TSO Table I


391
 
12-15-1994
 
111.13


392
 
12-15-1994
 
111.12


393
 
12-15-1994
 
110.002


394
 
12-20-1994
 
32.15


395
 
12-29-1994
 
TSO Table I


396
 
1-12-1995
 
70.06; Ch. 73, Schd. I


397
 
1-12-1995
 
113.01 - 113.11, 113.99


398
 
2-16-1995
 
52.13


399
 
2-16-1995
 
TSO Table IV


402
 
2-16-1995
 
50.02


403
 
3-2-1995
 
90.05, 111.03, 130.20


404
 
3-2-1995
 
30.20 - 30.23


405
 
3-2-1995
 
TSO Table I


406
 
3-2-1995
 
32.02, 32.20


408
 
3-4-1995
 
52.14, 111.12, 111.13, 130.06, 130.99


407
 
3-11-1995
 
TSO Table I


408
 
3-7-1995
 
10.24, 33.11, 34.01, 52.11, 70.01


410
 
4-13-1995
 
34.01


412
 
4-27-1995
 
151.017


413
 
4-27-1995
 
TSO Table I


415
 
5-11-1995
 
TSO Table I


418
 
7-6-1995
 
TSO Table I


416
 
7-13-1995
 
130.04


420
 
7-27-1995
 
151.013


425
 
8-15-1995
 
TSO Table IV


421
 
8-24-1995
 
TSO Table I


422
 
8-24-1995
 
TSO Table I


423
 
8-24-1995
 
TSO Table I


424
 
8-24-1995
 
TSO Table I


426
 
9-5-1995
 
TSO Table IV


417
 
9-14-1995
 
TSO Table I


428
 
11-2-1995
 
TSO Table I


429
 
11-2-1995
 
151.014, 151.045, 151.046


431
 
11-2-1995
 
TSO Table I


388
 
11-10-1995
 
TSO Table I


432
 
11-21-1995
 
TSO Table IV


434
 
11-30-1995
 
151.013, 151.040, 151.105 - 151.125


435
 
11-30-1995
 
151.030 - 151.031, 151.033 - 151.036, 151.038, 151.040 - 151.043


439
 
11-30-1995
 
TSO Table II


433
 
12-14-1995
 
TSO Table I


436
 
12-14-1995
 
TSO Table I


440
 
12-28-1995
 
114.02, 114.09, 114.15


441
 
12-28-1995
 
110.013


442
 
1-11-1996
 
TSO Table I


443
 
1-11-1996
 
TSO Table I


438
 
1-18-1996
 
30.06


430
 
2-1-1996
 
151.105 - 151.125, 151.040 - 151.043


444
 
2-22-1996
 
110.003


445
 
2-22-1996
 
10.24


447
 
3-28-1996
 
TSO Table I


449
 
4-4-1996
 
TSO Table I


451
 
5-21-1996
 
130.65


454
 
6-4-1996
 
113.02, 113.06, 113.09, 113.10


459
 
7-1-1996
 
TSO Table I


460
 
7-8-1996
 
113.02, 113.06, 113.09, 113.10


461
 
8-6-1996
 
TSO Table I


453
 
8-22-1996
 
TSO Table VII


456
 
8-29-1996
 
32.15


462
 
9-26-1996
 
71.18; Ch. 74, Schd. I


463
 
9-26-1996
 
53.09


464
 
10-1-1996
 
TSO Table I


466
 
10-17-1996
 
TSO Table I


465
 
12-12-1996
 
TSO Table I


467
 
12-19-1996
 
151.002, 151.036, 151.038


470
 
1-1-1997
 
151.007, 151.012


474
 
2-6-1997
 
151.002, 151.034 - 151.036, 151.038, 151.040, 151.042 - 151.046


473
 
2-13-1997
 
TSO Table I


476
 
2-13-1997
 
TSO Table I


477
 
2-27-1997
 
TSO Table I


481
 
4-17-1997
 
TSO Table I


480
 
4-24-1997
 
151.009, 151.048


482
 
5-5-1997
 
151.030, 151.031, 151.033 - 151.036, 151.038, 151.042 - 151.044


483
 
5-6-1997
 
TSO Table I


469
 
5-15-1997
 
TSO Table I


485
 
6-12-1997
 
151.040


486
 
6-12-1997
 
114.02


487
 
7-10-1997
 
151.112


489
 
7-1-1997
 
TSO Table I


490
 
7-10-1997
 
51.01


488
 
7-17-1997
 
151.046


493
 
8-14-1997
 
TSO Table I


494
 
8-14-1997
 
151.007


495
 
8-14-1997
 
151.007


496
 
8-21-1997
 
151.034, 151.035, 151.038


497
 
9-4-1997
 
151.002


498
 
9-4-1997
 
151.043


499
 
9-4-1997
 
TSO Table I


501
 
9-18-1997
 
151.007, 151.012, 151.030 - 151.031, 151.033 - 151.036, 151.038


503
 
10-16-1997
 
TSO Table I


500
 
11-13-1997
 
151.065, 151.072


504
 
11-20-1997
 
71.18; Ch. 74, Schd. I


506
 
12-2-1997
 
151.156


508
 
12-4-1997
 
TSO Table I


506
 
12-2-1997
 
151.010


505
 
1-1-1998
 
151.002


507
 
1-1-1998
 
TSO Table I


509
 
1-1-1998
 
31.04


510
 
2-5-1998
 
TSO Table I


513
 
2-5-1998
 
114.09


514
 
2-5-1998
 
151.046


511
 
3-5-1998
 
130.67, 130.68, 130.99


512
 
5-7-1998
 
30.08


517
 
5-7-1998
 
113.08


516
 
6-25-1998
 
TSO Table I


518
 
7-2-1998
 
151.007


519
 
7-2-1998
 
110.055 - 110.067, 110.999


520
 
7-16-1998
 
151.002


522
 
8-13-1998
 
130.19


521
 
9-3-1998
 
151.048


527
 
9-24-1998
 
110.055 - 110.067


256
 
10-14-1998
 
114.07


524
 
10-22-1998
 
TSO Table I


528
 
10-29-1998
 
151.030, 151.031, 151.033 - 151.036, 151.038, 151.042 - 151.046


530
 
10-29-1998
 
TSO Table I


533
 
12-17-1998
 
70.07, 70.99


525
 
12-31-1998
 
151.040


534
 
12-31-1998
 
TSO Table I


535
 
12-31-1998
 
TSO Table I


532
 
1-28-1999
 
TSO Table I


536
 
1-28-1999
 
TSO Table I


537
 
2-18-1999
 
151.065, 151.068, 151.073


538
 
2-18-1999
 
151.011


540
 
2-25-1999
 
TSO Table I


542
 
3-25-1999
 
110.061, 110.067


543
 
4-1-1999
 
111.17, 111.99


544
 
4-15-1999
 
151.036, 151.037


546
 
5-6-1999
 
151.013, 151.140 - 151.143


549
 
6-3-1999
 
151.002, 151.030, 151.031, 151.046


547
 
6-10-1999
 
151.047


550
 
6-10-1999
 
111.03


553
 
7-15-1999
 
TSO Table IV


554
 
7-6-1999
 
151.002, 151.013, 151.040, 151.048


555
 
7-15-1999
 
TSO Table I


556
 
9-30-1999
 
TSO Table I


558
 
9-30-1999
 
111.14


557
 
10-14-1999
 
150.01 - 150.21, 150.35 - 150.40, 150.55 - 150.66, 150.99


560
 
10-28-1999
 
71.18; Ch. 74, Schd. I


559
 
11-11-1999
 
TSO Table I


562
 
11-11-1999
 
130.06, 130.99


561
 
11-25-1999
 
34.04


563
 
11-25-1999
 
151.002, 151.034 - 151.036, 151.038 - 151.047, 151.111


564
 
12-30-1999
 
33.12


687
 
2-1-2000
 
TSO Table I


565
 
2-24-2000
 
TSO Table I


567
 
3-16-2000
 
151.085, 151.087 - 151.092, 151.094


566
 
3-30-2000
 
130.07


568
 
5-25-2000
 
151.086, 151.089, 151.093


571
 
6-27-2000
 
111.03


572
 
7-27-2000
 
151.030


573
 
8-10-2000
 
TSO Table I, TSO Table IV


575
 
8-24-2000
 
TSO Table IV


569
 
8-31-2000
 
TSO Table I


577
 
9-14-2000
 
TSO Table I


581
 
10-5-2000
 
130.06, 130.99


583
 
10-26-2000
 
51.07


584
 
11-6-2000
 
TSO Table I


586
 
11-15-2000
 
151.066


585
 
11-16-2000
 
114.02


589
 
1-25-2001
 
70.99, 72.03, 72.99


588
 
12-28-2001
 
TSO Table I


590
 
2-1-2001
 
111.08


591
 
3-1-2001
 
111.03


592
 
3-1-2001
 
TSO Table I


593
 
3-1-2001
 
TSO Table I


594
 
3-15-2001
 
51.03, 51.09


595
 
4-26-2001
 
TSO Table I


597
 
4-26-2001
 
151.043


596
 
5-3-2001
 
TSO Table I


599
 
6-14-2001
 
130.06, 130.99


600
 
6-28-2001
 
151.034


601
 
6-28-2001
 
151.045


602
 
7-26-2001
 
TSO Table I


603
 
8-2-2001
 
151.038


604
 
8-2-2001
 
TSO Table I


605
 
8-16-2001
 
TSO Table VII


607
 
8-16-2001
 
TSO Table VII


608
 
8-30-2001
 
150.05


609
 
8-30-2001
 
151.002, 151.141


610
 
8-30-2001
 
10.25


611
 
9-27-2001
 
TSO Table I


612
 
10-11-2001
 
TSO Table I


614
 
10-25-2001
 
71.18; Ch. 74, Schd. I


588
 
12-28-2001
 
TSO Table I


617
 
1-24-2002
 
150.03


618
 
2-28-2002
 
111.14


619
 
2-28-2002
 
TSO Table I


621
 
3-21-2002
 
114.99


622
 
3-28-2002
 
TSO Table I


624
 
4-11-2002
 
TSO Table I


625
 
4-25-2002
 
150.05


628
 
4-25-2002
 
32.22


626
 
5-30-2002
 
151.048


629
 
6-12-2002
 
130.36


629
 
6-13-2002
 
130.10, 130.99


631
 
6-27-2002
 
151.111


632
 
6-27-2002
 
TSO Table I


633
 
7-18-2002
 
110.999


634
 
7-18-2002
 
114.99


635
 
8-15-2002
 
TSO Table I


636
 
8-15-2002
 
TSO Table I


637
 
8-15-2002
 
TSO Table I


576
 
8-24-2000
 
TSO Table II


639
 
9-12-2002
 
151.002


638
 
9-19-2002
 
151.009


640
 
9-26-2002
 
TSO Table I


641
 
9-26-2002
 
TSO Table VII


709
 
9-26-2002
 
TSO Table VII


643
 
11-14-2002
 
151.007


645
 
11-14-2002
 
TSO Table I


649
 
12-26-2002
 
130.36, 130.99


650
 
12-26-2002
 
TSO Table I


648
 
1-2-2003
 
151.141


651
 
1-16-2003
 
150.11


652
 
1-30-2003
 
TSO Table II


654
 
2-27-2003
 
TSO Table I


657
 
3-20-2003
 
TSO Table II


658
 
3-27-2003
 
TSO Table I


661
 
3-27-2003
 
TSO Table I


660
 
4-10-2003
 
130.03


663
 
4-15-2003
 
130.66


664
 
5-15-2003
 
TSO Table I


665
 
5-29-2003
 
130.07


666
 
5-29-2003
 
111.15


667
 
5-29-2003
 
TSO Table I


668
 
5-29-2003
 
TSO Table I


669
 
6-12-2003
 
TSO Table I


671
 
6-26-2003
 
TSO Table I


672
 
6-26-2003
 
151.046


673
 
6-26-2003
 
TSO Table I


674
 
6-26-2003
 
TSO Table I


675
 
7-10-2003
 
TSO Table I


676
 
8-14-2003
 
111.01


677
 
8-28-2003
 
151.108


678
 
8-28-2003
 
151.010, 151.012


679
 
8-28-2003
 
TSO Table II


675
 
7-10-2003
 
TSO Table I


683
 
10-30-2003
 
TSO Table I


684
 
10-30-2003
 
TSO Table I


685
 
10-30-2003
 
TSO Table I


686
 
11-13-2003
 
TSO Table I


689
 
11-27-2003
 
151.012 - 151.014


691
 
11-27-2003
 
TSO Table I


690
 
12-4-2003
 
TSO Table IV


693
 
2-5-2004
 
130.10, 130.99


694
 
2-5-2004
 
151.015


695
 
2-5-2004
 
TSO Table I


697
 
3-11-2004
 
151.012


698
 
4-15-2004
 
130.10, 130.99


701
 
4-15-2004
 
32.15


700
 
5-6-2004
 
151.040


704
 
5-27-2004
 
151.037


705
 
5-27-2004
 
TSO Table I


706
 
6-3-2004
 
TSO Table II


707
 
6-17-2004
 
TSO Table I


708
 
7-29-2004
 
151.013, 151.040


710
 
7-29-2004
 
150.12, 150.13


711
 
8-26-2004
 
TSO Table I


712
 
8-26-2004
 
TSO Table I


713
 
8-26-2004
 
TSO Table II


717
 
12-30-2004
 
TSO Table I


722
 
1-27-2005
 
TSO Table I


719
 
2-10-2005
 
130.03


720
 
2-10-2005
 
150.65


724
 
2-10-2005
 
151.040


723
 
3-17-2005
 
TSO Table I


726
 
3-24-2005
 
71.14


727
 
4-14-2005
 
TSO Table I


729
 
4-28-2005
 
TSO Table I


730
 
5-12-2005
 
111.05, 111.06


731
 
6-2-2005
 
TSO Table I


732
 
7-14-2005
 
TSO Table I


734
 
7-28-2005
 
TSO Table II


735
 
7-28-2005
 
TSO Table I


736
 
9-8-2005
 
151.013, 151.040


740
 
10-27-2005
 
71.18; Ch. 74, Schd. I


739
 
11-10-2005
 
TSO Table I


741
 
12-1-2005
 
151.030, 151.031, 151.033, 151.035 - 151.044


737
 
1-1-2006
 
31.04


742
 
1-26-2006
 
30.21


746
 
2-2-2006
 
TSO Table I


745
 
2-23-2006
 
TSO Table I


749
 
3-16-2006
 
150.65


750
 
3-30-2006
 
130.45, 130.99


751
 
3-30-2006
 
TSO Table I


752
 
3-30-2006
 
150.11


753
 
3-30-2006
 
151.155 - 151.157


755
 
4-27-2006
 
TSO Table I


754
 
4-27-2006
 
TSO Table IV


756
 
5-11-2006
 
112.08


758
 
5-11-2006
 
TSO Table I


757
 
6-15-2006
 
TSO Table I


762
 
6-15-2006
 
71.09


763
 
6-15-2006
 
151.033


761
 
6-29-2006
 
TSO Table II


765
 
7-6-2006
 
TSO Table I


784
 
7-26-2007
 
TSO Table I


764
 
8-3-2006
 
72.25 - 72.32


766
 
8-17-2006
 
52.05, 52.10


768
 
8-24-2006
 
150.65


769
 
10-26-2006
 
33.01 - 33.11, 33.13


770
 
10-26-2006
 
71.18; Ch. 74, Schd. I


771
 
10-26-2006
 
151.032


773
 
12-14-2006
 
111.14


774
 
12-28-2006
 
32.23


778
 
5-17-2007
 
151.002


777
 
5-31-2007
 
130.11


780
 
6-14-2007
 
90.16, 111.03, 111.04, 151.010


783
 
6-28-2007
 
TSO Table IV


779
 
7-12-2007
 
114.01, 114.02, 114.05, 114.06, 114.09 - 114.14, 114.18, 114.23


787
 
10-25-2007
 
71.18; Ch. 74, Schd. I


786
 
11-21-2007
 
111.03


789
 
1-3-2008
 
151.155 - 151.157


790
 
3-20-2008
 
151.110


793
 
3-27-2008
 
151.002, 151.030 - 151.034, 151.038


792
 
4-17-2008
 
150.64


798
 
5-20-2008
 
150.55


796
 
5-29-2008
 
111.03


799
 
7-3-2008
 
TSO Table I


801
 
7-10-2008
 
32.15


802
 
7-10-2008
 
114.11


800
 
7-31-2008
 
111.01, 111.13, 111.99


804
 
8-28-2008
 
111.03


805
 
9-11-2008
 
150.09, 150.11, 150.14, 150.36, 150.39, 150.40, 150.64


806
 
9-11-2008
 
130.17


808
 
9-25-2008
 
151.002


811
 
12-24-2008
 
110.035


812
 
2-12-2009
 
110.033, 110.037, 110.999


813
 
2-26-2009
 
151.031 - 151.034, 151.037 - 151.044


814
 
2-26-2009
 
TSO Table I


815
 
3-26-2009
 
151.007, 151.034, 151.036, 151.105 - 151.125, 151.040 - 151.043


816
 
4-30-2009
 
151.045


817
 
4-30-2009
 
TSO Table I


818
 
4-30-2009
 
TSO Table I


819
 
5-14-2009
 
130.09


820
 
5-14-2009
 
111.03


823
 
7-30-2009
 
130.20


822
 
8-6-2009
 
151.005, 151.069


825
 
8-27-2009
 
51.01


826
 
12-10-2009
 
130.15


830
 
2-25-2010
 
151.040


831
 
3-11-2010
 
110.999


832
 
5-13-2010
 
114.16


835
 
9-2-2010
 
TSO Table I


838
 
9-30-2010
 
71.18; Ch. 74, Schd. I


839
 
12-16-2010
 
130.36


841
 
12-30-2010
 
110.055, 110.061, 110.064, 110.999


844
 
3-24-2011
 
30.22


845
 
5-12-2011
 
113.06


846
 
6-16-2011
 
114.14


847
 
6-30-2011
 
151.015


848
 
7-14-2011
 
113.05


849
 
10-27-2011
 
71.18; Ch. 74, Schd. I


851
 
12-29-2011
 
110.034


852
 
3-29-2012
 
32.01


853
 
3-29-2012
 
30.02


855
 
5-17-2012
 
111.03


857
 
8-23-2012
 
TSO Table I


856
 
9-6-2012
 
TSO Table I


859
 
9-6-2012
 
151.002


860
 
9-13-2012
 
116.01 - 116.07


858
 
11-29-2012
 
TSO Table I


862
 
12-27-2012
 
91.01 - 91.03, 114.11


865
 
3-5-2013
 
151.002, 151.012, 151.034, 151.036, 151.040


867
 
4-11-2013
 
TSO Table IV


868
 
5-7-2013
 
TSO Table I


870
 
6-4-2013
 
111.18, 111.99


871
 
8-20-2013
 
30.08


872
 
8-20-2013
 
31.04


873
 
10-1-2013
 
110.155 - 110.163, 110.999


874
 
10-1-2013
 
110.164


875
 
10-1-2013
 
TSO Table I


876
 
11-19-2013
 
151.040


877
 
12-3-2013
 
151.002, 151.013, 151.014, 151.039 - 151.041, 151.043, 151.044, 151.046,
151.047, 151.140 - 151.143


880
 
1-7-2014
 
32.15


883
 
5-20-2014
 
151.113


884
 
5-20-2014
 
151.112


887
 
5-20-2014
 
32.15


889
 
6-17-2014
 
112.10


885
 
7-17-2014
 
130.04


886
 
7-17-2014
 
112.01 - 112.09


890
 
8-19-2014
 
110.064


891
 
9-16-2014
 
114.01, 114.06, 114.09, 114.15, 114.35 - 114.37


893
 
10-7-2014
 
51.03, 51.04


894
 
10-7-2014
 
130.03


895
 
10-7-2014
 
116.06


896
 
11-18-2014
 
151.108


898
 
12-16-2014
 
151.185 - 151.200


899
 
1-20-2015
 
151.035


901
 
2-17-2015
 
151.007


902
 
2-17-2015
 
151.187, 151.189


903
 
3-17-2015
 
151.030, 151.031, 151.033 - 151.036, 151.038, 151.040, 151.042 - 151.044


904
 
5-19-2015
 
114.36


905
 
6-2-2015
 
110.185 - 110.189, 110.999


907
 
6-16-2015
 
151.009


908
 
8-18-2015
 
31.04


909
 
8-18-2015
 
151.002, 151.044 - 151.046


910
 
8-18-2015
 
30.09


911
 
8-18-2015
 
31.06


912
 
9-1-2015
 
151.040


914
 
9-1-2015
 
151.142


915
 
9-1-2015
 
151.013, 151.039 - 151.041, 151.043, 151.044


917
 
10-6-2015
 
50.02


918
 
10-6-2015
 
72.03


919
 
10-20-2015
 
Adopting Ordinance


920
 
12-1-2015
 
53.03


921
 
10-20-2015
 
TSO Table I


922
 
11-17-2015
 
151.002


923
 
11-17-2015
 
151.112


925
 
12-15-2015
 
151.051


926
 
2-2-2016
 
TSO Table I


927
 
1-19-2016
 
151.042, 151.043, 151.044


928
 
3-2-2016
 
110.187, 110.190


929
 
2-16-2016
 
TSO Table I


930
 
3-15-2016
 
TSO Table I


931
 
3-15-2016
 
TSO Table I


933
 
6-21-2016
 
151.190, 151.194


934
 
6-21-2016
 
90.08, 151.013


936
 
6-21-2016
 
TSO Table I


937
 
7-5-2016
 
30.08


939
 
8-3-2016
 
TSO Table VII


940
 
8-16-2016
 
151.007


946
 
10-4-2016
 
Ch. 74, Schd. I


948
 
11-1-2016
 
TSO Table VII


950
 
11-15-2016
 
151.007, 151.034


951
 
11-15-2016
 
151.001


951
 
12-20-2016
 
150.22, 151.018


953
 
12-20-2016
 
151.002, 151.008, 151.011


956
 
2-21-2017
 
151.002, 151.013, 151.040


959
 
3-21-2017
 
151.040


960
 
4-18-2017
 
TSO Table I


961
 
5-2-2017
 
32.15


963
 
7-5-2017
 
150.65


965
 
6-20-2017
 
TSO Table I


966
 
7-5-2017
 
151.044


968
 
9-5-2017
 
TSO Table I


971
 
10-3-2017
 
90.30 - 90.58, 90.99


972
 
10-17-2017
 
54.01 - 54.05, 54.14 - 54.17, 54.30 - 54.33, 54.45 - 54.54, 54.99


973
 
10-17-2017
 
TSO Table I


974
 
11-21-2017
 
TSO Table I


 
 
 
 
 




 


