7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 1/200
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Sleepy Eye, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including
ordinance 140, 2nd Series, passed October 10, 2017. Ordinances of the City adopted after said
ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or
inconsistent therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of
the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 36, 2ND SERIES
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING
THE CITY CODE OF SLEEPY EYE, MINNESOTA
The City of Sleepy Eye does ordain:
Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the City Code of the City of Sleepy
Eye, Minnesota, containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the
changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of the City, shall be
accepted in all courts without question as the Official Code and Law of the City as enacted by the City
Council of the City of Sleepy Eye.
Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose-leaf type of
binding together with the continuous supplement service, whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions of the Official City
Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the proper place in the official copy which
shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk, certified as to correctness and available for
inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly open.
Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this Official City Code shall be considered as
a continuation of said ordinance provision and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately
eliminated by the governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in said Official City Code. All ordinances of a special nature, such
as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances
shall continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the City
Code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the Official City Code.
Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter
or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to the extent of such conflict,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 2/200
hereby repealed.
Section 6: This Ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be in full force and effect from and
after its passage and approval in accordance with law, as printed and published in book form by order
of the City Council.
Passed by the City Council for the City of Sleepy Eye, Minnesota, on December 3, 1996.
/s/ James J. Broich, Mayor
I hereby certify and attest that the City Council of the City of Sleepy Eye, Minnesota, did pass the
above Ordinance on December 3, 1996, in accordance with the Charter provisions and State laws
provided therefor.
Dated: December 3, 1996.
/s/ Edwin V. Treml, City Clerk
Published in the Sleepy Eye Herald Dispatch, Sleepy Eye, Minnesota, on December 12, 1996.
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE; DEFINITIONS
1-1-1: APPLICATION, AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
A. Application Of Provisions: The provisions of this chapter and chapter 2 of this title shall be
applicable to all the chapters, sections, subsections, paragraphs and provisions in this Code, and
this Code shall apply to all persons and property within the City of Sleepy Eye, and within such
adjacent area as may be stated in specific provisions. (1988 Code § 1.01)
B. Authority And Purpose: Pursuant to authority granted by Charter, this title, and title 2, "Boards,
Commissions And Committees", of this Code are enacted so as to set down for enforcement the
government and good order of the City by and through the City Council. (1988 Code § 2.01)
1-1-2: WORD USAGE; MEANINGS:
As used in this Code, words of the male gender shall include the female and neuter, and the singular
shall include the plural and the plural shall include the singular. (1988 Code § 1.07)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 3/200
1-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the language or context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended, the following
words, terms and phrases, for the purpose of every chapter, section, subsection, paragraph and
provision of this Code, shall have the following meanings and inclusions:
CITY: The City of Sleepy Eye, Minnesota, acting by or through its duly authorized representative.
CITY CLERK: The person duly appointed by the City Council and acting in such capacity.
CONVICTION: Either of the following accepted and recorded by the court:
A. A plea of guilty; or,
B. A verdict of guilty by a jury or a finding of guilty by the court.
COUNCIL AND CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Sleepy Eye, Minnesota.
CRIME: Conduct which is prohibited by ordinance and for which the actor may be sentenced to
imprisonment or fine.
EX OFFICIO MEMBER: A person who is not counted for the purpose of determining a quorum, and
has no right to vote, but shall have the right and obligation (within his discretion) to speak to any
question coming before the board, commission or other deliberative body of which he is such member.
FISCAL YEAR: The same as the calendar year, January 1 through December 31.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb line or,
if no curb, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways or streets which join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining
at any other angle may come in conflict.
MAY/SHALL: "May" is permissive, "shall" is mandatory.
MISDEMEANOR: The crime for which a sentence of not more than ninety (90) days or a fine of not
more than seven hundred dollars ($700.00), or both, may be imposed.
ORDINANCE: An ordinance duly adopted by the City Council of Sleepy Eye, Minnesota.
PERSON: Includes all firms, partnerships, associations, corporations and natural persons.
PETTY MISDEMEANOR: An offense, which does not constitute a crime, and for which a sentence of
a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) may be imposed.
POLICE OFFICER AND PEACE OFFICER: Every officer, including special police, authorized to direct
or regulate traffic, keep the peace, and appointed or employed for the purpose of law enforcement.
PREMISES: Any lot, piece or parcel of land within a continuous boundary whether publicly or privately
owned, occupied or possessed.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: All property not included within the definition of public property or public place.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 4/200
PUBLIC PROPERTY AND PUBLIC PLACE: Any place, property or premises dedicated to public use,
owned by the City, occupied by the City as a lessee, or occupied by the City as a street by reason of
an easement, including, but not limited to, streets, parks or parking lots so owned or occupied.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the
event a street includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as used herein shall
refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
STREET: The entire area dedicated to public use, or contained in an easement or other conveyance
or grant to the City, and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, boulevards, sidewalks, alleys,
and other public property between lateral property lines in which a roadway lies.
VIOLATE: Includes failure to comply with.
WRITTEN AND IN WRITING: Any mode of representing words and letters in the English language.
(1988 Code § 1.02; amd. 1996 Code)
1-1-4: REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICIAL:
Wherever an appointed public official is referred to in this Code, the reference shall include such
public official or his designee. (1988 Code § 1.11)
1-1-5: CITATION:
This codification of the ordinances of the City of Sleepy Eye shall henceforth be known as this Code
and cited thus: "City Code, Sec. ". (1988 Code § 1.08)
1-1-6: CAPTIONS:
A title or caption to or in any chapter, section, subsection, subparagraph or other provision of this
Code is for convenience only and shall not limit, expand, or otherwise alter or control the content,
wording or interpretation thereof. (1988 Code § 1.10)
1-1-7: SEVERABILITY:
Every chapter, section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this Code shall be, and is hereby
declared, severable from every other such chapter, section, subsection, paragraph or provision and if
any part or portion of any of them shall be held invalid, it shall not affect or invalidate any other
chapter, section, subsection, paragraph or provision. (1988 Code § 1.05)
Chapter 2
GENERAL PENALTY
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 5/200
1-2-1: PENALTY:
A. Violation A Misdemeanor Or A Petty Misdemeanor:
1. Every person violates a chapter, section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this Code when
he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is
thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as for a
misdemeanor, or as for a petty misdemeanor, except as otherwise stated in specific provisions
herein, as set forth in the specific chapter in which the section, subsection, paragraph or
provision violated appears. Upon conviction for a crime, the actor may be convicted of either the
crime charged if it is a misdemeanor, or a petty misdemeanor as an included offense necessarily
proved if the misdemeanor charge were proved. (1988 Code § 1.03)
2. Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he
performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is
thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a
misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. (1988 Code § 2.99)
B. Penalties For Each Offense: When a penalty or forfeiture is provided for the violation of a chapter,
section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this Code, such penalty or forfeiture shall be
construed to be for each such violation. (1988 Code § 1.09)
1-2-2: ACTS OR OMISSIONS OTHERWISE UNLAWFUL:
This Code does not authorize an act or omission otherwise prohibited by law. (1988 Code § 1.04)
1-2-3: PAYMENT OF FINES AND PENALTIES INTO CITY TREASURY:
All fines, forfeitures and penalties recovered for the violation of any ordinance, charter, rule or
regulation of the City shall be paid into the City Treasury by the court or officer thereof receiving such
monies. Payment shall be made in the manner, at the time, and in the proportion provided by law.
(1988 Code § 1.06)
Chapter 3
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
1-3-1: OFFICIAL CITY SEAL:
All contracts to which the City is a party shall be sealed with the City Seal. Said seal shall be kept in
the custody of the City Clerk and affixed by him. The official City Seal shall be a circular disc having
engraved thereupon "City of Sleepy Eye" and such other words, figures or emblems as the Council
may, by resolution, designate. (1988 Code § 2.02)
1-3-2: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 6/200
At its first meeting each year, the City Council shall designate the official newspaper which shall be the
legal newspaper for the Municipality. (1996 Code)
Chapter 4
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
1-4-1: SALARIES OF MAYOR AND CITY COUNCILPERSONS:
Salaries of the Mayor and Council are hereby fixed as follows, which amounts are deemed
reasonable:
A. Salaries: Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 415.11, the salary of the Mayor is hereby fixed at four
thousand dollars ($4,000.00) per year and the salaries of the Councilpersons are fixed at three
thousand two hundred dollars ($3,200.00) per year.
B. Effective Date: This salary schedule shall take effect on January 1, 2007. (Ord. 86, 2nd Series, 12-
12-2006)
Chapter 5
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-5-1: PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Council may, by resolution, establish personnel rules setting forth the rights, duties and
responsibilities of employees. Such rules may from time-to-time be amended. (1988 Code § 2.71)
1-5-2: INTERIM EMERGENCY SUCCESSION:
A. Purpose: Due to the existing possibility of a nuclear attack or a natural disaster requiring a
declaration of a state of emergency, it is found urgent and necessary to ensure the continuity of
duly elected and lawful leadership of the City to provide for the continuity of the government and
the emergency interim succession of key governmental officials by providing a method for
temporary emergency appointments to their offices.
B. Succession To Local Offices: In the event of a nuclear attack upon the United States or a natural
disaster affecting the vicinity of the City, the Mayor, Council and City Clerk shall be forthwith
notified by any one of said persons and by any means available to gather at the City Hall. In the
event that safety or convenience dictates, an alternative place of meeting may be designated.
Those gathered shall proceed as follows:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 7/200
1. By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of number, they shall elect a Chairman
and Secretary to preside and keep minutes, respectively.
2. They shall review and record the specific facts relating to the nuclear attack or natural disaster
and injuries to persons or damage to property already done, or the imminence thereof.
3. They may, based on such facts, declare a state of emergency.
4. By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of number, they shall fill all positions on
the Council, (including the Office of Mayor) of those persons upon whom notice could not be
served or who are unable to be present.
5. Such interim successor shall serve until such time as the duly elected official is again available
and returns to his position, or the state of emergency has passed and a successor is designated
and qualifies as required by law, whichever shall occur first.
C. Duties Of Interim Emergency Council: The Interim Emergency Council shall exercise the powers
and duties of their offices, and appoint other key government officials to serve during the
emergency. (1988 Code § 2.07)
1-5-3: CITY CLERK, FACSIMILE SIGNATURE:
The City Clerk is hereby authorized to request a depository of City funds to honor an order for
payment when such instrument bears a facsimile of his signature, and to charge the same to the
account designated thereon or upon which it is drawn, as effectively as though it were his manually
written signature. Such authority is granted only for the purpose of permitting such officer an economy
of time and effort. (1988 Code § 2.05)
Chapter 6
CITY DEPARTMENTS
1-6-1: DEPARTMENTS GENERALLY:
A. Appointment: All department heads and employees shall be appointed by the Council. All
appointments shall be for an indeterminate term.
B. Compensation: Except as otherwise provided by Charter or this Code, all wage and salary scales
shall be fixed and determined by the Council.
C. Table Of Organization And Lines Of Responsibility: The Council may by resolution adopt, amend,
and from time to time revise, a table of organization and define lines of responsibility and authority
for the efficient governmental organization of the City. (1988 Code § 2.30)
1-6-2: POLICE DEPARTMENT:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 8/200
A Police Department is hereby established. The head of this department shall be known as the Chief
of Police, and the number of additional members and employees of the Police Department shall be
determined by the Council which may be changed from time-to-time. The Mayor shall have, without
the approval of the Council, authority to appoint additional members of the Police Department for
temporary duty when in his judgment an emergency exists for the preservation of life or property. The
Chief of Police and all members of the Police Department shall have the powers and authority of
police officers generally and shall perform such duties as are required of them by the Council or by
law. The Chief of Police shall have overall supervision and management of the Police Department and
custody of all property used and maintained for the purposes of said department. The Chief of Police
shall make and file such reports as may be required by the Council. (1988 Code § 2.31)
1-6-3: FIRE DEPARTMENT:
A Volunteer Fire Department under the control of the Council is hereby established. The size,
composition and remuneration shall all be established by resolution of the Council, which may be
changed from time-to-time by subsequent resolution. The Council shall also establish written rules and
regulations of the Department, a copy of which shall be distributed to each of its members. The
members of the Department shall elect their own Chief, Assistant Chief, and other officers subject to
confirmation and approval by the Council. The Chief of the Fire Department shall have general
superintendence of the Fire Department and the custody of all property used and maintained for the
purposes of said department. He shall see that the same are kept in proper order and that all rules
and regulations and all provisions of the laws of the State and ordinances of the City relative to a Fire
Department and to the prevention and extinguishment of fires are duly observed. He shall superintend
the preservation of all property endangered by fire and shall have control and direction of all persons
engaged in preserving such property. In case of the absence or disability of the Chief for any cause,
the Assistant Chief shall exercise all the powers, perform all the duties and be subject to all the
responsibilities of the Chief. The Chief of the Fire Department shall make and file such reports as may
be requested by the Council. (1988 Code § 2.32)
1-6-4: LEGAL DEPARTMENT:
A Legal Department is hereby established. The Council shall appoint a City Attorney, who shall be
head of the Legal Department, together with such assistants as may be necessary who shall serve at
the pleasure of the Council. The City Attorney shall perform such duties as are required of him by law
or referred to him by the Council. It shall be the official duty of the City Attorney to act as "revisor of
ordinances". (1988 Code § 2.33)
Chapter 7
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS; HEARINGS
1-7-1: RIGHT TO ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL:
If any person shall be aggrieved by any administrative decision of the City Clerk or any other City
official, or any board or commission not having within its structure an appellate procedure, such
aggrieved person is entitled to a full hearing before the Council upon serving a written request therefor
upon the Mayor and City Clerk at least five (5) days prior to any regular Council meeting. Such
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 9/200
request shall contain a general statement setting forth the administrative decision to be challenged by
the appellant. At such hearing the appellant may present any evidence he deems pertinent to the
appeal, but the City shall not be required to keep a verbatim record of the proceedings. The Mayor, or
other officer presiding at the hearing, may, in the interest of justice or to comply with time requirements
and on his own motion or the motion of the appellant, the City Clerk, or a member of the Council,
adjourn the hearing to a more convenient time or place, but such time or place shall be fixed and
determined before adjournment so as to avoid the necessity for formal notice of reconvening. (1988
Code § 2.03)
1-7-2: RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR APPEALS AND OTHER HEARINGS:
The Council may adopt by resolution certain written rules of procedure to be followed in all
administrative appeals and other hearings to be held before the Council or other bodies authorized to
hold hearings and determine questions therein presented. Such rules of procedure shall be effective
thirty (30) days after adoption and shall be for the purpose of establishing and maintaining order and
decorum in the proceedings. (1988 Code § 2.04)
Chapter 8
ACCOUNTS, CLAIMS AND DEMANDS
1-8-1: GENERALLY:
Except as to an annual salary, fees of jurors or witnesses fixed by law, or wages or salaries of
employees which have been fixed on an hourly, daily, weekly or monthly basis by the Council and
which by law are authorized to be paid on a payroll basis, any account, claim or demand against the
City which can be itemized in the ordinary course of business, the Council shall not audit or allow the
claim until the person claiming payment, or his agent, reduces it to writing, in items, and signs a
declaration to the effect that such account, claim or demand is just and correct and that no part of it
has been paid. (1988 Code § 2.06)
1-8-2: DISCRETIONARY EXCEPTION:
The Council may, in its discretion, allow a claim prepared by the City Clerk prior to such declaration by
the claimant if the declaration is made on the check by which the claim is paid. (1988 Code § 2.06)
1-8-3: FORM OF DECLARATION:
The declaration provided for in section 1-8-2 of this chapter is sufficient in the following form:
I declare under the penalties of law that this account, claim or demand is just and correct and that
no part of it has been paid.
(Signature of Claimant).
(1988 Code § 2.06)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 10/200
1-8-4: FORM AND EFFECT OF DECLARATION ON CHECK:
The declaration provided for in section 1-8-2 of this chapter shall be printed on the reverse side of the
check, above the space for endorsement thereof by the payee, as follows: "The undersigned payee, in
endorsing this check declares that the same is received in payment of a just and correct claim against
the City, and that no part of it has heretofore been paid". When endorsed by the payee named in the
check, such statement shall operate and shall be deemed sufficient as the required declaration of
claim. (1988 Code § 2.06)
1-8-5: SIGNING CHECKS:
All checks shall be signed by the City Clerk. (1988 Code § 2.06)
Chapter 9
UNCLAIMED OR EXCESS PROPERTY DISPOSAL
1-9-1: UNCLAIMED PROPERTY:
A. Definition: The term "abandoned property" means tangible or intangible property that has lawfully
come into the possession of the City in the course of Municipal operations, remains unclaimed by
the owner, and has been in the possession of the City for at least sixty (60) days and has been
declared such by a resolution of the Council.
B. Preliminary Notice: If the City Clerk knows the identity and whereabouts of the owner, he shall
serve written notice upon him at least thirty (30) days prior to a declaration of abandonment by the
Council. If the City acquired possession from a prior holder, the identity and whereabouts of whom
are known by the City Clerk, notice shall also be served upon him. Such notice shall describe the
property and state that unless it is claimed, and proof of ownership or entitlement to possession
established, the matter of declaring it abandoned property will be brought to the attention of the
Council after the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date of such notice. (1988 Code § 2.70)
C. Notice And Sale: Upon adoption of a resolution declaring certain property to be abandoned
property, the City Clerk shall publish a notice thereof describing the same, together with the names
(if known) and addresses (if known) of prior owners and holders thereof, and including a brief
description of such property. The text of such notice shall also state the time, place and manner of
sale of all such property, except cash and negotiables. Such notice shall be published once in the
official newspaper of the City at least three (3) weeks prior to sale. Sale shall be made to the
highest bidder at public auction or sale conducted in the manner directed by the Council in its
resolution declaring property abandoned and stated in the notice. (1988 Code § 2.70; amd. 1996
Code)
D. Fund And Claims Thereon: All proceeds from such sale shall be paid into the General Fund of the
City and expenses thereof paid therefrom. The former owner, if he makes claim within eight (8)
months from the date of publication of the notice herein provided, and upon application and
satisfactory proof of ownership, may be paid the amount of cash or negotiables or, in the case of
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 11/200
property sold, the amount received therefor, less a pro rata share of the expenses of storage,
publication of notice, and sale expenses, but without interest. Such payment shall be also made
from the General Fund. (1988 Code § 2.70)
1-9-2: EXCESS PROPERTY:
A. Declaration Of Surplus And Authorizing Sale Of Property: The City Clerk may, from time to time,
recommend to the Council that certain personal property (chattels) owned by the City is no longer
needed for a Municipal purpose and should be sold. By action of the Council, said property shall
be declared surplus, the value estimated and the City Clerk authorized to dispose of said property
in the manner stated herein.
B. Value Less Than One Hundred Dollars: The City Clerk may sell surplus property with a total value
of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) through negotiated sale.
C. Value Between One Hundred Dollars And Five Hundred Dollars: The City Clerk shall offer for public
sale, to the highest bidder, surplus property with a total estimated value of from one hundred
dollars ($100.00) to five hundred dollars ($500.00). Notice of such public sale shall be given stating
time and place of sale and generally describing the property to be sold at least ten (10) days prior
to the date of sale either by publication once in the official newspaper, or by posting in a
conspicuous place in the City Hall at the City Clerk's option. Such sale shall be by auction.
D. Value Over Five Hundred Dollars: The City Clerk shall offer for public sale, to the highest bidder,
surplus property with a total estimated value over five hundred dollars ($500.00). Notice of such
public sale shall be given stating time and place of sale and generally describing property to be
sold at least ten (10) days prior to the date of sale by publication once in the official newspaper.
Such sale shall be to the person submitting the highest bid.
E. Receipts From Sales Of Surplus Property: All receipts from sales of surplus property under this
section shall be placed in the General Fund. (1988 Code § 2.70)
1-9-3: PERSONS WHO MAY NOT PURCHASE; EXCEPTION:
A. No employee of the City who is a member of the administrative staff, department head, a member
of the Council, or an advisor serving the City in a professional capacity, may be a purchaser of
property under this chapter. Other City employees may be purchasers if they are not directly
involved in the sale, if they are the highest responsible bidder, and if at least one week's published
or posted notice of sale is given.
B. It is unlawful for any person to be a purchaser of property under this chapter if such purchase is
prohibited by the terms of this chapter. (1988 Code § 2.70)
Chapter 10
CITY MANAGER
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 12/200
1-10-1: ESTABLISHED:
A. The position of City Manager is hereby established.
B. All of the administrative work of the City is hereby consolidated under the position of City Manager
who shall be responsible for the supervision of all such work.
C. The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council and shall serve at the pleasure of the City
Council for a continuing term until resigning or being terminated by the City Council. (Ord. 62, 2nd
Series, 4-4-2000)
1-10-2: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The City Manager shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
A. Manage and supervise the operations of all City departments to include, but not be limited to, the
following duties:
1. Develop administrative policies and procedures.
2. Develop operational plans for all departments.
3. Set goals, strategies, and objectives for the organization.
4. Establish guidelines for evaluating the effectiveness of operations.
5. Coordinate the development of policies for consideration by the City Council.
6. Direct and coordinate City Council meeting preparation including research, reports, and
correspondence.
7. Direct the implementation of City Council actions by all City departments.
8. Oversee the election process.
B. Direct the financial activities of the City pursuant to chapter 7 of the City Charter including, but not
limited to, the following duties:
1. Preparation of the annual City budget for presentation to the City Council.
2. Preparation of financial goals and objectives.
3. Monitor and control over all departmental budgets and expenses.
4. Authorize all purchases and expenditures. No alterations in the budget may be made except by
authorization of the City Council as provided in sections 7.08 and 7.09 of the City Charter.
5. Provide for independent audits of City financial operations subject to the approval of the City
Council.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 13/200
6. Recommend improvements in the financial systems to the City Council.
C. Coordinate and direct personnel functions of the City to include:
1. Appointing authority for all employees.
2. Establish personnel policies.
3. Direct the implementation of Federal, State, and local laws and regulations regarding City
personnel.
4. Recommend salary changes based on position requirements and employee performance.
5. Conduct labor negotiations.
6. Perform disciplinary action as prescribed in labor agreements and personnel rules and
regulations.
7. Direct implementation of employee benefit programs and recommend new programs or changes
in existing programs.
D. Direct the Planning and Community Development programs of the City to include:
1. Act as or appoint staff to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
2. Meeting with developers regarding land uses and potential land developments.
3. Direct staff preparation of materials for the development of capital improvement programs and
long range planning.
4. Recommend courses of action regarding development planning.
5. Provide for and obtain planning advice.
E. Direct all operations of the City including the Public Utilities Department. The City Council shall
direct the work of City employees through the City Manager by official actions duly adopted. The
City Manager shall be the Chief Administrative Officer for the Public Utilities Commission and have
the same powers and responsibilities for the administrative work of the commission and the
supervision thereof as for all other work of the City.
F. Perform communications activities to include:
1. Resolution of citizen complaints/problems regarding City services.
2. Respond to media inquiries through the preparation of news releases and other methods of
public information.
3. Deliver presentations on behalf of the City at various official functions.
4. Testify at legal proceedings or before legislative bodies.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 14/200
G. Advise the City Council on actions by other jurisdictions which would affect City operations.
H. Act as a liaison between the City and other governmental and nongovernmental entities.
I. Attend all City Council meetings and other public meetings as needed. (Ord. 62, 2nd Series, 4-4-
2000)
Title 2
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
2-1-1: REGULATIONS GENERALLY:
A. Application Of Provisions: Except as otherwise provided in the charter, this chapter, or other law,
this section shall apply to all boards, commissions and committees. (1988 Code § 2.50)
B. Appointments: All board, commission and committee appointments shall be made by the Mayor,
and such appointments confirmed by the Council on the first Tuesday in January of each year.
C. Terms: All terms existing, extended, or appointed in May of 1999 shall expire on the first Tuesday in
January in the year of their designated expiration. Thereafter, the terms of all other appointees
shall be established and stated at the time of their appointments so as to give effect to this section.
(Ord. 54, 2nd Series, 5-4-1999)
D. Assumption Of Office: New appointees shall assume office on the day following their appointment
and qualification, or on the first day of the month following the expiration of the prior term and
qualification, whichever shall occur last. Provided, however, that all appointees to boards,
commissions and committees shall hold office until their successor is appointed and qualified.
E. Filling Vacancies: All vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as for an expired term, but the
appointment shall be effective immediately when made and only for the unexpired term.
F. Compensation: All appointed board, commission and committee members shall serve without
remuneration, except as provided in section 2-1-2 of this chapter, but may be reimbursed for out of
pocket expenses incurred in the performance of their duties when such expenses have been
authorized by the Council before they were incurred.
G. Chairman And Secretary: The Chairman and the Secretary shall be chosen from and by the board,
commission or committee membership annually to serve for one year.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 15/200
H. Removal From Office: Any board, commission or committee member may be removed by the
Council for misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office and his position filled as any other
vacancy1.
I. Meetings: Each board, commission and committee shall hold its regular meeting at a time
established and approved by the Council.
J. Advisory To Council: All boards, commissions and committees shall be advisory to the Council,
except as otherwise specified.
K. Elect Officers: Each board, commission and committee shall elect a Chairman, a Vice Chairman
and a Secretary to serve for a one year term.
L. Council Authority: Committees may, from time to time, be established and abolished by resolution of
the Council to serve in an advisory capacity for a specific purpose. (1988 Code § 2.50)
2-1-2: SALARIES AUTHORIZED:
A. Criteria: The City Council may by resolution pay members of boards, commissions, committees and
authorities if the following criteria is met:
1. A minimum of ten (10) full time employees must be managed.
2. The board, commission, committee or authority must manage or be in charge of an income or
revenue producing area of the City.
3. There must be a minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) managed by the board,
committee, commission, or authority.
4. Regular monthly meetings must be held.
5. Annual sales or revenues must equal one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) or more.
B. Payment From Revenues Of Board: Any salaries authorized by resolution of the City Council must
be paid from the sales or revenues of the board, commission, committee or authority. (Ord. 8, 2nd
Series, 4-3-1990; amd. 1996 Code)
Chapter 2
AIRPORT BOARD
2-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION:
An Airport Board is hereby established. The board shall be composed of five (5) members who shall
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 16/200
serve staggered three (3) year terms. (1988 Code § 2.53)
2-2-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board shall advise the Council in all matters dealing with the airport and its operation. It shall
recommend an annual operating budget, report on the adequacy of facilities, recommend capital
improvements, and serve as a forum for others to express their views on subjects relating to the
airport and its operation. (1988 Code § 2.53)
Chapter 3
LIBRARY BOARD
2-3-1: ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION:
A Library Board composed of five (5) members, all of whom shall be residents of the City and shall
serve staggered three (3) year terms, is hereby established. All appointments for a full term, or to fill a
vacancy for an unexpired term, shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of the Council and a
member may be removed in the same manner for misconduct or neglect1. No more than one
Councilmember shall be a member of the Board. Members shall receive no compensation for their
services but may be reimbursed for actual and necessary travel expenses incurred in the discharge of
board duties and activities. (1988 Code § 2.54)
2-3-2: DUTIES:
The duties of the board are as follows:
A. Elect Officers; Adopt Rules And Regulations: To annually elect from its membership a President,
Secretary and such other officers as it deems necessary and adopt rules and regulations for the
government of the library and conduct of its business.
B. Library Fund: To pay into the City Treasury all monies received for the library, and interest thereon,
which shall be credited to the Library Fund and kept separate from the other monies of the City,
and paid out only upon approval of the board.
C. Control Of Property: To have exclusive control of library grounds and rooms.
D. Report Of Circulation: To annually report to the Council receipts and their sources, disbursements
and for what purposes, the number of library materials on hand, purchased and loaned, and other
information it deems advisable; and, to file such information with the Minnesota Department of
Education not later than April 1 of each year. (1988 Code § 2.54)
2-3-3: TITLE TO PROPERTY:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 17/200
All property given, granted, conveyed, donated, devised, or bequeathed to, or otherwise acquired by,
the City for a library shall vest in, and be held in the name of, the City, and any conveyance, grant,
donation, devise, bequest or gift made to, or in the name of, the library or Library Board shall be
deemed to have been made directly to the City. (1988 Code § 2.54)
Chapter 4
PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
2-4-1: ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION:
A Park and Recreation Board is hereby established. The board shall be composed of five (5)
members who shall serve staggered three (3) year terms. (1988 Code § 2.55)
2-4-2: DUTIES:
The Park and Recreation Board shall have charge of all matters relating to recreation, public parks,
lakes and playgrounds, and the maintenance, improvement and expansion thereof. The board shall
also advise the Council in all matters relating to the management and establishment of rules and
regulations relating thereto. The Council shall have overriding authority in all matters relating to parks
and recreation. (1988 Code § 2.55)
Chapter 5
AMBULANCE COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 65, 2nd Series, 1-2-2001)
Chapter 6
POLICE COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 65, 2nd Series, 1-2-2001)
Chapter 7
HOSPITAL BOARD
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 18/200
2-7-1: ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION:
A Hospital Board is hereby established. The board shall be composed of seven (7) members who
shall serve staggered three (3) year terms. The City Clerk, by virtue of his position, shall act as
Secretary-Treasurer of the board. (1988 Code § 2.59)
2-7-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Hospital Board shall have the power and duty to administer and control the operation of the
hospital including, but not by way of limitation, maintenance of buildings and equipment, employment
and discharge of personnel, fixing rates and charges, control of funds including acceptance of
payment of accounts and payment of expenses, and keeping accurate records of all receipts,
disbursements, and proceedings of the board. (1988 Code § 2.59)
Chapter 8
PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
2-8-1: ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION:
A Public Utilities Commission is hereby established. The commission shall be composed of five (5)
members who shall serve staggered five (5) year terms. (1988 Code § 2.60)
2-8-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The commission shall have complete control, management and operation of the electrical and water
utilities of the City. The powers and duties of the commission include, but are not limited to,
employment and discharge of personnel, fixing rates and charges for utilities over which it has
jurisdiction, and to repair, replace, extend, improve and to make changes and additions to such
utilities, except such as may require issuance of bonds or specially assessing for improvements to real
estate. Provided, however, that all accounts shall be paid to the City at the Office of the City Clerk.
(1988 Code § 2.60; amd. Ord. 88, 2nd Series, 2-13-2007)
2-8-3: DISPOSITION OF FUNDS:
All money of the department shall be paid to the City Clerk and held by the City Treasurer as a part of
the funds of the City, and the commission shall as often as practical transfer therefrom into the
General Fund of the City:
A. Six percent (6%) of the gross annual receipts from supplying electricity, for electric franchise; and
B. Any surplus money, as the commission sees fit. (Ord. 88, 2nd Series, 2-13-2007)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 19/200
Title 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings stated:
APPLICANT: Any person making an application for a license under this chapter.
APPLICATION: A form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in and completed by the applicant at
his request for a license, furnished by the City and uniformly required as a prerequisite to the
consideration of the issuance of a license for a business.
BOND: A corporate surety document in the form and with the provisions acceptable and specifically
approved by the City Attorney.
BUSINESS: Any activity, occupation, sale of goods or services, or transaction that is either licensed or
regulated, or both licensed and regulated, by the terms and conditions of this chapter.
LICENSE: A document issued by the City to an applicant permitting him to carry on and transact a
business.
LICENSE FEE: The money paid to the City pursuant to an application and prior to issuance of a
license to transact and carry on a business.
LICENSEE: An applicant who, pursuant to his application, holds a valid, current, unexpired and
unrevoked license from the City for carrying on a business.
SALE, SELL AND SOLD: All forms of barter and all manner or means of furnishing merchandise to
persons. (1988 Code § 6.01)
3-1-2: APPLICATIONS:
All applications shall be made as follows:
A. Place And Form: All applications shall be made at the Office of the City Clerk upon forms that have
been furnished by the City for such purposes.
B. Information Required: Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, all such applications must be
subscribed, sworn to, and include such information as the Council shall deem necessary
considering the nature of the business for which license application is made.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 20/200
C. Misinformation Prohibited: It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false statement or
omission upon any application form. Any false statement in such application, or any wilful omission
to state any information called for on such application form, shall, upon discovery of such
falsehood work an automatic refusal of license, or if already issued, shall render any license or
permit issued pursuant thereto, void, and of no effect to protect the applicant from prosecution for
violation of this chapter, or any part hereof.
D. Investigation: The City Clerk shall, upon receipt of each application completed in accordance
herewith, forthwith investigate the truth of statements made therein and the moral character and
business reputation of each applicant for license to such extent as he deems necessary. For such
investigation the City Clerk may enlist the aid of the Chief of Police. The Council shall not consider
an application before such investigation has been completed.
E. Renewal Forms: Applications for renewal licenses may be made in such abbreviated form as the
Council may by resolution adopt. (1988 Code § 6.02)
3-1-3: ACTION ON APPLICATION, TRANSFER, TERMINATION AND DUPLICATE
LICENSE:
A. Granting: The Council may grant any application for the period of the remainder of the then current
license year or for the entire ensuing license year. Failure to pay any portion of a fee when due
shall be cause for revocation. No license fee shall be refundable upon revocation or voluntarily
ceasing to carry on the licensed activity. All applications, including proposed license periods, must
be consistent with this chapter.
B. Issuing: If an application is approved, the City Clerk shall forthwith issue a license pursuant thereto
in the form prescribed by the Council, payment of the appropriate license fee, and approval of the
bond or insurance as to form and surety or carrier, if required. All licenses shall be on a yearly
basis unless otherwise specified herein as to particular businesses. Unless otherwise herein
specified, license fees shall be prorated on the basis of one-twelfth (1/12) for each month or part
thereof remaining in the then current license year. Provided, that for licenses where the fee is less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) a minimum license fee equal to one-half (1/2) of the annual
license fee shall be charged. Except as to licenses which are specifically City-wide, licenses shall
be valid only at one location and on the premises therein described.
C. Transfer: Unless otherwise provided herein, no license shall be transferable between persons or to
a different location. It is unlawful to make any transfer in violation of this subsection.
D. Termination: Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or revocation.
E. Refusal And/Or Revocation: The Council may, for any reasonable cause, refuse to grant any
application, or revoke any license. No license shall be granted to a person of questionable moral
character or business reputation. Before revocation of any license, the Council shall give notice to
the licensee and grant such licensee opportunity to be heard. Notice to be given and the exact time
of hearing shall be stated in the resolution calling for such hearing. Grounds for revocation may be,
but are not limited to, any of the following: 1) that the licensee suffered or permitted illegal acts
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 21/200
upon licensed premises; 2) that the licensee had knowledge of such illegal acts but failed to report
the same to police; 3) that the licensee failed or refused to cooperate fully with police in
investigating such alleged illegal acts; or, 4) that the activities of the licensee created a serious
danger to public health, safety, or welfare.
F. Duplicate License: Duplicates of all original licenses may be issued by the City Clerk, without action
by the Council, upon licensee's affidavit that the original has been lost, and upon payment of a fee
in an amount adopted by resolution of the Council for issuance of the duplicate. All duplicate
licenses shall be clearly marked "duplicate". (1988 Code § 6.03)
3-1-4: FIXING LICENSE FEES:
Except as otherwise herein provided, all fees for licenses (late fee penalties, and investigation of
applicants) under this chapter shall be fixed and determined by the Council, adopted by resolution,
and uniformly enforced. Such license fees may, from time-to-time, be amended by the Council by
resolution. A copy of the resolution setting forth currently effective license fees shall be kept on file in
the Office of the City Clerk and open to inspection during regular business hours. For the purpose of
fixing such fees, the Council may subdivide and categorize licenses under a specific license
requirement; provided, that any such subdivision or categorization shall be included in the resolution
authorized by this section. (1988 Code § 6.04)
3-1-5: CARRYING OR POSTING:
All solicitors1 shall at all times when so engaged, carry their license on their person. All other
licensees shall post their licenses in their place of business near the licensed activity. Provided,
however, that in the case of machine or other device licensing, the City may provide a sticker for the
current license year which shall be affixed to each machine or device requiring such sticker. All
licensees shall display their licenses upon demand by any officer or citizen. (1988 Code § 6.05)
3-1-6: PENALTY FOR PROPERTY OWNER:
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any real property owned or controlled by him to be
used, without a license, for any business for which a license is required by this chapter. (1988 Code
§ 6.06)
3-1-7: RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE:
The conduct of agents or employees of a licensee, while engaged in performance of their duties for
their principal or employer under such license, shall be deemed the conduct of the licensee. (1988
Code § 6.07)
3-1-8: CONDITIONAL LICENSES:
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Council may, upon a finding of the necessity
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 22/200
therefor, place such conditions and restrictions upon a license as it, in its discretion, may deem
reasonable and justified. (1988 Code § 6.08)
3-1-9: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Whenever insurance is required by a section of this chapter, after approval by the Council, but before
the license shall issue, the applicant shall file with the City Clerk a policy or certificate of public liability
insurance showing: a) that the limits are at least as high as required, b) that coverage is effective for at
least the license term approved, and c) that such insurance will not be cancelled or terminated without
thirty (30) days' written notice served upon the City Clerk. Cancellation or termination of such
coverage shall be grounds for license revocation. (1988 Code § 6.09)
3-1-10: PENALTY:
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this title when he performs an
act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as
otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. (1988 Code § 6.99)
Chapter 2
LODGING TAX
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words, and their derivations have the
meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural form include the singular and words in the singular include the
plural form. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CITY: The City of Sleepy Eye.
LODGER: The person obtaining lodging from an operator.
LODGING: The furnishing for a consideration of lodging by a hotel, motel, bed and breakfast,
public/private campground, except where such lodging shall be for a continuous period of thirty (30)
days or more to the same lodger(s). The furnishing of rooms owned by religious, educational or
nonprofit organizations for self-sponsored activities shall not constitute "lodging" for purposes of this
program.
OPERATOR: The person who is the proprietor of the lodging facility, whether in the capacity of owner,
lessee, sublessee, licensee, or any other capacity.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, estate, receiver, trustee, executor,
administrator, assignee, syndicate, or any other combination of individuals. Whenever the term
"person" is used in any provision of this chapter prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as
applied to a corporation, association or partnership shall mean the officers or partners thereof, as the
case may be.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 23/200
RENT: The total consideration valued in money charged for the lodging whether paid in money or
otherwise, but shall not include any charges for services rendered in connection with furnishing
lodging other than the room charge itself. (Ord. 18, 2nd Series, 5-4-1993)
3-2-2: IMPOSITION OF TAX:
Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, section 469.190, there is hereby imposed a tax on the rent charged
by an operator for providing lodging to any person of five percent (5%). The tax collected by the
operator shall be extinguished only by payment to the City. In no case shall the tax imposed by this
section upon an operator exceed the amount of tax which the operator is authorized and required by
this program to collect from a lodger. (Ord. 18, 2nd Series, 5-4-1993; amd. Ord. 137, 2nd Series, 6-12-
2017)
3-2-3: COLLECTIONS:
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this program at the time the rent is paid. The tax
collections shall be deemed to be held in trust by the operator for the City. The amount of tax shall be
separately stated from the rent charged for the lodging, and those persons paying the tax shall receive
a receipt of payment from the operator. (Ord. 18, 2nd Series, 5-4-1993)
3-2-4: EXCEPTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS:
An exemption shall be granted to any person as to whom or whose occupancy it is beyond the power
of the City to tax. No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time the
rent is collected, and such a claim shall be made in writing and under penalty of perjury on forms
provided by the City. All such claims shall be forwarded to the City when the returns and collections
are submitted as required by this chapter. (Ord. 18, 2nd Series, 5-4-1993)
3-2-5: ADVERTISING NO TAX:
It shall be unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or any customer,
directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or
that it will not be added to the rent or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. (Ord. 18,
2nd Series, 5-4-1993)
3-2-6: PAYMENT AND RETURNS:
A. Return Due; Information Required: The taxes imposed by this program shall be paid monthly by the
operator to the City not later than twenty (20) days after the end of the month in which the taxes
were collected. At the time of payment, the operator shall submit a return upon such forms and
containing such information as the City Clerk may require. The return shall contain the following
minimum information:
1. The total amount of rent collected for lodging during the period covered by the return.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 24/200
2. The total amount of exceptions/exemptions.
3. The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period.
4. The signature of the person filing the return or that of his agent duly authorized in writing.
5. The period covered by the return.
6. The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject to the Lodging Tax.
B. Previously Paid Taxes An Offset: The operator may offset against the taxes payable with respect to
any reporting period, the amount of taxes imposed by this program previously paid as a result of
any transaction the consideration for which became uncollectible during such reporting period, but
only in proportion to the portion of such consideration which became uncollectible. (Ord. 18, 2nd
Series, 5-4-1993)
3-2-7: EXAMINATION OF RETURN, ADJUSTMENTS, NOTICES AND DEMANDS:
The City Clerk shall, after a return is filed, examine the same and make any investigation or
examination of the records and accounts of the person making the return deemed necessary for
determining its correctness. The tax computed on the basis of such examination shall be the tax to be
paid. If the tax due is found to be greater than that paid, such excess shall be paid to the City within
ten (10) days after receipt of a notice thereof given either personally or sent by registered mail to the
address shown on the return. If the tax paid is greater than the tax found to be due, the excess shall
be refunded to the person who paid the tax to the City within ten (10) days after determination of such
refund. (Ord. 18, 2nd Series, 5-4-1993)
3-2-8: REFUNDS:
Any person may apply to the City Clerk for a refund of taxes paid in excess of the amount legally due
for that period; provided, that no application for a refund shall be considered unless filed within one
year after such tax was paid, or within one year from the filing of the return, whichever period is the
longer. The City Clerk shall examine the claim and make and file written findings thereon denying or
allowing the claim in whole or in part and shall mail a notice thereof by registered mail to such person
at the address stated upon the return. If such claim is allowed in whole or in part, the City Clerk shall
credit the amount of the allowance against any taxes due under this program from the claimant. (Ord.
18, 2nd Series, 5-4-1993)
3-2-9: FAILURE TO FILE A RETURN:
A. Delinquent Or False Return Payment: If any operator required by this program to file a return shall
fail to do so within the time prescribed or shall make, wilfully or otherwise, an incorrect, false or
fraudulent return, the operator shall, upon written notice and demand, file such return or corrected
return within five (5) days of receipt of such written notice and shall at the same time pay any tax
due on the basis thereof. If such person shall fail to file such return or corrected return, the City
Clerk shall make a return or corrected return for such person from such knowledge and information
as the Director can obtain, and assess a tax on the basis thereof, which tax (less any payments
theretofore made on account of the tax for the taxable period covered by such return) shall be paid
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 25/200
within five (5) days of the receipt of written notice and demand for such payment. Any such return
or assessment made by the City Clerk shall be prima facie correct and valid, and such person shall
have the burden of establishing its incorrectness or invalidity in any action or proceeding with
respect thereto.
B. Delay Of Payment:
1. If any portion of a tax imposed by this program, including penalties thereon, is not paid within
thirty (30) days after it is required to be paid, the City may institute such legal action as may be
necessary to recover the amount due plus interest, penalties and the cost and disbursements of
any action.
2. Upon a showing of good cause, the City Clerk may grant an operator one (1) 30-day extension
of time within which to file a return and make payment of taxes as required by this chapter;
provided, that interest during such period of extension shall be added to the taxes due at the rate
of ten percent (10%) per annum. (Ord. 18, 2nd Series, 5-4-1993)
3-2-10: ADMINISTRATION OF TAX:
The City Clerk shall administer and enforce the assessment and collection of the taxes imposed by
this chapter. The Director shall cause to be prepared blank forms for the returns and other documents
required by this chapter and shall distribute the same throughout the City and furnish them upon
application; but failure to receive or secure them shall not relieve any person from any obligation
required under this chapter. (Ord. 18, 2nd Series, 5-4-1993)
3-2-11: EXAMINE RECORDS:
The City Clerk may examine the books, papers and records of any operator in order to verify the
accuracy of any return made, or if no return was made, to ascertain the tax as provided in this
program. Every such operator is directed and required to give to the City Clerk the means, facilities
and opportunity for such examinations and investigations as are hereby authorized. (Ord. 18, 2nd
Series, 5-4-1993)
3-2-12: USE OF PROCEEDS:
A. Statutory Provisions: The ninety five percent (95%) proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes
pursuant to this program shall be used in accordance with Minnesota Statutes section 469.190 as
the same may be amended from time to time to fund a local convention/tourism bureau for the
purpose of marketing and promoting the City as a tourist/convention center. The City may retain a
maximum of five percent (5%) for administrative costs.
B. Agreement; Terms: The City by and through an agreement entitled "Agreement for the
Establishment of a Convention and Visitors Bureau Between the City of Sleepy Eye and the
Sleepy Eye Area Chamber of Commerce" (hereinafter the "agreement") with the Sleepy Eye Area
Chamber of Commerce (hereinafter "Chamber of Commerce") hereby permits the Chamber of
Commerce to create the Sleepy Eye Area Convention and Visitors Bureau (hereinafter "CVB").
CVB will be funded by the tax set forth herein and pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 469.190.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 26/200
The agreement sets forth the purpose and duties of CVB and provides for its internal structure.
Pursuant to the terms of the agreement, and specifically incorporated herein without limiting the
effect of the agreement, are the following terms. CVB shall:
1. Establish and maintain separate books and records;
2. Establish separate bank accounts;
3. Not commingle its funds with the Chamber of Commerce or any other entity.
C. Hold Harmless: Any and all employees of the Chamber of Commerce or the CVB, or any other
persons, while engaged in the performance of any service required by the Chamber of Commerce,
shall not be considered employees of the City, and any and all claims that may or might rise under
the Worker's Compensation Act of the State of Minnesota on behalf of said employees or other
persons while so engaged, and any and all claims made by the third party as a consequence of
any act or omission on the part of the Chamber, or its agents or employees or other persons while
so engaged in any of the services provided to be rendered herein, shall in no way be the obligation
or the responsibility of the City. And in connection therewith, the Chamber of Commerce, hereby
agrees to indemnify, save and hold harmless, defend the City and all its agents and employees
thereof, from any and all claims, demands, actions or causes of action of whatever nature or
character arising out of or by reason of the execution or the performances of the services provided
in accordance with this agreement, excepting therefrom City Administrator duties and City duties
relating to the collection of taxes.
D. Violation A Misdemeanor: Violation of this chapter shall be considered a misdemeanor and
punished by a fine of seven hundred dollars ($700.00) or ninety (90) days in jail, or both.
E. Budget Approval Required: The annual budget submitted by CVB to the City Council for its
approval shall be approved or disapproved in total. (Ord. 18, 2nd Series, 5-4-1993)
3-2-13: APPEALS:
A. Filing Petition: Any operator aggrieved by any notice, order or determination made by the City Clerk
under this chapter may file a petition for review of such notice, order or determination detailing the
operator's reasons for contesting the notice, order or determination. The petition shall contain the
name of the petitioner, the petitioner's address and the location of the lodging subject to the order,
notice or determination.
B. Time Limit For Filing: The petition for review shall be filed with the Mayor within ten (10) days after
the notice, order or determination for which review is sought has been mailed or served upon the
person requesting review.
C. Set Hearing Date: Upon receipt of the petition, the Mayor, or his/her designee shall set a date for a
hearing and give the petitioner at least five (5) days' prior written notice of the date, time and place
of the hearing.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 27/200
D. Petitioner Representation: At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show
cause why the notice, order or determination should be modified or withdrawn. The petitioner may
be represented by counsel of petitioner's choosing at petitioner's own expense.
E. Conduct Of Disputes: Any disputes shall be conducted in accordance with principles and rules of
the American Arbitration Association.
F. Findings Of Fact: The hearing examiner conducting the hearing shall make written findings of fact
and conclusions based upon the applicable sections of this chapter and the evidence presented.
The person conducting the hearing may affirm, reverse or modify the notice, order or determination
made by the City Clerk.
G. Appeal Of Decision: Any decision rendered by the hearing examiner pursuant to this section may
be appealed to the City Council. A petitioner seeking to appeal a decision must file a written notice
of appeal with the Mayor within ten (10) days after the decision has been mailed to the petitioner.
The matter will thereupon be placed on the Council agenda as soon as practicable. The Council
shall then review the findings of fact and conclusions to determine whether they were correct.
Upon a determination by the Council that findings and conclusions were incorrect, the Council may
modify, reverse or affirm the decision of the hearing examiner or his designee upon the same
standards as set forth in subsection F of this section. (Ord. 18, 2nd Series, 5-4-1993)
3-2-14: VIOLATIONS:
Any person who shall wilfully fail to make a return required by this program or shall fail to pay the tax
after written demand for payment, or who shall fail to remit the taxes collected or any penalty or
interest imposed by this chapter after written demand for such payment or who shall refuse to permit
the City Clerk to examine the books, records and papers under his or her control, or who shall wilfully
make an incomplete, false or fraudulent return shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 18, 2nd Series,
5-4-1993)
3-2-15: PENALTIES:
A. Timely Payment Required; Specific Penalty: If any tax imposed by this chapter is not paid within the
time herein specified for the payment, or any extension thereof, there shall be added thereto a
specific penalty equal to ten percent (10%) of the amount remaining unpaid.
B. Additional Delinquent Penalty: In case of any failure to make and file a return within the time
prescribed by this chapter, unless it is shown that such failure is not due to wilful neglect, there
shall be added to the tax, in addition to the ten percent (10%) specific penalty provided in
subsection A of this section, ten percent (10%) if the failure is for not more than thirty (30) days
with an additional five percent (5%) for each additional thirty (30) days or fraction thereof during
which failure continues, not exceeding twenty five percent (25%) in the aggregate. If the penalty as
computed does not exceed ten dollars ($10.00), a minimum penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be
assessed. The amount so added to any tax shall be collected at the same time and in the same
manner and as a part of the tax unless the tax has been paid before the discovery of the
negligence, in which case the amount so added shall be collected in the same manner as the tax.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 28/200
C. Failure To File; Misinformation: If any person wilfully fails to file any return or make any payment
required by this chapter, or wilfully files a false or fraudulent return or wilfully attempts in any
manner to evade or defeat any such tax or payment thereof, there shall also be imposed as a
penalty an amount equal to fifty percent (50%) of any tax (less amounts paid on the basis of such
false or fraudulent return) found due for the period to which such return related. The penalty
imposed by this subsection shall be collected as part of the tax, and shall be in addition to any
other penalties provided by this chapter.
D. Disposition Of Payment: All payments received shall be credited first to penalties, next to interest,
and then to the tax due. (Ord. 18, 2nd Series, 5-4-1993)
Chapter 3
LIQUOR CONTROL
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless otherwise stated in specific sections, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings stated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) alcohol
by volume, including, but not limited to, beer, wine, and liquor as defined in this section.
APPLICANT: Any person making an application for a license under this chapter.
APPLICATION: A form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in and completed by the applicant as
his request for a license, furnished by the City and uniformly required as a prerequisite to the
consideration of the issuance of a license for a business.
BEER: Malt liquor containing not less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) alcohol by volume nor more
than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight. (This definition includes so-called "malt coolers" with the alcoholic
content limits stated herein.)
BREWER: A person who manufactures beer for sale.
CLUB: An incorporated organization organized under the laws of the State for civic, fraternal, social,
or business purposes, for intellectual improvement, or for the promotion of sports, or a congressionally
chartered veterans' organization, which: a) has more than fifty (50) members; b) has owned or rented
a building or space in a building for more than one year that is suitable and adequate for the
accommodation of its members; c) is directed by a board of directors, executive committee, or other
similar body chosen by the members at a meeting held for that purpose. No member, officer, agent, or
employee shall receive any profit from the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the
club, or their guests, beyond a reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each year by the
governing body. Such club or congressionally chartered veterans' organization must have been in
existence for at least three (3) years.
COMMISSIONER: The Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety.
HOTEL: An establishment where food and lodging are regularly furnished to transients and which has:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 29/200
a) a resident proprietor or manager; b) a dining room serving the general public at tables and having
facilities for seating at least thirty (30) guests at one time; and c) at least ten (10) guest rooms.
LICENSE: A document, issued by the City, to an applicant permitting him to carry on and transact the
business stated therein.
LICENSE FEE: The money paid to the City pursuant to an application and prior to issuance of a
license to transact and carry on the business stated therein.
LICENSED PREMISES: The premises described in the issued license.
LICENSEE: An applicant who, pursuant to his approved application, holds a valid, current, unexpired
license, which has neither been revoked nor is then under suspension, from the City for carrying on
the business stated therein.
LIQUOR: Ethyl alcohol and distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous and malt beverages containing in
excess of 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight. (This definition includes so-called "wine coolers" and "malt
coolers" with the alcoholic content limits stated herein.)
MALT LIQUOR: Any beer, ale, or other beverage made from malt by fermentation and containing not
less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) alcohol by volume.
MANUFACTURER: Every person who, by any process of manufacture, fermenting, brewing, distilling,
refining, rectifying, blending, or by the combination of different materials, prepares or produces
alcoholic beverages for sale.
MINOR: Any natural person who has not attained the age of twenty one (21) years.
OFF-SALE: The sale of intoxicating liquor in original packages for consumption off the licensed
premises only.
ON-SALE: The sale of intoxicating liquor for consumption on the licensed premises only.
PACKAGE AND ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any container or receptacle holding intoxicating liquors which
container or receptacle is corked, capped or sealed by a manufacturer or wholesaler.
RESTAURANT: An establishment, other than a hotel, under the control of a single proprietor or
manager, where meals are regularly served at tables to the general public, and having seating
capacity for at least twenty five (25) guests.
SALE, SELL AND SOLD: All barters and all manners or means of furnishing intoxicating liquor to
persons, including such furnishing in violation or evasion of law.
WHOLESALER: Any person engaged in the business of selling intoxicating liquor to a licensee from a
stock maintained in a warehouse.
WINE: A beverage made without rectification or fortification by the fermentation of sound ripe grapes,
grape juice, other fruits, or honey, and also carbonated wine, wine made from condensed grape must,
wine made from other agricultural products, imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider,
perry and sake, containing not less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) nor more than fourteen
percent (14%) alcohol by volume. (This definition includes so-called "wine coolers" with the alcoholic
content limits stated herein.) (1988 Code § 5.01)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 30/200
3-3-2: LICENSE APPLICATION; PROCEDURE; ADMINISTRATION:
A. Application: All applications shall be made at the Office of the City Clerk upon forms prescribed by
the City, or if by the Commissioner, then together with such additional information as the Council
may desire. Information required may vary with the type of business organization making
application. All questions asked or information required by the application forms shall be answered
fully and completely by the applicant. Every application for the issuance or renewal of a liquor or
beer license must include a copy of each summons received by the applicant during the preceding
year under Minnesota Statutes section 340A.802.
B. False Statements: It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false statement or
omission upon any application form. Any false statement in such application, or any wilful omission
to state any information called for on such application form shall, upon discovery of such
falsehood, work an automatic refusal of license, or if already issued, shall render any license
issued pursuant thereto void and of no effect to protect the applicant from prosecution for violation
of this chapter, or any part thereof.
C. Application And Investigation Fees: At the time the initial application is made, an applicant for a
license under this chapter shall accompany such application with payment of a fee to be
considered an application and investigation fee, not refundable to the applicant, to cover the cost
of the City in processing the application and the investigation of the applicant. No such fee shall be
required of an applicant for a temporary beer license.
D. Council Action:
1. Granting: The Council may approve any application for the period of the remainder of the then
current license year or for the entire ensuing license year. All applications including proposed
license periods must be consistent with this chapter. Prior to consideration of any application for
a license, the applicant shall pay the license fee, and if applicable, pay the investigation fee.
Upon rejection of any application for a license, or upon withdrawal of an application before
consideration by the Council, the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant. Failure to pay
any portion of a fee when due shall be cause for revocation. (1988 Code § 5.02)
2. Issuing: If an application is approved, the City Clerk shall forthwith issue a license pursuant
thereto in the form prescribed by the City or the Commissioner, as the case may be. Except as
otherwise specifically provided, all licenses shall be in effect from July 1 to June 30. For licenses
issued and which are to become effective other than on the first day of the licensed year, the fee
to be paid with the application shall be a pro rata share of the annual license fee. Licenses shall
be valid only at one location and on the premises therein described. (1988 Code § 5.02; amd.
1996 Code)
3. Transfer: No license shall be transferable between persons or to a different location. Any change
in individual ownership, incorporation, or substitution of partners is a transfer. It is unlawful to
make any transfer in violation of this subsection D3.
4. Refusal And Termination: The Council may, in its sole discretion and for any reasonable cause,
refuse to grant any application. No license shall be granted to a person of questionable moral
character or business reputation. Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or revocation.
5. Public Interest: No license under this chapter may be issued, transferred or renewed if the
results of any investigation show, to the satisfaction of the Council that such issuance, transfer,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 31/200
or renewal would not be in the public interest.
6. Revocation Or Suspension: The Council shall revoke or suspend, for a period not to exceed
sixty (60) days, a license granted under the provisions of this chapter, or impose a civil fine not
to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), for each violation on a finding that the licensee has
failed to comply with a statute, regulation or provision of this Code relating to intoxicating liquor.
The Council shall revoke the license upon conviction of any licensee or agent or employee of a
licensee for violating any law relating to the sale or possession of beer, wine or liquor upon
premises of the licensee, or if such revocation is mandatory by statute. If it shall be made to
appear at the hearing thereon that such violation was not wilful, the Council may order
suspension; provided, that revocation shall be ordered upon the third such violation or offense.
No suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity
for a hearing before the Council, a committee of the Council, or a hearing under the
Administrative Procedures Act, as may be determined by the Council in action calling the
hearing. Such hearing shall be called by the Council upon written notice to the licensee served in
person or by certified mail not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the
hearing date, stating the time, place and purpose thereof. As additional restrictions or
regulations on licensees under this chapter, and in addition to grounds for revocation or
suspension stated in this Code or statute, the following shall also be grounds for such action: a)
that the licensee suffered or permitted illegal acts upon licensed premises unrelated to the sale
of beer, wine or liquor; b) that the licensee had knowledge of such illegal acts upon licensed
premises, but failed to report the same to police; c) that the licensee failed or refused to
cooperate fully with police in investigating such alleged illegal acts upon licensed premises; or,
d) that the activities of the licensee created a serious danger to public health, safety, or welfare.
7. Corporate Applicants And Licensees: A corporate applicant, at the time of application, shall
furnish the City with a list of all persons that have an interest in such corporation and the extent
of such interest. The list shall name all shareholders and show the number of shares held by
each, either individually or beneficially for others. It is the duty of each corporate licensee to
notify the City Clerk in writing of any change in legal ownership, or beneficial interest in such
corporation or in such shares. Any change in the ownership or beneficial interest in the shares
entitled to be voted at a meeting of the shareholders of a corporate licensee, which results in the
change of voting control of the corporation by the persons owning the shares therein, shall be
deemed equivalent to a transfer of the license issued to the corporation, and any such license
shall be revoked thirty (30) days after any such change in ownership or beneficial interest of
shares unless the Council has been notified of the change in writing and has approved it by
appropriate action. The Council, or any officer of the City designated by it, may at any
reasonable time examine the stock transfer records and minute books of any corporate licensee
in order to verify and identify the shareholders, and the Council or its designated officer may
examine the business records of any other licensee to the extent necessary to disclose the
interest which persons other than the licensee have in the licensed business. The Council may
revoke any license issued upon its determination that a change of ownership of shares in a
corporate licensee or any change of ownership of any interest in the business of any other
licensee has actually resulted in the change of control of the licensed business so as materially
to affect the integrity and character of its management and its operation, but no such action shall
be taken until after a hearing by the Council on notice to the licensee.
E. Duplicate Licenses: Duplicates of all original licenses under this chapter may be issued by the City
Clerk without action by the Council, upon licensee's affidavit that the original has been lost, and
upon payment of a fee of two dollars ($2.00) for issuance of the duplicate. All duplicate licenses
shall be clearly marked "duplicate".
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 32/200
F. Posting: All licensees shall conspicuously post their licenses in their places of business.
G. Resident Manager Or Agent: Before a license is issued under this chapter to an individual who is a
nonresident of the City, to more than one individual whether or not they are residents of the City, or
to a corporation, partnership, or association, the applicant or applicants shall appoint in writing a
natural person who is a resident of the City as its manager or agent. Such resident manager or
agent shall, by the terms of his written consent: 1) take full responsibility for the conduct of the
licensed premises, and, 2) serve as agent for service of notices and other process relating to the
license. Such manager or agent must be a person who, by reason of age, character, reputation,
and other attributes, could qualify individually as a licensee. If such manager or agent ceases to be
a resident of the City or ceases to act in such capacity for the licensee without appointment of a
successor, the license issued pursuant to such appointment shall be subject to revocation or
suspension. (1988 Code § 5.02)
3-3-3: DELINQUENT TAXES AND CHARGES:
No license under this chapter shall be granted for operation on any premises upon which taxes,
assessments, or installments thereof, or other financial claims of the City, are owed and are delinquent
and unpaid. (1988 Code § 5.03)
3-3-4: CONDITIONAL LICENSES:
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Council may, upon a finding of the necessity
therefor, place such special conditions and restrictions, in addition to those stated in this chapter, upon
any license as it, in its discretion, may deem reasonable and justified. (1988 Code § 5.04)
3-3-5: PREMISES LICENSED:
Unless expressly stated therein, a license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid
only in the compact and contiguous building or structure situated on the premises described in the
license, and all transactions relating to a sale under such license must take place within such building
or structure. (1988 Code § 5.05)
3-3-6: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
A. Consumption: It is unlawful for any person to consume, or any licensee to permit consumption of,
intoxicating liquor on licensed premises more than twenty (20) minutes after the hour when a sale
thereof can legally be made.
B. Removal Of Containers: It is unlawful for any on-sale licensee to permit any glass, bottle or other
container, containing intoxicating liquor in any quantity, to remain upon any table, bar, stool or other
place where customers are served, more than twenty (20) minutes after the hour when a sale
thereof can legally be made.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 33/200
C. Closing: It is unlawful for any person, other than an on-sale licensee or his bona fide employee
actually engaged in the performance of his duties, to be on premises licensed under this chapter
more than thirty (30) minutes after the legal time for making licensed sales. Provided, however,
that this subsection shall not apply to licensees, employees of licensees and patrons on licensed
premises for the sole purpose of preparing, serving or consuming food or beverages other than
intoxicating liquor. (1988 Code § 5.06)
3-3-7: CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES:
Except as herein provided, every licensee under this chapter shall be responsible for the conduct of
his place of business and shall maintain conditions of sobriety and order therein. (1988 Code § 5.07)
3-3-8: SALE BY EMPLOYEE:
Any sale of intoxicating liquor in or from any premises licensed under this chapter by any employee
authorized to make such sale in or from such place is the act of the employer as well as of the person
actually making the sale; and every such employer is liable to all of the penalties, except criminal
penalties, provided by law for such sale, equally with the person actually making the sale. (1988 Code
§ 5.09)
3-3-9: LICENSE CONDITION AND UNLAWFUL ACT:
A. Consent To Inspections: All premises licensed under this chapter shall at all times be open to
inspection by any police officer to determine whether or not this chapter and all other laws are
being observed. All persons, as a condition to being issued such license, consent to such
inspection by such officers and without a warrant for searches or seizures.
B. Barring Inspections Unlawful: It is unlawful for any licensee, or agent or employee of a licensee, to
hinder or prevent a police officer from making such inspection. (1988 Code § 5.09)
3-3-10: LICENSE FEES; FIXING AND REFUNDMENT:
A. Fixing Fees: Except as otherwise specifically provided, all fees for licenses provided for in this
chapter, including, but not by way of limitation, license fees, investigation and administration fees,
shall be fixed and determined by the Council, adopted by resolution, and uniformly enforced. Such
fees may, from time to time, be amended by the Council by resolution. A copy of the resolution
shall be kept on file in the Office of the City Clerk and open to inspection during regular business
hours. For the purpose of fixing such fees, the Council may categorize and classify; provided, that
such categorization and classification shall be included in the resolution authorized by this section.
B. Refund: A pro rata share of an annual license fee for a license to sell liquor or beer, either on-sale
or off-sale, shall be refunded to the licensee, or to his estate, if: 1) the business ceases to operate
because of destruction or damage; 2) the licensee dies; or, 3) the business ceases to be lawful for
a reason other than a license revocation or suspension. (1988 Code § 5.10)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 34/200
3-3-11: FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEES:
A. Proof: No intoxicating liquor license shall be issued or renewed unless and until the applicant has
provided proof of financial responsibility, imposed by statute, by filing with the City:
1. A certificate that there is in effect an insurance policy or pool providing minimum coverage of: a)
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) because of bodily injury to any one person in any one
occurrence, and, subject to the limit for one person, in the amount of one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) because of bodily injury to two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence,
and in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) because of injury to or destruction of
property of others in any one occurrence, and b) fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for loss of
means of support of any one person in any one occurrence, and, subject to the limit for one
person, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for loss of means of support of two (2) or
more persons in any one occurrence; an annual aggregate of three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) may be included in the insurance coverage; or,
2. A bond of a surety company with minimum coverage as provided in subsection A1 of this
section; or,
3. A certificate of the State Treasurer that the licensee has deposited with him one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in cash or securities which may legally be purchased by savings
banks or for trust funds having a market value of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
B. Exception: This section does not apply to on-sale beer licensees with sales of beer of less than ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for the preceding year, nor to off-sale beer licensees with sales of
beer of less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for the preceding year, nor does it apply to
holders of on-sale wine licenses with sales of wine of less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
for the preceding year. An affidavit of the licensee shall be required to establish the exemption
under this subsection.
C. Documents Submitted To Commissioner: All proof of financial responsibility and exemption
affidavits filed with the City under this section shall be submitted by the City to the Commissioner.
(1988 Code § 5.11)
3-3-12: INSURANCE CERTIFICATE REQUIREMENTS:
Whenever an insurance certificate is required by this chapter the applicant shall file with the City Clerk
a certificate of insurance showing: a) that the limits are at least as high as required, b) that coverage is
effective for at least the license term approved, and c) that such insurance will not be cancelled or
terminated without thirty (30) days' written notice served upon the City Clerk. Cancellation or
termination of such coverage shall be grounds for license revocation. (1988 Code § 5.12)
3-3-13: MINORS; UNLAWFUL ACTS:
A. Consumption: It is unlawful for any:
1. Licensee to permit any minor to consume alcoholic beverages on licensed premises.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 35/200
2. Minor to consume alcoholic beverages except in the household of the minor's parent or
guardian, and then only with the consent of such parent or guardian.
B. Purchasing: It is unlawful for any:
1. Person to sell, barter, furnish, or give alcoholic beverages to a minor unless such person is the
parent or guardian of the minor, and then only for consumption in the household of such parent
or guardian.
2. Minor to purchase or attempt to purchase any alcoholic beverages.
3. Person to induce a minor to purchase or procure any alcoholic beverages.
C. Possession: It is unlawful for a minor to possess any alcoholic beverages with the intent to
consume it at a place other than the household of the minor's parent or guardian. Possession of
any alcoholic beverages by a minor at a place other than the household of the parent or guardian
is prima facie evidence of intent to consume it at a place other than the household of his parent or
guardian. (1988 Code § 5.13)
3-3-14: CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION ON PUBLIC PROPERTY AND PRIVATE
PARKING LOTS:
It is unlawful for any person to consume, or possess in an unsealed container, any alcoholic
beverages on any: a) premises of a gasoline service station after it is closed for business, b) street, c)
public property, except City-owned parks, or d) private parking lot to which the public has access,
except on such premises when and where permission has been specifically granted or licensed by the
Council. Provided, that this section shall not apply to the possession of an unsealed container in a
motor vehicle when the container is kept in the trunk of such vehicle if it is equipped with a trunk, or
kept in some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers, if the motor
vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. For the purpose of this section, a utility or glove compartment
shall be deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver or passengers. (1988 Code § 5.14)
3-3-15: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN CERTAIN BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS:
It is unlawful for any person to introduce upon, or have in his possession upon, or in, any school
ground, or any schoolhouse or school building, any alcoholic beverages except for experiments in
laboratories. (1988 Code § 5.15)
3-3-16: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; CERTAIN UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It is unlawful for any:
A. Person to knowingly induce another to make an illegal sale or purchase of alcoholic beverages.
B. Licensee to sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any person who is obviously intoxicated.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 36/200
C. Licensee to fail, where doubt could exist, to require adequate proof of age of a person upon
licensed premises.
D. Licensee to sell any alcoholic beverages on any day, or during any hour, when such sales are not
permitted by law.
E. Licensee to allow consumption of any alcoholic beverages on licensed premises on any day, or
during any hour, when such consumption is not permitted by law.
F. Person to purchase alcoholic beverages on any day, or during any hour, when such sales are not
permitted by law. (1988 Code § 5.16)
3-3-17: NUDITY OR OBSCENITY PROHIBITED:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings stated:
NUDITY: Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal human genitals, pubic areas,
the post-pubertal human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or
the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. For purposes of this definition, a
female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and the areola only are
covered.
OBSCENE PERFORMANCE: A play, motion picture, dance, show or other presentation, whether
pictured, animated or live, performed before an audience and which in whole or in part depicts or
reveals nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic abuse, or which includes
obscenities or explicit verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual conduct.
OBSCENITIES: Those slang words currently generally rejected for regular use in mixed society,
that are used to refer to genitals, female breasts, sexual conduct or excretory functions or
products, either that have no other meaning or that in context are clearly used for their bodily,
sexual or excretory meaning.
SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE: Flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in
undergarments or in revealing or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or
otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed.
SEXUAL CONDUCT: Human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or any touching of the genitals,
pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female, or the breasts of the female, whether alone
or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of
apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT: The condition of human male or female genitals or the breasts of the
female when in a state of sexual stimulation, or the sensual experiences of humans engaging in or
witnessing sexual conduct or nudity.
B. Unlawful Act: It is unlawful for any person issued a license provided for in this chapter to permit
upon licensed premises any nudity, obscene performance, or continued use of obscenities by any
agent, employee, patron or other person. (1988 Code § 5.98)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 37/200
3-3-18: PENALTY:
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs
an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as
otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. (1988 Code § 5.99)
ARTICLE A. BEER
3-3A-1: BEER LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTION:
It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any pretense or by any device, to sell, barter,
keep for sale, or otherwise dispose of beer, as part of a commercial transaction, without a license
therefor from the City. This section shall not apply to sales by manufacturers to wholesalers or to sales
by wholesalers to persons holding beer licenses from the City. Annual on-sale beer licenses may be
issued only to drug stores, restaurants, hotels, bowling centers, clubs, and establishments used
exclusively for the sale of beer with the incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks. Any person licensed
to sell liquor on-sale shall not be required to obtain an on-sale beer license, and may sell beer on-sale
without an additional license. (1988 Code § 5.30)
3-3A-2: TEMPORARY BEER LICENSE:
A. Applicant: A club or charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization shall qualify for a temporary onsale
beer license. Such organization shall be duly incorporated as a nonprofit or religious
corporation under the laws of the State of Minnesota and having its registered office and principal
place of activity within the City.
B. Conditions:
1. An application for a temporary license shall state the exact dates and place of proposed
temporary sale.
2. No applicant shall qualify for a temporary license for more than a total of seven (7) days in any
calendar year.
3. The Council may, but at no time shall it be under any obligation whatsoever to, grant a
temporary beer license on premises owned or controlled by the City. Any such license may be
conditioned, qualified or restricted as the Council sees fit. If the premises to be licensed is
owned or under the control of the City, the applicant shall file with the City, prior to issuance of
the license, a certificate of liability insurance coverage in at least the sum of fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00) for injury to any one person and one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) for injury to more than one person, and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for
property damage, naming the City as an insured during the license period. Such license shall be
issued only on the condition that the applicant will not sell in excess of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) (retail value) worth of beer in any fiscal year, and thereupon shall be exempt from
proof of financial responsibility as provided for herein. (1988 Code § 5.31)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 38/200
3-3A-3: SEASONAL BEER LICENSE:
A. License Established: There is hereby established a seasonal on-sale beer license which is granted
to the Sleepy Eye Baseball Association to be applied for on a yearly basis.
B. Validity: The seasonal license allowed to the Sleepy Eye Baseball Association shall be effective
from April 15 through September 30 of each year.
C. Yearly Application: The Sleepy Eye Baseball Association shall apply for a license each year in
order for said license to be effective.
D. Fee: The license fee for the yearly seasonal license shall be established by resolution of the City
Council for the City. (Ord. 3, 2nd Series, 4-5-1989)
3-3A-4: HOURS AND DAYS OF BEER SALES:
No sale of beer shall be made between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. on the days of Monday through Saturday, nor between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sunday. (1988 Code § 5.32)
ARTICLE B. ON-SALE LIQUOR AND WINE
3-3B-1: LIQUOR LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any pretense or by any device, to sell, barter,
keep for sale, or otherwise dispose of liquor, as part of a commercial transaction, without a license
therefor from the City. This article shall not apply: a) to such potable liquors as are intended for
therapeutic purposes and not as a beverage, b) to industrial alcohol and its compounds not prepared
or used for beverage purposes, c) to wine in the possession of a person duly licensed under this
chapter as an on-sale wine licensee, d) to sales by manufacturers to wholesalers duly licensed as
such by the Commissioner, e) to sales by wholesalers to persons holding liquor licenses from the City,
or f) to the Municipal liquor store. The voters of the City having authorized such issuance at a special
election called for that purpose, the City may issue on-sale liquor licenses to: a) hotels; b) restaurants;
and, c) clubs, provided that liquor sales will be made only to members and bona fide guests. Any
person licensed to sell liquor on-sale shall not be required to obtain an on-sale beer license, and may
sell beer on-sale without an additional license. (1988 Code § 5.40)
3-3B-2: SUNDAY SALES:
The electorate of the City having heretofore authorized the same at a general or special election, a
Sunday on-sale liquor license may be issued to "hotels", "restaurants", or "clubs", as defined in
section 3-3-1 of this chapter, which have on-sale licenses and which also have facilities for serving not
less than thirty (30) guests at one time. The hours of such sales shall be from twelve o'clock (12:00)
noon Sunday to one o'clock (1:00) A.M. Monday in conjunction with the serving of food; provided, that
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 39/200
the licensed establishment is in conformance with the Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act1. (Ord. 6, 2nd
Series, 8-1-1989)
3-3B-3: SPORTS, CONVENTION OR CULTURAL FACILITIES LICENSE:
The Council may authorize any holder of an on-sale liquor license issued by the City or by an adjacent
municipality to sell liquor at any convention, banquet, conference, meeting or social affair conducted
on the premises of a sports, convention or cultural facility owned by the City, or instrumentality thereof
having independent policy-making and appropriating authority and located within the City. The
licensee must be engaged to sell liquor at such an event by the person or organization permitted to
use the premises, and may sell liquor only to persons attending the event. The licensee shall not sell
liquor to any person attending or participating in any amateur athletic event. Such sales may be limited
to designated areas of the facility. All such sales shall be subject to all laws relating thereto. (1988
Code § 5.42)
3-3B-4: TEMPORARY LIQUOR LICENSE:
A. License Authorized: Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, the Council may
issue a license for the temporary on-sale of liquor in connection with a social event sponsored by
the licensee. Such license may provide that the licensee may contract with the holder of a full-year
on-sale license, issued by the City, for liquor catering services.
B. Applicant: The applicant for a license under this section must be a club or charitable, religious, or
other nonprofit organization in existence for at least three (3) years.
C. Terms And Conditions Of License:
1. No license is valid until approved by the Commissioner.
2. No license shall be issued for more than three (3) consecutive days.
3. All licenses and licensees are subject to all provisions of statutes and this Code relating to liquor
sale and licensing. The licensee shall provide proof of financial responsibility coverage and, in
the case of catering, by a full-year on-sale licensee, such caterer shall provide proof of the
extension of such coverage to the licensed premises.
4. Licenses may authorize sales on premises other than those owned or permanently occupied by
the licensee.
D. Insurance Required: The Council may, but at no time shall it be under any obligation whatsoever to,
grant a temporary liquor license on premises owned or controlled by the City. Any such license
may be conditioned, qualified or restricted as the Council sees fit. If the premises to be licensed is
owned or under the control of the City, the applicant shall file with the City, prior to issuance of the
license, a certificate of liability insurance coverage in at least the sum of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) for injury to any one person, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injury to
more than one person, and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for property damage, naming the
City as an insured during the license period. (1988 Code § 5.43)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 40/200
3-3B-5: HOURS AND DAYS OF LIQUOR SALES:
No on-sale sales of liquor shall be made between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. on the days of Monday through Saturday, nor between the hours of one o'clock
(1:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sunday. No off-sale shall be made on Sunday nor
before eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. or after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on Monday through Saturday, nor on
New Year's Day, January 1; Independence Day, July 4; Thanksgiving Day; or Christmas Day,
December 25. No sale of liquor shall be made after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. on December 24. (Ord. 6,
2nd Series, 8-1-1989)
3-3B-6: ON-SALE WINE LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any pretense or by any device, to sell, barter,
keep for sale, or otherwise dispose of wine on-sale, as part of a commercial transaction, without a
license therefor from the City. This section shall not apply: a) to sales by manufacturers to wholesalers
duly licensed as such by the Commissioner, b) to sales by wholesalers to persons holding on-sale or
off-sale liquor licenses from the City, c) to sales by wholesalers to persons holding on-sale wine
licenses from the City, or d) to sales by on-sale liquor licensees on days and during hours when onsale
liquor sales are permitted. (1988 Code § 5.45)
3-3B-7: HOURS AND DAYS OF SALES BY ON-SALE WINE LICENSEES:
No on-sale of wine shall be made between one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on
Sunday, nor between one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and until eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Monday through
Saturday, nor between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. on December 24 and eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. on December 25. (Ord. 6, 2nd Series, 8-1-1989)
3-3B-8: LICENSE RESTRICTIONS, REGULATIONS AND UNLAWFUL ACTS:
A. Bond Required: Prior to issuance of any license the applicant shall file with the City Clerk a bond
with a corporate surety, cash, or United States government bonds in the sum of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) for an on-sale liquor or wine license. A bond filed under this section must be
conditional on the licensee obeying all laws governing the business and paying all taxes, fees,
penalties, and other charges, and must provide that the bond is forfeited to the City issuing the
license on a violation of law. The Commissioner must approve all bonds filed by applicants for an
off-sale license.
B. Licenses In Connection With Premises Of Another: A license may not be issued to a person in
connection with the premises of another to whom a license could not be issued under the
provisions of this chapter. This section does not prevent the granting of a license to a proper
lessee because the person has leased the premises of a minor, a noncitizen who is not a resident
alien, or a person who has been convicted of a crime other than a violation of this chapter.
C. Employment Of Minors: No person under eighteen (18) years of age may sell or serve liquor or
wine on licensed premises.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 41/200
D. On-Sale Wine Establishments: On-sale wine licenses shall be granted only to "restaurants" as
defined in section 3-3-1 of this chapter. Provided, however, for purposes of this article, such
restaurant shall have appropriate facilities for seating not less than twenty five (25) guests at one
time. (1988 Code § 5.47)
ARTICLE C. CLUBS
3-3C-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the meanings stated:
GUEST: A person not a member of the club but present on the club licensed premises in the company
of a host member.
HOST MEMBER: A member who is entertaining a guest who is in the member's company at all times
such guest is on the licensed premises.
MEMBER: Any person in good standing according to rules and regulations of the licensed club,
wherever located, having evidence of current membership upon his person. (1988 Code § 5.70)
3-3C-2: DAILY REGISTER:
In addition to all other general provisions, restrictions and regulations set forth in this chapter, relating
to beer or liquor licensees, as the case may be, all club licensees shall keep a daily register showing
the names of guests present and the name of the host member. Such register shall be open to
inspection by police officers at all times. (1988 Code § 5.70)
3-3C-3: RESTRICTED AND PROHIBITED ACTS:
The following are in addition to all other unlawful acts set forth in this chapter relating to sales and
purchases of beer or liquor, as the case may be. It is unlawful for:
A. Liquor Sales Restricted: A club licensee to sell liquor or beer to any person not a member, or a
bona fide guest of a member, of the licensed club.
B. Guests Only Served: Any club licensee to serve beer or liquor to any nonmember of the licensed
club unless such nonmember is a guest.
C. Persons Liable: Any person who is not a member, or a bona fide guest of a member, of the licensed
club to purchase liquor or beer from the club.
D. Interfere With Officer Of Law: Any club licensee to hinder or prevent a police officer from
determining compliance with this article and chapter, and all other laws.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 42/200
E. Refuse To Cooperate/Give False Information: Any person to refuse, upon request of a licensee or
police officer, to provide information as to whether he or she is a member, guest or host member,
or to give false, fraudulent or misleading information in response to such request. (1988 Code
§ 5.70)
ARTICLE D. MUNICIPAL DISPENSARY
3-3D-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
A Municipal dispensary is hereby established to be operated within the City for the sale of alcoholic
beverages. Such dispensary shall be at such place or places as the Council shall determine and may
be either leased or owned by the City. It shall be in the charge of a person known as the manager who
shall have such assistants as may be necessary. All employees, including the manager, shall hold
their positions at the pleasure of the Council. (1988 Code § 5.71)
3-3D-2: DISPENSARY FUND:
A Liquor Dispensary Fund is hereby created into which all revenues received from the operation of the
dispensary shall be paid, and from which all operating expenses shall be paid. Any surplus
accumulating in this fund may, from time to time, be transferred to the General Fund by resolution of
the Council, and expended for any Municipal purpose. (1988 Code § 5.71)
ARTICLE E. CONSUMPTION AND DISPLAY
3-3E-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any business establishment or club, not holding an on-sale liquor license to directly or
indirectly, or on any pretense or by any device, sell, barter, keep for sale, or otherwise dispose of any
liquid for the purpose of mixing the same with liquor, or permit its members to bring and keep a
personal supply of liquor in lockers assigned to such members, without a license therefor from the
City. (1988 Code § 5.72)
3-3E-2: RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS:
A. Eligible Licensees: If the applicant is otherwise eligible, licenses may be issued only to: 1) persons
who have not, within five (5) years prior to application, been convicted of a felony or of violating
provisions of this chapter or other law relating to the sale or furnishing of alcoholic beverages; 2) a
restaurant; 3) a hotel; 4) a beer licensee; 5) a resort as defined by statute; or, 6) a club or an
unincorporated club otherwise meeting the definition of a club, provided, that no license may be
issued to a club holding an on-sale liquor license.
B. Unlawful Act: It is unlawful to sell liquor on licensed premises. (1988 Code § 5.72)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 43/200
C. License Expiration: In order to coordinate the expiration of a consumption and display license with
a State permit, all licenses shall expire on March 31 of each year. (1988 Code § 5.72; amd. 1996
Code)
D. State Permit Required: Licenses shall be issued only to holders of a consumption and display
permit from the Commissioner.
E. Lockers: A club to which a license is issued under this article may allow members to bring and keep
a personal supply of liquor in lockers on the club's premises. All bottles kept on the premises must
have attached labels signed by the member. No minor may keep a supply of liquor on club
premises.
F. Hours And Days: No licensee may permit a person to consume or display liquor, and no person
may consume or display liquor, between one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon
on Sundays, and between one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Monday
through Saturday. (1988 Code § 5.72)
Chapter 4
PUBLIC DANCES
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings stated:
PUBLIC DANCE: Any dance wherein the public may participate by payment, directly or indirectly, of
an admission fee or price for dancing, which fee may be in the form of a club membership, or payment
of money, directly or indirectly.
PUBLIC DANCING PLACE: Any room, place, or space open to public patronage in which dancing,
wherein the public may participate, is carried on and to which admission may be had by the public by
payment, directly or indirectly, of an admission fee or price for dancing. (1988 Code § 6.30)
3-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
A. License Required: It is unlawful for any person to operate a public dancing place, or hold a public
dance, without a license therefor from the City. (1988 Code § 6.30)
B. Fee: An application fee in an amount as periodically established by the City Council shall be paid to
the City of Sleepy Eye. (Ord. 01-2003, 1-14-2003)
3-4-3: APPLICATION AND LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 44/200
A. Application Required: A verified application for a dance license shall be filed with the City and shall
specify the names and addresses of the person, committee or organization that is to hold the
dance, time and place thereof, and the area of the dance floor. (1988 Code § 6.30)
B. Criminal Record Statement: All applicants shall state whether or not they have been convicted of a
felony, gross misdemeanor, or violation of any public dance laws within the past five (5) years. No
license shall be issued to any person who has been so convicted. (Ord. 01-2003, 1-14-2003)
C. Location: No license shall be granted by the City for any place having so-called "private
apartments" or "private rooms" furnished or used for any purposes other than a legitimate business
purpose which adjoins such dancing place, or which may be reached by stairs, elevators, or
passageway leading from such dancing place. Nor shall a license be granted for any place which
is not properly ventilated and equipped with necessary toilets, washrooms or lighting facilities.
D. Investigation And Report: Applications may be referred by the City to the Chief of Police for
investigation and report prior to being acted upon by the City. (1988 Code § 6.30; amd. Ord. 01-
2003, 1-14-2003)
E. City Manager's Office To Act: The City Manager's Office shall act upon all dance license
applications.
F. Officer In Attendance: At least one officer of the law who is approved by the Chief of Police and
employed and paid by the dance license recipient shall be present at every public dance during the
entire time said dance is being held. For purposes of this subsection, the term "officer of the law"
means any person who is a full time or part-time peace officer or reserve officer. In the discretion of
the City or Chief of Police, more than one such peace officer may be required. An exemption
waiving the requirement that a police officer be present may be granted if approved by the Police
Chief and the City. (Ord. 01-2003, 1-14-2003)
G. License Posted: The dance license shall be posted in the public dancing place and shall state the
name of the licensee, the amount paid therefor, and the time and place licensed. The license shall
also state that the licensee is responsible for the manner of conducting the dance.
H. Under Age Persons: No license shall be issued to any applicant under the age of eighteen (18)
years. (1988 Code § 6.30)
3-4-4: DANCE REGULATIONS:
A. Obscenity And Immorality Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to dance, or for a licensee to
permit or suffer any person to dance at any public dance in an indecent or immodest manner. It is
also unlawful for any person at a public dance to speak in a rude, boisterous, obscene, or indecent
manner or for any licensee to suffer or permit any person so to act or speak in any public dancing
place.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 45/200
B. Illumination: Every public dancing place shall be brightly illuminated while in public use, and
dancing therein while the lights are extinguished, dimmed or turned low so as to give imperfect
illumination is prohibited.
C. Certain Persons Prohibited: No licensee shall permit any unmarried person under the age of
sixteen (16) years, unless said unmarried person is accompanied by his parent or guardian, to
remain in a public dancing place. Nor shall any licensee permit any intoxicated person, or other
person who persists in violating the law, to be or remain in a public dancing place.
D. Hours Of Dancing: No public dance shall be held on Sunday between the hours of one o'clock
(1:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon. No public dance shall be held on any day between
the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (1988 Code § 6.30)
Chapter 5
SHOWS; PERFORMANCES; EXHIBITIONS
3-5-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to present any public show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical or
other performance or exhibition without first having obtained a license therefor from the City. (1988
Code § 6.31)
3-5-2: EXCEPTIONS:
No license shall be required in the following instances:
A. Performances For Students; School And College Events: Performances presented in the local
schools and colleges, under the sponsorship of such schools and colleges, and primarily for the
students thereof only.
B. Performances By Students; Athletic, Musical Or Theatrical Events: Performances of athletic,
musical or theatrical events sponsored by local schools or colleges using student talent only.
C. Events Sponsored By Church And Nonprofit Organizations: Any performance or event in, or
sponsored by, bona fide local church and nonprofit organizations, provided that such organization
shall be incorporated. (1988 Code § 6.31)
3-5-3: OBSCENITY PROHIBITED:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings stated:
NUDITY: Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal human genitals, pubic areas,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 46/200
the post-pubertal human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or
the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. For purposes of this definition, a
female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and the areola only are
covered.
OBSCENE PERFORMANCE: A performance which in whole or in part depicts or reveals nudity,
sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic abuse, or which includes obscenities or
explicit verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual conduct.
OBSCENITIES: Those slang words currently generally rejected for regular use in mixed society,
that are used to refer to genitals, female breasts, sexual conduct or excretory functions or
products, either that have no other meaning or that in context are clearly used for their bodily,
sexual or excretory meaning.
PERFORMANCE: Any play, motion picture film, dance, or other exhibition pictured, animated, or
live, performed before an audience.
SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE: Flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in
undergarments or in revealing or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or
otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed.
SEXUAL CONDUCT: Human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or any touching of the genitals,
pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female, or the breasts of the female, whether alone
or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of
apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT: The condition of human male or female genitals or the breasts of the
female when in a state of sexual stimulation, or the sensual experiences of humans engaging in or
witnessing sexual conduct or nudity.
B. Obscene Performances Prohibited: It is unlawful for any licensee, for a monetary consideration or
other valuable commodity or service, to knowingly or recklessly: 1) exhibit an obscene
performance; or, 2) directly or indirectly sell an admission ticket or other means to gain entrance to
an obscene performance; or, 3) directly or indirectly permit admission of a person to premises
whereon there is exhibited an obscene performance.
C. Prosecution: Any prosecution under this section shall include the following elements:
1. That the average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find the
performance, taken as a whole, appealing to the prurient interest of the audience;
2. That the performance describes or depicts, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct included
in the definition of "obscene performance"; and,
3. That the performance, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific
value. (1988 Code § 6.31)
Chapter 6
TOBACCO SALE AND USAGE BY MINORS
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 47/200
3-6-1: PURPOSE:
Because the City recognizes that many persons under the age of eighteen (18) years purchase or
otherwise obtain, possess and use tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, and electronic
delivery devices, and such sales, possession, and use are violations of both State and Federal laws;
and because studies done and available from the State Health Department, American Cancer Society,
the Association of Non-Smokers and Smoke Free Coalition, which the City hereby accepts and
adopts, have shown that most smokers begin smoking before they have reached the age of eighteen
(18) years and that those persons who reach the age of eighteen (18) years without having started
smoking are significantly less likely to begin smoking; and because smoking has been shown to be
the cause of several serious health problems which subsequently place a financial burden on all levels
of government; this chapter shall be intended to regulate the sale, possession, and use of tobacco,
tobacco products, tobacco-related devices and electronic delivery devices for the purpose of enforcing
and furthering existing laws, to protect minors against the serious effects associated with the illegal
use of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, and electronic delivery devices and to
further the official public policy of the State of Minnesota in regard to preventing young people from
starting to smoke as stated in Minnesota Statutes section 144.391. (Ord. 122, 2nd Series, 9-11-2014)
3-6-2: DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS:
Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall be given their
commonly accepted definitions. The singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the
singular. The masculine shall include the feminine and neuter, and vice-versa. The term "shall" means
mandatory and the term "may" means permissive. The following terms shall have the definitions given
to them:
COMPLIANCE CHECKS: The system the City uses to investigate and ensure that those authorized to
sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, and electronic delivery devices are following
and complying with the requirements of this chapter. Compliance checks shall involve the use of
minors as authorized by this chapter. Compliance checks shall also mean the use of minors who
attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, or electronic delivery devices
for educational, research and training purposes as authorized by State and Federal laws. Compliance
checks may also be conducted by other units of government for the purpose of enforcing appropriate
Federal, State, or local laws and regulations relating to tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related
devices, and electronic delivery devices.
ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICES: Any product containing or delivering nicotine, lobelia, or any
other substance intended for human consumption that can be used by a person to simulate smoking
in the delivery of nicotine or any other substance through inhalation of vapor from the product.
Electronic delivery device shall include any component part of such a product whether or not sold
separately. Electronic delivery device shall not include any product that has been approved or
otherwise certified by the United States Food and Drug Administration for legal sales for use in
tobacco cessation treatment or other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that
approved purpose.
INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED: The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco product wrapped
individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and tobacco products shall include, but not be
limited to, single cigarette packs, single bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or
other packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing more than a
single pack or other container as described in this definition shall not be considered individually
packaged.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 48/200
LOOSIES: The common term used to refer to a single or individually packaged cigarette.
MINOR: Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of eighteen (18) years.
MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS: Any form of business operated out of a truck, van, automobile,
or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and not a fixed address store front or other permanent
type of structure authorized for sales transactions.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT: Any place of business where tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related
devices, or electronic delivery devices are available for sale to the general public. Retail
establishments shall include, but not be limited to, grocery stores, convenience stores, and
restaurants.
SALE: Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other consideration.
SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING: Open displays of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related
devices, or electronic delivery devices in any manner where any person shall have access to the
tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, or electronic delivery devices, without the
assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee's employee. The assistance or intervention
shall entail the actual physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, or
electronic delivery device between the customer and the licensee or employee. Self-service
merchandising shall not include vending machines.
TOBACCO OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance or item containing tobacco leaf, including but
not limited to, cigarettes; cigars; pipe tobacco; snuff; fine cut or other chewing tobacco; cheroots;
stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff
flowers; cavendish; shorts; plug and twist tobaccos; dipping tobaccos; refuse craps, clippings,
cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco leaf prepared in such
manner as to be suitable for chewing, sniffing or smoking.
TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES: Any tobacco product as well as a pipe, rolling papers, electronic
delivery device, or other device intentionally designed or intended to be used in a manner which
enables the chewing, sniffing, or smoking of tobacco or tobacco products.
VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type of device which dispenses
tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, or electronic delivery devices upon the insertion
of money, tokens, or other form of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to
purchase the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, or electronic delivery device. (Ord.
122, 2nd Series, 9-11-2014)
3-6-3: LICENSE:
No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, or
electronic delivery devices without first having obtained a license to do so from the City.
A. Application: An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices,
or electronic delivery devices shall be made on a form provided by the City. The application shall
contain the full name of the applicant, the applicant's residential and business addresses and
telephone numbers, the name of the business for which the license is sought, and any additional
information the City deems necessary. Upon receipt of a completed application, the City Clerk shall
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 49/200
forward the application to the Council for action at a regularly scheduled Council meeting. If the
Clerk shall determine that an application is incomplete, he or she shall return the application to the
applicant with notice of the information necessary to make the application complete.
B. Action: The Council may either approve or deny the license, or it may delay action for such
reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any investigation of the application or the
applicant it deems necessary. If the Council shall approve the license, the Clerk shall issue the
license to the applicant. If the Council denies the license, notice of the denial shall be given to the
applicant along with notice of the applicant's right to appeal the Council's decision.
C. Term: All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid for one calendar year from the date of
issue except the first year which may be a partial year in order to have all licenses issued at the
same time.
D. Revocation Or Suspension: Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended
as provided in the violations and penalties section of this chapter.
E. Transfers: All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid only on the premises for which the
license was issued and only for the person to whom the license was issued. No transfer of any
license to another location or person shall be valid without the prior approval of the Council.
F. Moveable Place Of Business: No license shall be issued to a moveable place of business. Only
fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be licensed under this chapter.
G. Display: All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of the general public on the
licensed premises.
H. Renewals: The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be handled in the same manner
as the original application. The request for a renewal shall be made at no more than sixty (60) days
before the expiration of the current license. The issuance of a license issued under this chapter
shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant and shall not entitle the
holder to an automatic renewal of the license. (Ord. 122, 2nd Series, 9-11-2014)
3-6-4: FEES:
No license shall be issued under this chapter until the appropriate license fee shall be paid in full. The
fee for a license under this chapter shall be according to a schedule established by resolution. (Ord.
122, 2nd Series, 9-11-2014)
3-6-5: BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license under this chapter;
however, except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of any particular ground for
denial does not mean that the City must deny the license. If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 50/200
to a person, it shall be revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the license under
this section.
A. The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years.
B. The applicant has been convicted within the past five (5) years of any violation of a Federal, State,
or local law, ordinance provision or other regulation relating to tobacco or tobacco products,
tobacco related devices, or electronic delivery devices.
C. The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, or
electronic delivery devices revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months of the date of
application.
D. The applicant fails to provide any information required on the application, or provides false or
misleading information.
E. The applicant is prohibited by Federal, State, or other local law, ordinance, or other regulation, from
holding such a license. (Ord. 122, 2nd Series, 9-11-2014)
3-6-6: PROHIBITED SALES:
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco product,
tobacco related device, or electronic delivery device.
A. To any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
B. By means of any type of vending machine, except as may otherwise be provided in this chapter.
C. By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need to make a verbal or written
request to an employee of the licensed premises in order to receive the tobacco, tobacco product,
tobacco related device, or electronic delivery device and whereby there is not a physical exchange
of the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, or electronic delivery device between the
licensee or the licensee's employee, and the customer.
D. By means of loosies as defined in section 3-6-2 of this chapter.
E. Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, belladonna, strychnos, cocaine, marijuana, or other
deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic, or controlled substances except nicotine and other substances
found naturally in tobacco or added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process.
F. By any other means, to any other person, or in any other manner or form prohibited by Federal,
State, or other local law, ordinance provision, or other regulation. (Ord. 122, 2nd Series, 9-11-
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 51/200
2014)
3-6-7: VENDING MACHINES:
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this chapter to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco
products, tobacco related devices, or electronic delivery devices by the means of a vending machine
unless minors are at all times prohibited from entering the licensed establishment. (Ord. 122, 2nd
Series, 9-11-2014)
3-6-8: SELF-SERVICE SALES:
It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this chapter to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco products,
tobacco related devices, or electronic delivery devices by any means whereby the customer may have
access to such items without having to request the item from the licensee or the licensee's employee
and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related
device, or electronic delivery device between the licensee or his or her clerk and the customer. All
tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, and electronic delivery devices shall either be
stored behind a counter or other area not freely accessible to customers, or in a case or other storage
unit not left open and accessible to the general public. Any retailer selling tobacco, tobacco products,
tobacco related devices, or electronic delivery devices at the time this chapter is adopted shall comply
with this section within sixty (60) days following the effective date of this chapter, at which time all selfservice
sales of cigarettes would be banned. A licensee will not be subject to this section if minors are
at all times prohibited from entering or ninety percent (90%) or more of their revenues are from sale of
tobacco, tobacco related products or electronic delivery devices. (Ord. 122, 2nd Series, 9-11-2014)
3-6-9: RESPONSIBILITY:
All licensees under this chapter shall be responsible for the actions of their employees in regard to the
sale of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, or electronic delivery devices on the
licensed premises, and the sale of such an item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the
license holder. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the City from also subjecting
the clerk to whatever penalties are appropriate under this chapter, State or Federal law, or other
applicable law or regulation. (Ord. 122, 2nd Series, 9-11-2014)
3-6-10: COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS:
All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the City police or other authorized City official
during regular business hours. From time to time, but at least once per year, the City shall conduct
compliance checks by engaging, with the written consent of their parents or guardians, minors over
the age of fifteen (15) years but less than eighteen (18) years, to enter the licensed premises to
attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, or electronic delivery
devices. Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be supervised by the City designated
law enforcement officers or other designated City personnel. Minors used for compliance checks shall
not be guilty of unlawful possession of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, or
electronic delivery devices when such items are obtained as a part of the compliance check. No minor
used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting the minor's age,
and all minors lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall answer all questions about the minor's
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 52/200
age asked by the licensee or his or her employee and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for
which he or she is asked. Nothing in this section shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by State
or Federal laws for educational, research, or training purposes, or required for the enforcement of a
particular State or Federal law. (Ord. 122, 2nd Series, 9-11-2014)
3-6-11: OTHER ILLEGAL ACTS:
Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of this chapter.
A. Illegal Sales: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or otherwise provide any
tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, or electronic delivery device to any minor.
B. Illegal Possession: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to have in his or her
possession any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, or electronic delivery device.
This subsection shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check.
C. Illegal Use: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to smoke, chew, sniff, or otherwise
use any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, or electronic delivery device.
D. Illegal Procurement: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to purchase or attempt to
purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, or electronic
delivery device, and it shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to purchase or otherwise
obtain such items on behalf of a minor. It shall further be a violation for any person to coerce or
attempt to coerce a minor to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco
product, tobacco related device, or electronic delivery device. This subsection shall not apply to
minors lawfully involved in a compliance check.
E. Use Of False Identification: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to attempt to disguise
his or her true age by the use of a false form of identification, whether the identification is that of
another person or one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to
represent an age older than the actual age of the person.
F. Illegal Location: It shall be a violation of this chapter to sell or provide any tobacco, tobacco
products, tobacco related device, or electronic delivery device within three hundred fifty feet (350')
of schools. (Ord. 122, 2nd Series, 9-11-2014)
3-6-12: VIOLATIONS:
A. Notice: Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged violator shall be issued, either
personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the alleged violation and which shall inform the
alleged violator of his or her right to be heard on the accusation.
B. Hearings: If a person accused of violating this chapter so requests, a hearing shall be scheduled,
the time and place of which shall be published and provided to the accused violator.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 53/200
C. Hearing Officer: The City Mayor, City Clerk and City Council President shall serve as the Hearing
Officer.
D. Decision: If the Hearing Officer determines that a violation of this chapter did occur, that decision,
along with the Hearing Officer's reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed under
section 3-6-13 of this chapter, shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the
accused violator. Likewise, if the Hearing Officer finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds
for not imposing any penalty, such findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted
accused violator.
E. Appeals: Appeals of any decision made by the Hearing Officer shall be filed in the District Court for
the City in which the alleged violation occurred.
F. Misdemeanor Prosecution: Nothing in this section shall prohibit the City from seeking prosecution
as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of this chapter. If the City elects to seek misdemeanor
prosecution, no administrative penalty shall be imposed.
G. Continued Violation: Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs or continues, shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 122, 2nd Series, 9-11-2014)
3-6-13: PENALTIES:
A. Licensees: Any licensee found to have violated this chapter, or whose employee shall have violated
this chapter, shall be charged an administrative fine of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for a first
violation of this chapter; two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second offense at the same licensed
premises within a twenty four (24) month period; and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a third
or subsequent offense at the same location within a twenty four (24) month period. In addition,
after the third offense, the license shall be suspended for not less than three (3) months.
B. Other Individuals: Other individuals, other than minors regulated by subsection C of this section,
found to be in violation of this chapter shall be charged an administrative fee of fifty dollars
($50.00).
C. Minors: Minors found in unlawful possession of, or who unlawfully purchase or attempt to purchase,
tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, or electronic delivery devices, shall be fined
thirty dollars ($30.00).
D. Misdemeanor: Nothing in this section shall prohibit the City from seeking prosecution as a
misdemeanor for any violation of this chapter. (Ord. 122, 2nd Series, 9-11-2014)
3-6-14: EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES:
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the providing of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 54/200
devices, or electronic delivery devices to a minor as part of a lawfully recognized religious, spiritual, or
cultural ceremony. It shall be an affirmative defense to the violation of this chapter for a person to have
reasonably relied on proof of age as described by State law. (Ord. 122, 2nd Series, 9-11-2014)
Chapter 7
SOLICITORS
3-7-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
This chapter is not intended to in any way hinder, delay or interfere with legitimate business or
organizational activities. The Council finds, however, that solicitors have used public streets and their
direct contact with residents of the City for the illegitimate solicitation practices of harassment,
nuisance, theft, deceit, or menacing, troublesome or unlawful activities. This chapter is intended to
ferret out and control: a) businesses and organizations using solicitation as a means of concealing
unlawful activities; and, b) businesses and organizations which, though its activities be lawful or even
commendable, use such illegitimate practices in solicitation; and, c) individual natural persons who,
though they represent lawful businesses and organizations, use such illegitimate solicitation practices.
The Council further finds that a large number of the residents of the City are employed as their
livelihood and means of support by manufacturing plants and other businesses on shifts rotating
between night and day, and to disturb them during their sleeping hours for the purpose of solicitation is
a source of nuisance or even harassment and should be subject to control. (1988 Code § 6.34)
3-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, as used in this chapter shall have the meanings stated:
BUSINESS SOLICITATION: An attempt by a solicitor, engaging in transactions of the same kind, to
sell or distribute for a consideration any goods or services primarily for personal, family, or household
purposes, when either the solicitor or person acting for him contacts the solicitee by telephone or in
person, other than at the established place of business of solicitor, except:
A. An attempted solicitation in which the solicitee personally knows the identity of the solicitor, the
name of the business firm or organization he represents, and the identity or kinds of goods,
services or things of value offered; or
B. An attempted solicitation in which the solicitee has first initiated the contact with the solicitor; or,
C. An attempted solicitation of a newspaper subscription in which the solicitor is a minor child
engaged in both the delivery and sale of the newspaper; or,
D. An attempted solicitation for the sale of products of a farm or garden occupied or cultivated by
the solicitor, when facts of such occupancy or cultivation are proven by the solicitor.
CONTRIBUTION SOLICITATION: An attempt by a solicitor to obtain money from a solicitee for any
cause or purpose, when either the solicitor or person acting for him contacts the solicitee by telephone
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 55/200
or in person other than at the established place of meeting, business, service, or activity of the
organization represented by the solicitor, except:
A. An attempted solicitation in which the solicitee personally knows the identity of the solicitor, the
name of the organization he represents, and the identity of the services performed or offered by
the organization, or,
B. An attempted solicitation in which the solicitee has first initiated the contact with the solicitor or
the organization represented by him.
ESTABLISHED PLACE: Real estate in the City owned, leased on a month-to-month or term-certain
longer than thirty (30) days. The term includes a booth, compartment, or area leased or assigned
during and for the length of an event or occasion.
GOODS: Any tangible thing of value including money if the selling price exceeds the face value
thereof. The term includes such chattels as are furnished or used at the time of sale or subsequently
in the modernization, rehabilitation, repair, alteration, improvement or construction of real property so
as to become a part thereof whether or not severable therefrom. The term also includes the following
intangibles:
A. Property, casualty, health, accident and life insurance,
B. Corporate, mutual fund and limited partnership shares or interests, and,
C. Merchandise certificates or coupons, redeemable in cash or in exchange for goods or services,
either in whole or in part, but not including such merchandise certificates or coupons as are
given or distributed as a gratuity.
SERVICES: Work, labor, or services of any kind.
SOLICITEE: The person solicited.
SOLICITOR: Any person making the solicitation, including such common terms as "peddler",
"transient merchant" and "canvasser". (1988 Code § 6.34)
3-7-3: PROHIBITED SOLICITATION PRACTICES:
A. Unlawful Purpose: It is unlawful for any solicitor to engage in solicitation for any unlawful business
or organizational purpose or activity.
B. Coercive Tactics: It is unlawful for any solicitor to practice harassment, nuisance, theft, deceit, or
menacing, troublesome or otherwise unlawful activities during the course of solicitation.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 56/200
C. Forced Entry: It is unlawful for any solicitor to enter, or attempt to gain entrance, to residential
premises displaying at such entrance a sign at least three and three-fourths inches (33/4") long and
three and three-fourths inches (33/4") high with the words "Peddlers and Solicitors Prohibited" or
"Solicitors Prohibited" in type not smaller than 48-point.
D. Refusal To Leave Premises: It is unlawful for any solicitor to refuse to leave the premises when
requested by the owner, lessee, or person in charge thereof.
E. Unlicensed/Unregistered: It is unlawful for any person to engage in contribution solicitation without
completion of licensing or registration as herein provided.
F. Failure To Secure License: It is unlawful for any person to engage in business solicitation without a
license as herein provided. (1988 Code § 6.34)
3-7-4: APPLICATION:
Applications for licensing or registration shall contain the name and address of the solicitor, the name
and address of the business or organization for which solicitations are sought and such other
information as may reasonably be required by the Council as a condition to registration or licensing or
to permit investigation into the applicant's background and past solicitation practices. No application
for a business solicitor's license shall be complete unless it is accompanied by a valid and current
license issued by the county in which such solicitor proposes to engage in solicitation. (1988 Code
§ 6.34)
3-7-5: INVESTIGATION; APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL:
A. Investigation: All applications for licensing or registration shall be immediately referred to the Chief
of Police, and by him or other person acting in his stead, investigated as to the truth thereof. The
Chief of Police shall have five (5) business days within which to investigate and make a
recommendation thereon.
B. Approval; Issuance, Fee: If he finds no past history of the applicant indicating violations similar to
those declared unlawful in this chapter, he shall recommend issuing a license or approving
registration, as the case may be, and the City Clerk shall forthwith advise the applicant. The City
Clerk shall issue a license, upon payment of the fee therefor, to the approved applicant for
business solicitation, and shall approve the completion of registration by the applicant for a
contribution solicitor.
C. Disapproval; Appeal: If the Chief of Police finds a past history of the applicant indicating violations
similar to those declared unlawful in this chapter, he shall recommend denial of the license or
registration. In all matters of recommended denial the applicant shall be forthwith advised thereof,
and the application shall be referred to the Council and considered by it at its next regular or
special meeting occurring more than ten (10) days thereafter. The applicant shall be afforded an
opportunity to be heard at such meeting. (1988 Code § 6.34)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 57/200
3-7-6: DURATION OF CONTRIBUTION SOLICITATION REGISTRATION:
Registration of contribution solicitation shall expire sixty (60) days after registration is approved. (1988
Code § 6.34)
3-7-7: EXCLUSIONS:
The City may exclude certain classes of solicitor events from compliance with licensing or registration
provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that such exclusion shall not extend to the prohibited
solicitation practices set forth in subsections 3-7-3A through D, inclusive, of this chapter. (1988 Code
§ 6.34)
Chapter 8
TREE SERVICE
3-8-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of trimming, removing or treating trees for
others, or selling products purporting to arrest, impede or cure tree diseases, without a license
therefor from the City. (1988 Code § 6.35)
3-8-2: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS:
A. Qualifications Of Applicant: No tree service license shall be granted to any person unless he can
adequately demonstrate that he possesses the necessary skill, knowledge and ability to
scientifically perform the service, and that he owns or has under his control sufficient equipment to
safely and properly perform the service.
B. Insurance Required: No license shall issue until the applicant has filed with the City Clerk a policy
or certificate of public liability insurance for coverage concurrent with the license term with limits of
at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for injury to one person, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) for each occurrence, and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for property damage.
(1988 Code § 6.35)
Chapter 9
PLUMBERS
3-9-1: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall be licensed to engage in the work or business of plumbing or the installation of water
or sewer pipes without a license therefor from the City. No person shall be licensed under the City
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 58/200
unless he or she shall have a license from the Minnesota State Commissioner of Health or unless they
have five (5) years of experience working under a master plumber. (Ord. 80, 2nd Series, 7-12-2005)
3-9-2: APPLICATIONS AND LICENSE:
Application for a plumbing license shall be made to the City Administrator's Office. A fee of fifteen
dollars ($15.00) covering the period of July 1 thru June 30 of each year shall be made. The fifteen
dollar ($15.00) fee shall apply to renewals and for a new license from the date of application to the
following June 30th. New yearly rates may be adjusted by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 80, 2nd
Series, 7-12-2005)
3-9-3: BONDING AND INSURANCE:
All persons licensed by the City shall have a twenty five thousand dollar ($25,000.00) bond filed with
the State with a copy to the City or a twenty five thousand dollar ($25,000.00) bond with the City
before contracting to do plumbing work in the City. The person contracting to do plumbing work may
give bond to the State which would be in lieu of bonds required for plumbing work by the City or may
give bond to the City directly. The bond is to benefit persons suffering loss by reason of failure to
comply with the requirements of the Plumbing Code. A copy of the plumber's bond shall be held on file
with the City or a copy thereof if given to the State of Minnesota.
Plumbers shall file an insurance certificate with the City for public and product liability with limits of at
least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per person, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per
occurrence, and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) property damage. Also, proof of worker's
compensation coverage shall be filed or a statement not requiring such coverage per Minnesota
Statutes 176.182 and 176.181 subd. 2. (Ord. 80, 2nd Series, 7-12-2005)
3-9-4: PERMITS REQUIRED:
In addition to the above requirements, all plumbers shall file necessary excavation and plumbing
permits as required by this Code prior to commencing work. (Ord. 80, 2nd Series, 7-12-2005)
3-9-5: MASTER PLUMBER REQUIRED:
Only a master plumber shall work on City taps within the City of Sleepy Eye. (Ord. 80, 2nd Series, 7-
12-2005)
3-9-6: WORKING WITHIN CITY:
All plumbers doing work within the City shall provide a Minnesota business tax ID# or social security
number of the licensee as per Minnesota Statutes. (Ord. 80, 2nd Series, 7-12-2005)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 59/200
Title 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 1
OPEN BURNING
4-1-1: PROHIBITED:
All burning of leaves, vegetative fuels, structures and refuse is prohibited within the City at all times
and in all seasons. Burn barrels, even if approved by the Department of Natural Resources, may not
be used in the City. (Ord. 28, 2nd Series, 7-6-1995)
4-1-2: EXCEPTIONS:
A. Controlled Burns Of Fire Departments: Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit Fire Departments from
burning structures within the City if complying with the DNR rules for training fires nor from
conducting controlled burns of grass and weed vegetation on City-owned property.
B. Campfires, Grills Or Other Devices: Also excepted are campfires and fire contained in a charcoal
grill, camp stove, or other device designed for the purpose of cooking or heating. A "campfire" is
defined as a fire set for cooking, warming, or ceremonial purposes, which is not more than three
feet (3') in diameter by three feet (3') high, and has had the ground five feet (5') from the base of
the fire cleared of all combustible material. (Ord. 28, 2nd Series, 7-6-1995)
Chapter 2
SHADE TREE DISEASE CONTROL
4-2-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any elm, oak or ash tree infected to any degree with Dutch elm disease, oak wilt or emerald ash borer
is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 101, 2nd Series, 2-9-2010)
4-2-2: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE:
The Council may order the abatement of any such nuisance and cause the infected tree to be
sprayed, removed, burned or otherwise treated to destroy and prevent as fully as possible the spread
of shade tree disease. Any ash tree showing signs of decline would be removed under the same
guidelines as a nuisance tree. (Ord. 101, 2nd Series, 2-9-2010)
4-2-3: ASSESSMENT:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 60/200
The cost of such abatement shall be paid by the City when the trees are on the boulevards or other
property owned by the City, and the cost shall be assessed against the property owner when the trees
are on privately owned property. If the assessment is not paid within sixty (60) days, the City Clerk
shall certify the amount to the County Auditor for collection with other assessments and taxes. When
the City bears the cost of tree removal, the adjacent property owner will bear the cost of tree
replacement taken from an acceptable list of trees chosen by the City. (Ord. 101, 2nd Series, 2-9-
2010)
4-2-4: PENALTY:
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs
an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful or performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure is
prohibited or declared unlawful by a Code adopted by reference by this chapter, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions
hereof. (1988 Code § 10.99)
Chapter 3
BLIGHT CONDITIONS
4-3-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS:
A. The City Council makes the following findings:
1. Any accumulation of any garbage, rubbish, offal, refuse, the body of a dead animal, or other
litter on any property, or in a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon
any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway, or other property, is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance, as it is a direct threat to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of this City, and it
detracts from the surrounding neighborhood because it: a) is unsightly, b) decreases adjoining
landowners' and occupants' enjoyment of their property and neighborhood, and c) adversely
affects property values and neighborhood patterns.
2. Poorly maintained buildings, fences and structures, and the prolonged presence of dumpsters
filled with construction debris is a growing problem of concern and a direct threat to the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of this City. The Council finds these matters to be public
nuisances and adopts this chapter in an effort to regulate them.
3. Buildings, fences, and other structures that have been so poorly maintained that their physical
condition and appearance detract from the surrounding neighborhood are declared to be public
nuisances because they: a) are unsightly, b) decrease adjoining landowners' and occupants'
enjoyment of their property and neighborhood, and c) adversely affect property values and
neighborhood patterns.
4. Dumpsters on residential property are necessary for temporary projects such as remodeling,
clean up, landscaping, renovations and construction activities. However, the extended presence
of dumpsters on residential property may cause aesthetic, health and safety concerns especially
for adjacent property owners and, as such, are declared to be public nuisances. The Council
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 61/200
determines it is in the best interests of the public's health, safety, comfort, peace, tranquility and
general welfare to limit the use of dumpsters on residential property.
5. The maintenance of unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped or junked automobiles not in
good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements,
equipment, junk or personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the
purposes for which it was manufactured is hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to
the public health and safety. Unsheltered storage of these property items throughout the City
tend to impede traffic in the streets, interfere with the enjoyment of and reduce the value of
private property, invite plundering, create fire hazards and other safety and health hazards to
children as well as adults, interfere with the comfort and well-being of the public, and create,
extend and aggravate urban blight. As such, the Council determines that, in order to protect the
public health, safety and welfare, such conditions must be regulated, abated or prohibited.
6. Property that attracts or harbors vermin, or an owner, occupant, or possessor of property who
fails to cause such vermin to be remediated or removed from such property in a safe and
sanitary manner, is a direct threat to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of this City and
is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. (Ord. 140, 2nd Series, 10-10-2017)
4-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the City Council establishes the following definitions:
BLIGHT OFFICER: Shall be the Chief of Police for the City of Sleepy Eye, any peace officer in the
City of Sleepy Eye, or an individual appointed to said position by the City Council.
DESIGNATED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: Shall be the Sleepy Eye Police Department or City
Attorney for the City of Sleepy Eye.
DUMPSTER: Shall mean any portable container (typically open on top), compactors, roll-offs or
recycling containers used for the collection or storage of waste, whether from active and ongoing
permitted construction projects, house cleans, or other use.
GARBAGE: Shall mean trash including, but not limited to, waste material, discarded matter, wasted or
spoiled food, paper, cans, bottles, matter that is wrecked, scattered, or destroyed, or material or
matter that is no longer useful.
JUNK: Shall mean worn out or discarded material including, but not limited to, household appliances
or parts thereof, tools, discarded building materials, tin cans, broken glass, broken furniture,
mattresses, box springs, boxes, crates, cardboard, tires or any other unsightly debris the accumulation
of which has an adverse effect upon neighborhood or City property values, health, safety or general
welfare.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Shall mean every vehicle which is self-propelled or at some point in time was selfpropelled.
OPEN SPACE: Shall mean an area that is visible by surrounding properties or visible by the public
from a public right-of-way, including but not limited to a street, alley, or sidewalk.
PROPERTY: Shall mean any property within the City of Sleepy Eye.
RUBBISH AND REFUSE: Shall mean non-garbage solid waste including, but not limited to, barrels,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 62/200
cans, cardboard, glass, paper, plastic, sweepings, clippings, ashes, rags, used or discarded building
materials, and pallets.
VERMIN: Shall mean any non-domesticated animal, insect, or organism that is potentially distributive
or injurious to the health or comfort of any persons, and includes but is not limited to mice, rats,
pigeons, cockroaches, and other potential vectors. (Ord. 140, 2nd Series, 10-10-2017)
4-3-3: GARBAGE:
A. No person shall accumulate any garbage, rubbish, offal, refuse, the body of a dead animal, or other
litter on any property, whether or not such accumulation is in a proper container for collection.
B. No person shall cast, place, sweep, or deposit anywhere within the City any garbage, rubbish, offal,
refuse, body of a dead animal, or other litter in any such manner that it may be carried or deposited
by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway, or other property. (Ord. 140, 2nd
Series, 10-10-2017)
4-3-4: BUILDING MAINTENANCE AND APPEARANCE:
A. No person shall keep or permit to remain a building, fence, or other structure that conforms with
any one of the following conditions:
1. Any part of any exterior surface has deterioration, holes, breaks, gaps, loose or rotting boards or
timbers.
2. Any exterior surface that has had a surface finish such as paint applied is not maintained in
order to avoid noticeable deterioration of the finish. Any wall or other exterior surface that has
peeling, cracked, chipped or otherwise deteriorated surface finish on more than twenty five
percent (25%) of:
a. Any one wall or other flat surface; or
b. All door and window moldings, eaves, gutters and similar projections on any one side or
surface.
3. Glass, including windows and exterior light fixtures, are broken or cracked, or screens are torn
or separated from moldings.
4. Exterior doors and shutters are not hung properly and do not have an operable mechanism to
keep them securely shut or in place.
5. Cornices, moldings, lintels, sills, bay or dormer windows, and similar projections are not kept in
good repair and are not free from cracks and defects that make them hazardous or unsightly.
6. Roof surfaces are not tight and have defects that admit water.
7. Roof drainage systems are not secured and hung properly.
8. Chimneys, antennae, air vents, and other similar projections are not structurally sound and are
not in good repair. These projections are not secured properly, where applicable, to an exterior
wall or exterior roof.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 63/200
9. Foundations are not structurally sound and are in bad repair. (Ord. 140, 2nd Series, 10-10-2017)
4-3-5: DUMPSTERS:
A. A dumpster may be located on a property during the execution of a building permit. A dumpster
must be removed within five (5) calendar days of the expiration of a building permit, passage of all
final inspections or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever is later.
B. No person shall keep a dumpster on a property longer than the time-frame prescribed in this
section. This shall not limit a person's ability to keep a dumpster on a property when there are
regularly-scheduled weekly pickups for the contents of the dumpster. (Ord. 140, 2nd Series, 10-10-
2017)
4-3-6: MOTOR VEHICLES, EQUIPMENT, JUNK:
A. No person shall place, park, permit to remain, store or leave upon an open area of a property any
motor vehicle that conforms with any one of the following conditions:
1. The motor vehicle does not have a valid current motor vehicle license affixed to it.
2. The motor vehicle is unusable or inoperable because of lack of, or defects in component parts.
3. The motor vehicle is unusable or inoperable because of damage from collision, deterioration, or
having been cannibalized.
4. The motor vehicle is beyond repair and therefore not intended for future use as motor vehicle.
5. The motor vehicle is being retained on the property for possible use of salvageable parts.
B. No person shall maintain unsheltered storage of any other vehicles, machinery, implements,
equipment, junk or personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes
for which it was manufactured.
C. The owner or possessor of a motor vehicle or of any other vehicles, machinery, implements,
equipment, junk or personal property described in this section shall be responsible to remove the
motor vehicle, other vehicle, machinery, implement, equipment, junk or personal property to a duly
licensed junk yard or other authorized place of deposit or storage. In the event the owner or
possessor cannot be located, then it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property to
remove it from the property.
D. This section shall not apply to the owner or occupier of a property that sells fifteen (15) or more
vehicles, at said property, in any given calendar year.
E. No person shall place, park, permit to remain, or store a motor vehicle on a surface that is dirt or
grass-covered. This subsection shall not be applicable during snow emergencies.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 64/200
F. No person shall place, park, permit to remain, or store a motor vehicle in the front setback (front
yard) of a property, unless the driveway or parking area is approved by the City Council. (Ord. 140,
2nd Series, 10-10-2017)
4-3-7: VERMIN:
A. No person shall create, cause, permit, or fail to remediate or remove any condition on such
property that attracts or harbors vermin. No person shall allow or permit any accumulation of
material that harbors or attracts vermin.
B. No person shall fail to cause such vermin to be removed from the property in a safe and sanitary
manner. (Ord. 140, 2nd Series, 10-10-2017)
4-3-8: NOTICE AND ABATEMENT:
A. Whenever a person fails to comply with this chapter, the Blight Officer shall order the owner or
occupant thereof of a property to remove the same at the owner or occupant's expense within a
time not to exceed ten (10) calendar days, which exact time shall be specified in said notice. The
Blight Officer, in his sole discretion, may establish the time limit to be less than ten (10) calendar
days, but may not establish the time limit to be less than five (5) calendar days. Said notice shall
be signed by the Blight Officer, shall be addressed to at least one owner or occupant of the
property on which said non-compliance is found, and shall contain a brief description of the noncompliance.
Said notice shall contain the address of the property upon which said non-compliance
is found, and setting forth that, unless the non-compliance is abated or removed within said time,
the Blight Officer will issue a ticket and/or seek a civil court order which may cause the City to
abate or remove the non-compliance at the expense of the owner of the property.
B. The notice shall be served by a peace officer by delivery of a copy thereof to at least one owner or
occupant, who must be of legal age, of such property. If the owner or occupant of the property is
unknown or absent with no representative or agent upon whom notice can be served, then the
peace officer shall post said notice on the front door of the property or in an otherwise conspicuous
place on the property described in the notice.
C. After the time specified in the notice has elapsed, the Blight Officer shall investigate to determine if
the failure to comply with this chapter has been removed or abated from the property. Additional
time may be granted by the Blight Officer, in his/her sole discretion, where extraneous/special
circumstances or a bona fide effort to remove or eliminate said non-compliance is in progress. If
the non-compliance is not removed or abated from the property within the time specified in the
notice and no additional time has been granted, the Blight Officer shall notify the designated
enforcement agency for the City and direct that a ticket or a civil summons and complaint to
appear in court be issued.
D. Any owner or occupier of a property who fails to remove and abate any non-compliance of this
chapter after proper notice, shall be liable to the City for all expenses incurred in the removal and
abatement of the non-compliance. The City shall have the right to recover all such costs and a lien
may be imposed and charged against the property on which the non-compliance was located, and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 65/200
the City Clerk shall at the time of certifying City taxes to the County Auditor, certify the aforesaid
costs to the County Auditor, as other taxes are certified. (Ord. 140, 2nd Series, 10-10-2017)
4-3-9: VIOLATIONS:
A. No owner or occupier of a property, after notice and after the time allowed in said notice has
lapsed, as described in section 4-3-8 of this chapter, shall fail to abate or remove from said
property a condition that does not comply with this chapter. Said failure shall constitute a violation
of this chapter. Said failure shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter for each notice given
pursuant to section 4-3-8 of this chapter.
B. A violation under this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. The fine amounts shall be as follows:
1. One violation within three (3) years: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
2. Two (2) violations within three (3) years: Five hundred dollars ($500.00).
3. Three (3) or more violations within three (3) years: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
C. Violation of this chapter may involve a civil proceeding under Minnesota Statutes section 463, in
the discretion of the Blight Officer and designated enforcement agency for the City. (Ord. 140, 2nd
Series, 10-10-2017)
Chapter 4
RENTAL HOUSING
4-4-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDING:
It is hereby found that there exists in the City of Sleepy Eye structures used for human habitation
which are not owner occupied and are now, or may become in the future, substandard with respect to
structure, equipment, or maintenance, and further that such conditions, together with inadequate
provisions for light and air, insufficient protection against fire hazards, lack of proper heating,
unsanitary conditions, and overcrowding, constitute a threat to public health, safety, and welfare. It is
hereby found therefore that adequate protection of public health, safety and welfare requires the
establishment and enforcement of minimum rental housing maintenance standards. (Ord. 82, 2nd
Series, 3-14-2006, eff. 5-1-2006)
4-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
DWELLING: Any structure designed or intended to be used primarily for residential purposes.
DWELLING UNIT: Any specific area, space, or rooms in any building, structure or enclosure or any
part thereof, including any mobile home, rented or leased, or offered for rent or lease, by any
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 66/200
person(s) to any other person(s) for use for residential purposes by such other person(s).
HABITABLE SPACE (ROOM): Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms,
toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility space, and similar areas, are not considered
habitable space.
LONG-TERM HOTEL DWELLING UNIT: A building, structure, enclosure, or any part thereof used as,
maintained as, advertised as, or held out to be a place where sleeping accommodations are furnished
to the public and furnishing accommodations for periods of more than one week.
ROOMING HOUSE DWELLING UNIT: Any specific area, space, or room in any building, structure or
enclosure or any part thereof, within a dwelling used or held out to be a place where sleeping
accommodations are furnished to the public as regular roomers for periods of one week or more. (Ord.
82, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006, eff. 5-1-2006)
4-4-3: EXEMPTION:
This chapter does not apply to any hotel or motel room or facility licensed by the State of Minnesota or
any agency of the United States government. (Ord. 82, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006, eff. 5-1-2006)
4-4-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, as the owner, manager or other person having control of any dwelling, to
lease, rent or permit to be leased or rented or occupied, any dwelling within the City without first
having obtained a rental license for such dwelling from the City of Sleepy Eye. All existing dwelling
units, rooming house dwelling units, and long-term hotel dwelling units will be licensed prior to June 1,
2006. (Ord. 82, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006, eff. 5-1-2006)
4-4-5: LICENSE AND FEES:
A. There are two (2) classes of licenses, a license that requires an inspection and a license that does
not require an inspection. (Ord. 82, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006, eff. 5-1-2006)
B. The fee for an annual dwelling rental license for each long-term hotel or rooming house dwelling
unit shall be established via resolution of the City Council.
C. The fee for an annual dwelling rental license for each dwelling unit other than a long-term hotel or
rooming house dwelling unit shall be established via resolution of the City Council. The fee for
properties not requiring inspections shall be established via resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 82,
2nd Series, 3-14-2006, eff. 5-1-2006; amd. Ord. 131, 2nd Series, 8-11-2016)
D. Licenses shall be transferred under section 4-4-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 82, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006,
eff. 5-1-2006)
4-4-6: LICENSE EXPIRATION:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 67/200
Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on the 30th day of September following the
date the license is issued. (Ord. 82, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006, eff. 5-1-2006)
4-4-7: INSPECTION:
All applications must be made by May 1, 2006 and inspections made by September 30, 2006.
Thereafter, upon receipt of a completed application, such application to be provided by the City of
Sleepy Eye, for any rental license, the City Clerk shall forward a copy of such application to the
building inspector, whereupon the inspector shall, within ten (10) days after receiving such application,
inspect the dwelling to be licensed to determine whether such dwelling complies with the provisions of
applicable codes. No rental license shall be issued by the City unless the dwelling complies with
provisions of this Code which pertain to such dwelling. In addition no license shall be issued if the
dwelling does not meet the requirements of the space and occupancy standards in section 4-4-8 of
this chapter. Inspections will generally be done every two (2) years, but the frequency shall be at the
discretion of the City of Sleepy Eye. Additional inspections may be required of individual units at the
discretion of the City if a valid complaint is received. If the rental dwelling is subject to inspection by a
United States agency or an agency of the State of Minnesota no inspection may be necessary.
Period allowed for correction of inspection violations shall be set by the inspector but shall not exceed
thirty (30) days unless such violations threaten life and health which shall not exceed ten (10) days.
A. Inspections; Penalties: On initial inspections, penalties may be forgiven for the 1st year (ending
May 1, 2007) of this chapter at the discretion of the building inspector.
1. More than three (3) failures to pass inspections in any given license year shall result in the loss
of the license for one year.
2. There shall be a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee for failure to keep scheduled inspection appointments.
3. There shall be a re-inspection fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for any returns beyond two (2)
required of the building inspector.
4. There shall be a penalty for willful neglect of licensing application, as required by this chapter of
five hundred dollars ($500.00).
5. After the initial one year period from the beginning (May 1, 2006) of this chapter there shall be a
penalty for failure to comply to inspection requirements as follows:
1st failure $ 25.00 penalty
2nd failure 50.00 penalty
3rd failure 100.00 penalty
4th failure Loss of license for 1 year
6. The building inspector may impose penalties related to immediate health and safety violations
from twenty five dollars ($25.00) to one hundred dollars ($100.00) and require correction of the
violation as deemed appropriate.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 68/200
7. Violations of this section can be charged as misdemeanors.
B. Appeals: Any person aggrieved by a fee or penalty or loss of license issued under this license may
file a petition with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the issuance of such decision.
1. Upon receipt of the petition, the City Manager, or his designee, shall set a date for a hearing and
give the petitioner at least five (5) days prior written notice of the date, time and place of the
hearing.
2. At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show cause why the fee, penalty or
loss of license should be modified or withdrawn. The petitioner may be represented by counsel
or petitioners of choosing at his/her expense.
3. The hearing shall be conducted by the City Manager.
4. The decision of the City Manager may be appealed to the City Council. A petitioner seeking a
decision of the City Council must file a written petition with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of
the decision of the City Manager. The matter will thereupon be placed on the City Council
agenda as soon as is practical. The City Council shall review the findings of fact and conclusions
to determine whether they were correct. The City Council may revise, reverse or modify or affirm
the decision of the City Manager. (Ord. 82, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006, eff. 5-1-2006)
4-4-8: SPACE AND STRUCTURE STANDARDS:
A. Every dwelling unit other than a long-term hotel dwelling unit or a rooming house dwelling unit shall
have a room or portion of a room in which food may be prepared and cooked, which shall have
adequate circulation area, and which shall be equipped with the following:
1. A kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to a water supply system which
is approved by the City of Sleepy Eye and which provides at all times an adequate amount of
heated and unheated running water under pressure, and which is connected to a sewer system
approved by the City of Sleepy Eye.
2. Cabinets or shelves for the storage of eating, drinking and cooking equipment and utensils and
of food that does not in ordinary summer condition require refrigeration for safe keeping; and a
counter or table for food preparation; said cabinets or shelves and counter or table shall be of
sound construction furnished with surfaces that are easily cleanable and that will not impart any
toxic or harmful effect to food.
3. A stove, or similar device, for cooking food, and a refrigerator, or similar device, for the safe
storage of food at temperatures less than forty five degrees Fahrenheit (45°F) but more than
thirty two degrees Fahrenheit (32°F) under ordinary maximum summer conditions, which are
properly installed with all necessary connection for safe, sanitary and efficient operation;
provided that such stove, refrigerator, or similar devices need not be installed when a dwelling
unit is not occupied and when the occupant is expected to provide same on occupancy.
B. Within every dwelling unit, other than a long-term hotel dwelling unit or rooming house dwelling unit,
there shall be provided a water closet, lavatory sink, and bathing facilities, equipped as follows:
1. A non-habitable room which affords privacy to a person within said room and which is equipped
with a flush water closet in good working condition. Said flush water closet shall be equipped
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 69/200
with easily cleanable surfaces, be properly connected to a water system that at all times
provides an adequate amount of running water under pressure to cause the water closet to be
operated properly, and shall be properly connected to a sewer system which is approved by the
City of Sleepy Eye. The room shall have an operable window or mechanical ventilation sufficient
to provide the equivalent of five (5) air exchanges per hour.
2. A lavatory sink. Said lavatory sink may be in the same room as the flush water closet, or, if
located in another room, the lavatory sink shall be located in close proximity to the door leading
directly into the room in which said water closet is located. The lavatory sink shall be in good
working condition and properly connected to a water supply which is approved by the
appropriate authority and which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and
unheated running water under pressure, and which is properly connected to a sewer system
approved by the appropriate authority.
3. A room which affords privacy to a person within said room and which is equipped with a bathtub
or shower in good working condition. Said bathtub or shower may be in the same room as the
flush water closet or in another room and shall be properly connected to a water supply system
which is approved by the appropriate authority and which provides at all times an adequate
amount of heated and unheated water under pressure, and which is connected to a sewer
system approved by the appropriate authority.
C. Every long-term hotel dwelling unit and rooming house dwelling unit shall have access to a water
closet, lavatory sink, and bathing facilities equipped within the specifications of subsection B of this
section. Each of these facilities may be available or used by no more than two (2) long-term hotel
or rooming house dwelling units.
D. Every dwelling unit, long-term hotel dwelling unit, and rooming house dwelling unit shall have at
least two (2) means of egress. Bedrooms located below the first floor shall be provided with an
exterior door or window of such dimensions and construction as to be used as a means of
emergency egress.
E. Access to and from each dwelling unit, long-term hotel dwelling unit, and rooming house dwelling
unit shall be provided without passing through any other dwelling unit, long-term hotel dwelling
unit, or rooming house dwelling unit.
F. No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling unit, long-term hotel dwelling unit, or
rooming house dwelling unit unless all exterior doors and windows of the dwelling unit are
equipped with appropriate, functioning locking devices.
G. Every foundation, roof and exterior wall, door, skylight and window shall be reasonably weathertight,
water-tight and damp free, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Floors,
interior walls and ceilings shall be sound and in good repair. All exterior wood surfaces, other than
decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by paint, which is not leadbased
paint or other protective covering or treatment.
H. Every window, exterior door and hatchway or similar device shall be so constructed to exclude
insects during that portion of the year when there is a need for protection against mosquitoes, flies
and other flying insects.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 70/200
I. Accessory structures present or provided by the owner, agent or tenant occupant on the premises of
a dwelling shall be structurally sound and be maintained in good repair and free of insects and
rodents, or such structures shall be removed from the premises. The exterior of such accessory
structures shall be made weather resistant through the use of decay-resistant materials or the use
of lead-free paint or other preservative.
J. Every plumbing fixture and all water and waste pipes shall be properly installed and maintained in
good sanitary working condition. All waste system clean-out plugs must be easily accessible.
K. Every water closet compartment, bathroom and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and
maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily
kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
L. Every plumbing fixture and pipe, every chimney, flue and smoke pipe, every mechanical and
electrical fixture and component, and every other facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is
present in a dwelling unit, long-term hotel dwelling unit, or rooming house dwelling unit which is
required under this chapter, shall be constructed and installed in conformance with the appropriate
statutes, ordinances and regulations of the Uniform Housing Code, City of Sleepy Eye, and the
State of Minnesota.
M. No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is
required under this chapter to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued from any occupied
dwelling unit, long-term hotel dwelling unit, or rooming house dwelling unit; except for such
temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or
during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by the appropriate
authority.
N. Every dwelling shall be equipped with smoke detectors as required by Minnesota State Building
Code. (Ord. 82, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006, eff. 5-1-2006)
4-4-9: OCCUPANCY STANDARDS:
A. Permissible Occupancy Of A Dwelling Unit: The maximum permissible occupancy of any dwelling
unit shall be deemed as follows:
1. Minimum Space: For the first two (2) occupants, two hundred twenty (220) square feet of
habitable room floor space and for every additional occupant thereof, at least one hundred (100)
square feet of habitable room floor space.
2. Maximum Occupancy: In no event shall the total number of occupants exceed two (2) times the
number of habitable rooms, less kitchen, in the dwelling unit.
3. Occupancy Of Sleeping Rooms: In every dwelling unit of two (2) or more rooms, every room
occupied for sleeping purposes shall have the following minimum habitable room floor space:
seventy (70) square feet for one person; ninety (90) square feet for two (2) persons; and
required habitable room floor space shall be increased at the rate of fifty (50) square feet for
each occupant in excess of two (2).
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 71/200
4. Copy Of Occupancy Standards: All lease principals will receive a copy of the occupancy
standards in this section in writing from the landlord. (Ord. 82, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006, eff. 5-1-
2006)
4-4-10: REGISTER OF OCCUPANCY:
Each owner of a dwelling within the City that is rented or offered for rent for residential purposes shall
maintain a register of occupancy for each dwelling unit, long-term hotel dwelling unit and rooming
house dwelling unit, which register shall be available for examination by City officials, and shall include
the following information:
A. The address of each dwelling unit, long-term hotel dwelling unit, and rooming house dwelling unit.
B. The number of bedrooms in each dwelling unit, long-term hotel dwelling unit, and rooming house
dwelling unit.
C. The names of the current occupants of each dwelling unit, long-term dwelling unit, and rooming
house dwelling unit.
D. The telephone numbers of the current occupants of each dwelling unit, long-term hotel dwelling
unit, and rooming house dwelling unit.
E. The telephone number and address of agent if assigned. (Ord. 82, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006, eff. 5-1-
2006)
4-4-11: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
Each license issued pursuant to this section may be transferred to another party, provided that any
licensee shall give written notice of such transfer to the City at least forty eight (48) hours prior to the
transfer of the licensed premises, which notice shall include the name and address of the transferee.
(Ord. 82, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006, eff. 5-1-2006)
4-4-12: PARKING:
All leases on downtown apartments shall contain language requiring tenants to park off of Highway 14
for anything beyond momentary parking. (Ord. 82, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006, eff. 5-1-2006)
Title 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 72/200
Chapter 1
GENERAL OFFENSES
5-1-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
It is unlawful for any person, in a public or private place, knowing, or having reasonable grounds to
know, that it will, or will tend to, alarm, anger or disturb others or provoke any assault or breach of the
peace, to do the following:
A. Brawl Or Fight: Engage in brawling or fighting; or
B. Disturb Assembly: Disturb an assembly or meeting, not unlawful in its character; or
C. Verbal Abuse; Noisy Conduct: Engage in offensive, obscene or abusive language or in boisterous
and noisy conduct tending reasonably to arouse alarm, anger or resentment in others; or
D. Public Indecency: Wilfully and lewdly expose his person or the private parts thereof, or procure
another to so expose himself; and any open or gross lewdness or lascivious behavior, or any act of
public indecency; or
E. Unauthorized Swimming; Improper Attire: Whether or not posted with signs so prohibiting,
voluntarily enter the waters of any public swimming pool at any time when said waters are not
properly supervised by trained life saving personnel in attendance for that purpose, or enter such
waters without being garbed in a bathing suit sufficient to cover his person and equal to the
standards generally adopted and accepted by the public; or
F. Urinate Or Defecate: Urinate or defecate in a place other than: 1) if on public property then in a
plumbing fixture provided for that purpose, or 2) if on the private property of another then in a
plumbing fixture provided for that purpose, or 3) if on private property not owned or controlled by
another, then within a building; or
G. Unnecessary Noise: Cause the making or production of an unnecessary noise by shouting or by
any other means or mechanism including the blowing of any automobile or other vehicle horn; or
H. Sound Amplifier: Use a sound amplifier upon streets and public property without prior written
permission from the City; or
I. Flash Or Spot Light: Use a flash or spot light in a manner so as to annoy or endanger others; or
J. Defacement, Destruction To Property: Cause defacement, destruction, or otherwise damage to any
premises or any property located thereon; or
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 73/200
K. Litter, Dispose Of Refuse Or Rubbish: Strew, scatter, litter, throw, dispose of or deposit any refuse,
garbage, or rubbish onto any premises except into receptacles provided for such purpose; or
L. Enter Motor Vehicle: Enter any motor vehicle of another without the consent of the owner or
operator; or
M. Failure To Leave Property: Fail or refuse to vacate or leave any premises after being requested or
ordered, whether orally or in writing, to do so, by the owner, or person in charge thereof, or by any
law enforcement agent or official; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to any
person who is owner or tenant of the premises involved nor to any law enforcement or other
government official who may be present thereon at that time as part of his official duty, nor shall it
include the spouse, children, employee or tenant of such owner or occupier; or (1988 Code
§ 10.51)
N. Noise From Radios: Use or operate or permit the use or operation of any radio receiving set,
musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine, or other device for the production or
reproduction of sound in a district and loudly audible manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and
comfort of any person nearby. Operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph machine or
other device between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. in such a
manner as to be plainly audible at the property line of the structure or building in which it is located,
in the hallway or apartment adjacent, or a distance of fifty feet (50') if the sound is located outside
a structure or building, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection; or (Ord. 46,
2nd Series, 6-2-1998)
O. Noise From Motor Vehicles: Operate a motor vehicle in such a manner as to produce squealing of
tires, exhaust noise audible at a distance of three hundred feet (300') or use of jake brakes. In
addition, no sound system contained in a motor vehicle shall be used in a manner where the sound
is plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet (50') or more. The vehicle owner shall be guilty of the
violation, provided that if the vehicle owner is not present, the person in charge of the vehicle at the
time of the violation is guilty of the violation. (Ord. 58, 2nd Series, 9-9-1999)
5-1-2: NOISY PARTIES:
A. Owner Responsibility To Abate: It is unlawful for any person or persons to congregate on any
private lands because of, or participate in, any party or gathering of people from which noise
emanates of a sufficient volume or of such nature as to disturb the peace, quiet or repose of other
persons. Any owner or person in lawful possession or control of such private lands who has
knowledge of the disturbance and fails to immediately abate said disturbance shall be guilty of a
violation of this section.
B. Written Permission Required: It is unlawful for any person or persons to congregate on any private
lands of another because of, or participate in, any party or gathering of people in the absence of
the owner of said private lands being present, without first having obtained written permission from
the landowner or other person in lawful possession of such private lands. Such written permission
shall at all times be in the possession of one or more persons at the site of such congregation. The
document containing the written permission must bear the signature of the landowner and date of
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 74/200
the permitted use. Failure to display written permission upon request shall be considered prima
facie evidence of an absence of permission from the owner.
C. Authority Of Peace Officer: A violation of subsection A or B of this section shall give a peace officer
the authority to order all persons present, other than persons identifying themselves as the owner
or person in lawful possession or control of such land, to immediately disperse. Any person who
shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by a peace officer shall be guilty of a violation of
this section. (1988 Code § 10.52)
5-1-3: MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY:
A. Weeds Or Grass; Diseased Trees; Water Service Lines: It is the primary responsibility of any owner
or occupant of any lot or parcel of land to maintain any weeds or grass growing thereon at a height
of not more than six inches (6"); to remove all public health or safety hazards therefrom; to install
or repair water service lines thereon; and to treat or remove insect infested or diseased trees
thereon.
B. Failure To Assume Responsibility; Notice; Lien: If any such owner or occupant fails to assume the
primary responsibility described in subsection A of this section, and after notice given by the City
Clerk, has not within seven (7) days of such notice complied, the City may cause such work to be
done and the expenses thus incurred shall be a lien upon such real estate. The City Clerk shall
certify to the County Auditor of Brown County a statement of the amount of the cost incurred by the
City. Such amount together with interest shall be entered as a special assessment against such lot
or parcel of land and be collected in the same manner as Real Estate Taxes. (1988 Code § 10.31)
5-1-4: PENALTY:
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs
an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful or performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure is
prohibited or declared unlawful by a Code adopted by reference by this chapter, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions
hereof. (1988 Code § 10.99)
5-1-5: SMOKING PROHIBITED:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE: Any product containing or delivering nicotine, lobelia, or any
other substance intended for human consumption that can be used by a person to simulate
smoking in the delivery of nicotine or any other substance through inhalation of vapor from the
product. Electronic delivery device includes any component part of a product, whether or not
marketed or sold separately. Electronic delivery device does not include any product that has
been approved or certified by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a
tobacco-cessation product, as a tobacco-dependence product, or for other medical purposes,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 75/200
and is marketed and sold for such an approved purpose.
SMOKING: For the purposes of subsections C and D of this section:
1. The inhaling or exhaling smoke from any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any
other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product; or
2. Carrying a lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or
plant product intended for inhalation; or
3. Inhaling or exhaling vapor from any electronic delivery device; or
4. Carrying an electronic delivery device that is turned on or otherwise activated.
TOBACCO OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance or item containing tobacco leaf,
including but not limited to, cigarettes; cigars; pipe tobacco; snuff; fine cut or other chewing
tobacco; cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed, and other
smoking tobacco; snuff flowers; cavendish; shorts; plug and twist tobaccos; dipping tobaccos;
refuse craps, clippings, cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of
tobacco leaf prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing, sniffing or smoking.
TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES: Any tobacco product as well as a pipe, rolling papers,
electronic delivery device, or other device intentionally designed or intended to be used in a
manner which enables the chewing, sniffing, or smoking of tobacco or tobacco products.
USE: The inhaling or exhaling of vapor from any electronic delivery device. Use shall also mean
carrying an electronic delivery device that is turned on or otherwise activated.
B. Prohibition: The use of any electronic delivery device is prohibited where smoking is prohibited by
the Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act. The prohibition contained in this section is intended to
complement the Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act, Minnesota Statutes sections 144.411 to 144.417,
as amended from time to time. Nothing in this section or any other ordinance of the City authorizes
use of an electronic delivery device in any location where use is restricted by other applicable laws.
C. Use In Retail Tobacco Establishment: Smoking any tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related
devices, and electronic delivery devices, including for the purpose of sampling, is prohibited within
the indoor area of any establishment with a tobacco retailer license.
D. Proprietors: It is a violation of this section for the proprietor, person, or entity that owns, leases,
manages, operates, or otherwise controls the area in which use or smoking is prohibited under this
section to knowingly fail to comply with the provisions of this section.
E. Penalty: A person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. Each
day of violation constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 123, 2nd Series, 10-14-2014)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 76/200
Chapter 2
DANGEROUS WEAPONS AND ARTICLES; FIREWORKS
5-2-1: PROHIBITED ACTS; EXCEPTION:
A. Prohibited Acts: It is unlawful for any person to:
1. Recklessly handle or use a gun or other dangerous weapon or explosive so as to endanger the
safety of another; or,
2. Intentionally point a gun of any kind, capable of injuring or killing a human being and whether
loaded or unloaded, at or toward another; or,
3. Manufacture or sell for any unlawful purpose any weapon known as a slung-shot or sand club;
or,
4. Manufacture, transfer or possess metal knuckles or a switch blade knife opening automatically;
or,
5. Possess any other dangerous article or substance for the purpose of being used unlawfully as a
weapon against another; or,
6. Sell or have in his possession any device designed to silence or muffle the discharge of a
firearm; or,
7. Permit, as a parent or guardian, any child under fourteen (14) years of age to handle or use,
outside of the parent's or guardian's presence, a firearm or air gun of any kind, or any
ammunition or explosive; or,
8. Furnish a minor under eighteen (18) years of age with a firearm, air gun, ammunition, or
explosive without the written consent of his parent or guardian or of the Police Department.
9. Possess, sell, transfer, or have in possession for sale or transfer, any weapon commonly known
as a throwing star, nun chuck or sharp stud. For the purposes of this subsection: a) a "throwing
star" means a circular metallic device with any number of points projecting from the edge, b) a
"nun chuck" means a pair of wood sticks or metallic rods separated by chain links attached to
one end of each such stick or rod, and c) a "sharp stud" means a circular piece of metal
attached to a wristband, glove, belt or other material which protrudes one-fourth inch (1/4"), or
more, from the material to which it is attached, and with the protruding portion pyramidal in
shape, sharp or pointed.
B. Exception: Nothing in subsection A of this section shall prohibit the possession of the articles
therein mentioned if the purpose of such possession is for public exhibition by museums or
collectors of art. (1988 Code § 10.02)
5-2-2: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES; EXCEPTION:
A. Prohibition: It is unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any cannon, gun, pistol or other firearm,
firecracker, sky rocket or other fireworks, air gun, air rifle, or other similar device commonly
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 77/200
referred to as a BB gun.
B. Exception: Nothing in subsection A of this section shall apply to a display of fireworks by an
organization or group of organizations authorized in writing by the Council, or to a peace officer in
the discharge of his duty, or to a person in the lawful defense of his person or family. This section
shall not apply to the discharge of firearms in a range authorized in writing by the Council. (1988
Code § 10.02)
5-2-3: POSSESSION AND SALE OF FIREWORKS:
A. Definitions:
FIREWORKS: For the purposes of this section, "fireworks" will have the same definition as
contained in Minnesota Statutes section 624.20 subd. 1(c) or any superseding statute.
B. Permit Required: No person shall sell or possess for sale fireworks without first having obtained an
annual permit from the City.
1. The Fire Chief shall give final approval or denial of an application for the manufacture, storage
for commercial purposes, or sale of fireworks within fourteen (14) days of such application being
made to the City.
2. Permits shall be issued for a period of one calendar year.
3. Prior to processing the application, a criminal records check must be conducted; neither the
applicant nor the responsible party for the permit shall have been convicted of a felony or a
fire/fireworks-related misdemeanor within the last three (3) years.
4. Prior to processing the application, the Fire Chief shall determine that the proposed location is
Code compliant.
5. The application shall include a letter from the person legally responsible for the property on
which the fireworks related activity will occur. Such letter shall grant permission to the applicant
for the use of said property.
C. Sales And Storage Of Fireworks:
1. No person shall sell or store fireworks within twenty feet (20') of any fuel dispensing apparatus.
2. It shall be unlawful for any seller of any fireworks to permit smoking at any site containing
fireworks. "No Smoking" signs must be conspicuously posted and approved fire extinguishers
must be available for use.
3. In buildings that do not have an automated sprinkling system, retail sales displays of fireworks
shall be limited to a gross weight of five hundred (500) pounds of fireworks. In buildings that do
contain an automated sprinkling system, the amount of fireworks contained in retail sales
displays shall be determined by the Sleepy Eye Fire Chief on a case by case basis after
considering the building's construction, fire suppression apparatus and other relevant factors.
4. The requirements of this section are in addition to any requirements imposed by any building
and zoning regulations, fire codes or State law.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 78/200
5. Only persons eighteen (18) years of age or older may purchase or sell fireworks and the age of
the purchaser must be verified by photographic identification. A sign indicating only persons
eighteen (18) years of age or older may purchase fireworks must be displayed during the hours
of sale which shall be limited to between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and nine thirty o'clock (9:30)
P.M.
6. No exterior storage of fireworks are permitted. No manufacturing, sales or storage for
commercial purposes shall occur on residentially zoned property or properties used for
educational purposes or assemblies. Sale and storage in a non-permanent structure may not
exceed 20 feet by 20 feet in size.
7. A list of all consumer fireworks displayed and stored on the property shall be available at time of
purchase for all fireworks for sale at location. The list shall document the name, and quantity of
the fireworks and be accompanied by the material safety data sheets.
8. Manufacturing, warehouse buildings, or display in excess of the quantities listed for retail
consumer fireworks shall be classified as occupancy and protected similarly to explosives and
aerosols.
9. A handout describing fireworks shall be provided to each consumer purchasing fireworks.
D. Use And Possession:
1. It is unlawful to use, fire or discharge any fireworks along the route of and during any parade, in
any place of public assembly, on any public property or in any commercial/industrial zoning
district.
2. It is unlawful at any time to throw, toss, or aim any fireworks at any person, animal, vehicle or
other thing or object or used in any manner that may threaten or cause possible harm to life or
property.
3. The discharge of fireworks shall be prohibited inside a building and within fifteen feet (15') of any
building.
4. The Fire Chief may ban fireworks if dry or windy conditions occur.
5. Juveniles may not possess fireworks unless under the direct supervision of a responsible adult.
6. Fireworks may not be discharged in such a manner that may create a nuisance nor between the
hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. with the exception of the 4th of July
when the hours for discharge of fireworks will be allowed from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight.
E. Penalties:
1. Materials which violate and/or pose a threat to public safety may be confiscated and destroyed.
Costs associated with disposal shall be assessed back to the property owner or permit holder.
2. Violations of this regulation, City ordinance or State Statute may result in revocation of the
permit.
3. Violations of these fireworks rules are misdemeanor offenses punishable by fines up to one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or ninety (90) days in jail. (Ord. 120, 2nd Series, 5-13-2014)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 79/200
5-2-4: EXPOSURE OF UNUSED CONTAINER:
It is unlawful for any person, being the owner or in possession or control thereof, to permit an unused
refrigerator, ice box, or other container, sufficiently large to retain any child and with doors which
fasten automatically when closed, to expose the same accessible to children, without removing the
doors, lids, hinges or latches. (1988 Code § 10.02)
5-2-5: USE OF BOW AND ARROW:
It is unlawful for any person to shoot a bow and arrow except in the physical education program in a
school supervised by a member of its faculty, a community-wide supervised class or event specifically
authorized by the Chief of Police, or a bow and arrow range authorized by the Council. (1988 Code
§ 10.02)
5-2-6: PENALTY:
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs
an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, or performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure
is prohibited or declared unlawful by a Code adopted by reference by this chapter, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific
provisions hereof. (1988 Code § 10.99)
Chapter 3
CURFEW
5-3-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, "minor" means a person under the age of sixteen (16) years. (1988 Code
§ 10.50)
5-3-2: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
A. Loitering Prohibited: It is unlawful for any minor person to be or loiter upon the streets or public
places between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the day
following.
B. Responsibility Of Parent Or Guardian: It is unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other person having
the legal care or custody of any minor to allow or permit such minor person to be or loiter upon the
streets or public places in violation of this chapter unless such minor is accompanied by a parent
or guardian. (1988 Code § 10.50)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 80/200
5-3-3: EXCEPTIONS:
Such curfew shall not apply to any minor student who is lawfully attending, going to or returning from
school, church or community sponsored athletic, musical or social activities or events. (1988 Code
§ 10.50)
5-3-4: PENALTY:
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs
an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, or performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure
is prohibited or declared unlawful by a Code adopted by reference by this chapter, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific
provisions hereof. (1988 Code § 10.99)
Chapter 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
5-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall mean:
ANIMAL: A dog or cat.
CAT: Both male and female and includes any animal of the feline kind.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL: An animal which has caused damage to property or injury to a person, or
which animal, by its actions, exhibits a propensity for causing imminent danger to persons.
DOG: Both male and female and includes any animal of the dog kind.
OWN: To have a property interest in, or to harbor, feed, board, keep or possess.
OWNER: A person who owns an animal hereby regulated. (1988 Code § 10.20)
5-4-2: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for the owner of any animal to permit such animal to run at large. Any dog or cat shall be
deemed to be running at large with the permission of the owner unless it is on a durable leash not to
exceed ten feet (10') in length, secured to an object which it cannot move and/or on the premises of
the owner, or on a leash and under the control of an accompanying person of suitable age and
discretion, or effectively confined within a motor vehicle, building, or enclosure. (1988 Code § 10.20;
amd. 1996 Code)
5-4-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS RESTRICTED:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 81/200
It is unlawful for any owner of a dog or cat over six (6) months of age, to fail to obtain a proper City
license therefor. The total number of dogs and cats permitted shall not exceed two (2) per dwelling
unit, or four (4) per multi-dwelling structure, whichever is the lesser; provided, that this section shall
not apply to a kennel licensed under this Code or to a licensed veterinary clinic. (1988 Code § 10.20)
5-4-4: LICENSE ISSUANCE; TERM:
All animal licenses shall be issued only upon presentation of a certificate issued by a veterinarian,
licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the State of Minnesota, showing rabies immunization of the
animal for at least the term of the license. All animal licenses shall be issued by the City Clerk's Office
for a term of three (3) years. (1988 Code § 10.20)
5-4-5: FEES:
All fees for the licensing, confinement and maintenance of animals, including penalties for late
application, may be fixed and determined by the Council, adopted by resolution, and uniformly
enforced. Such fees may from time to time be amended by the Council by resolution. A copy of the
resolution setting forth currently effective fees shall be kept on file in the Office of the City Clerk and
open to inspection during regular business hours. (1988 Code § 10.20)
5-4-6: COLLAR AND TAG REQUIRED:
All licensed animals shall wear a collar and have a tag firmly affixed thereto evidencing a current
license. A duplicate for a lost tag may be issued by the City upon presentation of the receipt showing
the payment of the duplicate license fee. Tags shall not be transferable, and no refund shall be made
on any license fee because of leaving the City or death of the animal before the expiration of the
license. (1988 Code § 10.20)
5-4-7: CONFINEMENT:
A. Placement Of Animals; Records: Any animal found in the City without a license tag, running at
large, or otherwise in violation of this chapter, shall be placed in confinement, and an accurate
record of the time of such placement shall be kept on each animal. Every animal so placed in
confinement shall be held for redemption by the owner for at least five (5) regular business days.
Confinement records shall be preserved for at least six (6) months and shall show:
1. The description of the animal by species, breed, sex, approximate age, and other distinguishing
traits;
2. The location at which the animal was seized;
3. The date of seizure;
4. The name and address of the person from whom any animal three (3) months of age or over
was received; and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 82/200
5. The name and address of the person to whom any animal three (3) months of age or over was
transferred.
B. Disposition Of Unclaimed Animals: If unclaimed, such animal shall be humanely destroyed and the
carcass disposed of, unless it is requested by a licensed educational or scientific institution under
authority of Minnesota Statutes section 35.71; provided, however, that if a tag affixed to the animal,
or a statement by the animal's owner after seizure specifies that the animal should not be used for
research, such animal shall not be made available to any such institution but may be destroyed
after the expiration of the five (5) day period. (1988 Code § 10.20)
C. Notice Of Confinement: Upon the confinement of any animal, the owner shall be notified by the
most expedient means, or if the owner is unknown, written notice shall be posted for five (5) days
at the police station describing the animal and the place and time of taking.
D. Release From Confinement: Animals shall be released to their owners, as follows:
1. If such animal is owned by a resident of the City, after purchase of a license, if unlicensed, and
payment of the confinement fee, maintenance, and immunization fee.
2. If such animal is owned by a person not a resident of the City, after immunization of any such
animal for rabies, and payment of the confinement fee and maintenance. (1988 Code § 10.20)
5-4-8: SEIZURE BY CITIZEN:
It is lawful for any person to seize and impound an animal so found running at large and shall within
six (6) hours thereafter notify the City police of said seizure. It shall be the duty of the City police to
place said animal in confinement. If the name of the owner of such animal so seized is known to the
person who first takes such animal into custody, he or she shall inform the police of the name of the
owner, and the address if known. (1988 Code § 10.20)
5-4-9: IMMOBILIZATION OF ANIMALS:
For the purpose of enforcement of this chapter, any peace officer, or person whose duty is animal
control, may use a so-called tranquilizer gun or other instrument for the purpose of immobilizing and
catching an animal. (1988 Code § 10.20)
5-4-10: OTHER UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It is unlawful for the owner of any animal to: a) fail to have the license tag issued by the City firmly
attached to a collar worn at all times by the licensed animal, or b) own a dangerous animal, or c)
interfere with any police officer, or other City employee, in the performance of his duty to enforce this
chapter, or d) fail to keep his dog from barking, howling or whining. (1988 Code § 10.20)
5-4-11: SUMMARY DESTRUCTION:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 83/200
If an animal is diseased, vicious, rabid or exposed to rabies and such animal cannot be confined after
a reasonable effort or cannot be confined without serious risk to the person attempting to confine,
such animal may be destroyed in a humane manner. (1988 Code § 10.20; amd. Ord. 117, 2nd Series,
12-9-2013)
5-4-12: RABIES CONTROL; GENERALLY:
A. Quarantine Required: Every animal which bites a person shall be promptly reported to the Chief of
Police and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the direction of the Chief of Police for a
period of fourteen (14) days, and shall not be released from such quarantine except by written
permission of the City. In the discretion of the Chief of Police, such quarantine may be on the
premises of the owner, at a veterinary hospital or clinic, or at the City pound. If the animal is
quarantined on the premises of the owner, the City shall have access to the animal at any
reasonable time for study and observation of rabies symptoms. In the case of a stray animal or in
the case of an animal whose ownership is not known, such quarantine shall be at the discretion of
the Chief of Police, who may have the animal confined in a veterinary hospital designated by him.
(Ord. 117, 2nd Series, 12-9-2013)
B. Owner Surrender Animal: The owners, upon demand made by the Chief of Police or by any other
City employee empowered by the Council to enforce this chapter, shall forthwith surrender any
animal which has bitten a human, or which is suspected as having been exposed to rabies, for the
purpose of supervised quarantine. The expenses of the quarantine shall be borne by the owner,
and the animal may be reclaimed by the owner, if adjudged free of rabies, upon payment of fees
set forth in this chapter and upon compliance with licensing provisions set forth in this chapter.
C. Rabies Suspected: When an animal under quarantine and diagnosed as being rabid or suspected
by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid dies or is killed, the City shall immediately send the head
of such animal and rabies data report to the State Health Department for pathological examination
and shall notify all persons concerned of the results of such examination.
D. Comply With Statutes: The City shall issue such proclamation and take such action when rabies is
suspected or exists as is required by Minnesota Statutes. (1988 Code § 10.20)
5-4-13: REPORTS OF BITE CASES:
A. Responsibility Of Physician Or Practitioner: It is the duty of every physician, or other practitioner, to
report to the Chief of Police the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by
animals, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control.
B. Responsibility Of Veterinarians: It is the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the Chief of
Police his diagnosis of an animal observed by him as a rabies suspect. (1988 Code § 10.20)
5-4-14: POLICE DOGS; GUIDE DOGS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 84/200
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the ownership or use of guide dogs by physically
impaired persons, or dogs used in police activities of the City, such as canine corps or tracking dogs
used by or with the permission of the Police Department. (1988 Code § 10.20; amd. 1996 Code)
5-4-15: ANIMALS IN HEAT:
Except for controlled breeding purposes, every female animal in heat shall be kept confined in a
building or secure enclosure, or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel, in such manner that such
female animal cannot come in contact with other animals. (1988 Code § 10.20)
5-4-16: ANIMALS AND FOWL REGULATED:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply.
ANIMALS: Includes farm animals and all other animals, reptiles and feathered birds or fowl except
dogs, cats, gerbils, hamsters and caged household birds.
FARM ANIMALS: Cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats, swine, ponies, ducks, geese, turkeys,
chickens, guinea hens and honey bees.
B. Keeping: It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any animal, not in transit, except: 1) farm
animals kept in that portion of the City zoned for agricultural purposes, or, 2) animals kept as part
of a show licensed under this Code, or, 3) animals used in a parade, or, 4) animals kept in a
laboratory for scientific or experimental purposes, or, 5) animals kept in an animal hospital or clinic
for treatment by a licensed veterinarian.
C. Animals In Transit: It is unlawful for any person to transport animals unless they are: 1) confined
within a vehicle, cage or other means of conveyance, or, 2) farm animals being transported in a
portion of the City zoned for agricultural purposes, or, 3) restrained by means of bridles, halters,
ropes or other means of individual restraint.
D. Treatment: It is unlawful for any person to treat any "animal" as herein defined, or any other animal,
in a cruel or inhumane manner.
E. Housing: It is unlawful for any person to keep any "animal" as herein defined, or any other animal,
in any structure infested by rodents, vermin, flies or insects, or inadequate for protection against
the elements.
F. Trespasses: It is unlawful for any person to herd, drive or ride any animal over and upon any grass,
turf, boulevard, City park, cemetery, garden or lot without specific permission therefor from the
owner. (1988 Code § 10.20)
5-4-17: PENALTY:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 85/200
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs
an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, or performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure
is prohibited or declared unlawful by a Code adopted by reference by this chapter, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific
provisions hereof. (1988 Code § 10.99)
ARTICLE A. DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY
DANGEROUS DOGS
5-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall mean:
DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog that has:
A. When unprovoked, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a human being on public or private
property; or
B. When unprovoked, killed or inflicted substantial bodily harm on a domestic animal while off the
owner's property; or
C. Been found to be potentially dangerous, and after the owner has notice that the dog is
potentially dangerous, the dog aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or
domestic animals; or
D. When unprovoked, repeatedly attacks or attempts to attack a person or domestic animal on
private or public property.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog that:
A. When unprovoked, inflicts bites on a human or domestic animal on public or private property; or
B. When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person, including a person on a bicycle, upon the
streets, sidewalks, or any public or private property, other than the dog owner's property, in an
apparent attitude of attack; or
C. Has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, causing injury or
otherwise threatening the safety of humans or domestic animals; or
D. Engages in any unprovoked behavior that requires a defensive action by any person to prevent
bodily harm when the person and the animal are on or off the property of the owner or custodian
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 86/200
of the animal.
REPEATEDLY: More than one unprovoked attack or attempted attack occurring during the course of
either a single encounter or separate encounters. (Ord. 117, 2nd Series, 12-9-2013)
5-4A-2: AUTHORITY:
The animal control officer has the authority and discretion to declare a dog to be dangerous or
potentially dangerous, upon receiving such evidence that the dog meets the definition set forth in this
section. (Ord. 117, 2nd Series, 12-9-2013)
5-4A-3: REGULATION OF A DANGEROUS DOG:
A. Seizure Of Certain Dogs: Upon a finding that the dog has been declared dangerous, the animal
control authority or Hearing Officer is authorized to order the seizure of the dog, while the outcome
of an owner's appeal is pending or until there has been compliance with applicable conditions, as
set out under Minnesota Statutes section 347.51. Proper notice must be given pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes section 347.541. The owner is liable for all costs incurred in the maintenance,
impounding, and boarding of the dog.
B. Destruction Of Certain Dogs:
1. The animal control authority or Hearing Officer is authorized to order the destruction or other
disposition of any dog, upon a finding that:
a. The dog has been declared dangerous;
b. Proper notice has been given pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 347.541;
c. The owner's right to appeal hereunder has been exhausted or expired; and
d. The owner has failed to comply with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes section 347.51.
2. The owner is liable for all costs incurred in the destruction or other disposition of the dog. (Ord.
117, 2nd Series, 12-9-2013)
5-4A-4: REGULATION OF A POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG:
A. Registration:
1. No person may own a potentially dangerous dog in this City unless the dog is registered as
provided in this section. The dog must be validly registered within fourteen (14) days after the
owner has notice that the dog is potentially dangerous.
2. The animal control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a potentially
dangerous dog if the owner presents sufficient evidence that:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 87/200
a. The owner has paid an annual fee of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), in addition
to any regular dog licensing fees, to obtain a certificate of registration for a potentially
dangerous dog under this section; and
b. The owner has had microchip identification implanted in the potentially dangerous dog as
required under Minnesota Statutes section 347.515.
B. Requirements:
1. An owner of a potentially dangerous dog must renew the registration of the dog annually until
the dog is deceased. If the dog is removed from the jurisdiction, it must be registered as a
potentially dangerous dog in its new jurisdiction.
2. An owner of a potentially dangerous dog must notify the animal control authority in writing of the
death of the dog or its transfer to a new location where the dog will reside within thirty (30) days
of the death or transfer, and must, if requested by the animal control authority, execute an
affidavit under oath setting forth either the circumstances of the dog's death and disposition or
the complete name, address, and telephone number of the person to whom the dog has been
transferred or the address where the dog has been relocated.
3. A person who transfers ownership of a potentially dangerous dog must notify the new owner that
the animal control authority has identified the dog as potentially dangerous. The current owner
must also notify the animal control authority in writing of the transfer of ownership and provide
the animal control authority with the new owner's name, address, and telephone number.
C. Confiscation:
1. Seizure: A potentially dangerous dog may be seized if the dog is not validly registered after
fourteen (14) days after the owner has notice that the dog is potentially dangerous. The owner is
liable for all costs incurred in the maintenance, impounding, and boarding of the dog.
2. Reclaimed:
a. A potentially dangerous dog seized may be reclaimed by the owner of the dog upon payment
of impounding and boarding fees, and presenting proof that the requirements are met or will
be met.
b. A dog not reclaimed within seven (7) days may be disposed of in a manner permitted by law,
and the owner is liable for costs incurred in confining and disposing of the dog. (Ord. 117, 2nd
Series, 12-9-2013)
5-4A-5: PENALTIES:
A person who violates this article is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 117, 2nd Series, 12-9-2013)
5-4A-6: STATE LAW:
State law regulating dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs is used in conjunction with this
article. (Ord. 117, 2nd Series, 12-9-2013)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 88/200
5-4A-7: INCONSISTENCIES:
Provided that the regulations are not inconsistent with this article, this chapter is hereby reaffirmed.
Prior regulations that are inconsistent with this article are hereby revoked. (Ord. 117, 2nd Series, 12-9-
2013)
5-4A-8: SEIZURE:
In the discretion of the Chief of Police, a dog seized under this article may be held on the premises of
the dog's owner, at a veterinary hospital or clinic, or at the City pound. (Ord. 117, 2nd Series, 12-9-
2013)
Chapter 5
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE: A motor vehicle as defined in Minnesota Statutes chapter 168B,
that has remained for a period of more than forty eight (48) hours on public property illegally or lacking
vital component parts, or has remained for a period of more than forty eight (48) hours on private
property without the consent of the person in control of such property, or in an inoperable condition
such that it has no substantial potential further use consistent with its usual function, unless it is kept
in an enclosed garage or storage building. It shall also mean a motor vehicle voluntarily surrendered
by its owner to and accepted by the City. A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in Minnesota
Statutes chapter 168B, shall not be considered an abandoned motor vehicle within the meaning of this
chapter. Vehicles on the premises of junk yards or automobile graveyards, which are licensed and
maintained in accordance with this Code, shall not be considered abandoned motor vehicles within
the meaning of this chapter.
VITAL COMPONENT PARTS: Those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to the mechanical
functioning of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, the motor, drive train and wheels. (1988 Code
§ 2.70)
5-5-2: CUSTODY:
The City may take into custody and impound any abandoned motor vehicle. (1988 Code § 2.70)
5-5-3: IMMEDIATE SALE:
When an abandoned motor vehicle is more than seven (7) model years of age, is lacking vital
component parts, and does not display a license plate currently valid in Minnesota or any other state
or foreign country, it shall immediately be eligible for sale at public auction, and shall not be subject to
the notification, reclamation, or title provisions of this chapter. (1988 Code § 2.70)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 89/200
5-5-4: NOTICE:
A. Content Of Notice: When an abandoned motor vehicle does not fall within the provisions of section
5-5-3 of this chapter, the City shall give notice of the taking within ten (10) days. The notice shall
set forth the date and place of the taking, the year, make, model and serial number of the
abandoned motor vehicle, if such information can be reasonably obtained, and the place where the
vehicle is being held, shall inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the vehicle
under section 5-5-5 of this chapter and shall state that failure of the owner or lienholder to exercise
their right to reclaim the vehicle and contents shall be deemed a waiver by them of all rights, title
and interest in the vehicle and a consent to the sale of the vehicle and contents at a public auction
pursuant to section 5-5-6 of this chapter.
B. Recipients And/Or Publication: The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered owner, if any, of
the abandoned motor vehicle and to all readily identifiable lienholders of record. If it is impossible
to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and all
lienholders, the notice shall be published once in the official newspaper. Published notices may be
grouped together for convenience and economy. (1988 Code § 2.70)
5-5-5: RIGHT TO RECLAIM:
A. Fifteen Day Limit: The owner or any lienholder of an abandoned motor vehicle shall have a right to
reclaim such vehicle from the City upon payment of all towing and storage charges resulting from
taking the vehicle into custody within fifteen (15) days after the date of the notice required by
section 5-5-4 of this chapter.
B. Garage Keeper Defined: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair any lien of a garage
keeper under the laws of this State, or the right of the lienholder to foreclose. For the purposes of
this section "garage keeper" is an operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator of a
motor vehicle storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for the servicing, repair or
maintenance of motor vehicles. (1988 Code § 2.70)
5-5-6: PUBLIC SALE:
A. Purchaser Receives Title: An abandoned motor vehicle and contents taken into custody and not
reclaimed under section 5-5-5 of this chapter shall be sold to the highest bidder at public auction or
sale, following one notice published at least seven (7) days prior to such auction or sale. The
purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles which
shall be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to
register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of
ownership. Before such a vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must receive a motor vehicle
safety check.
B. Disbursement Of Auction Monies: From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle,
the City shall reimburse itself for the cost of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, and all
administrative, notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to this section. Any remainder from
the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for ninety (90)
days and then shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City. (1988 Code § 2.70)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 90/200
5-5-7: DISPOSAL OF VEHICLES NOT SOLD:
Where no bid has been received for an abandoned motor vehicle, the City may dispose of it in
accordance with section 5-5-8 of this chapter. (1988 Code § 2.70)
5-5-8: CONTRACTS FOR DISPOSAL:
A. Eligibility For Contract: The City may contract with any qualified person for collection, storage,
incineration, volume reduction, transportation or other services necessary to prepare abandoned
motor vehicles and other scrap metal for recycling or other methods of disposal.
B. Compliance With Agency: Where the City enters into a contract with a person duly licensed by the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, the agency shall review the contract to determine whether it
conforms to the agency's plan for solid waste disposal. A contract that does so conform may be
approved by the agency. Where a contract has been approved, the agency may reimburse the City
for the costs incurred under the contract which have not been reimbursed.
C. Reimbursement To City: If the City utilizes its own equipment and personnel for disposal of the
abandoned motor vehicle, it shall be entitled to reimbursement for the cost thereof along with its
other costs as herein provided. (1988 Code § 2.70)
5-5-9: PENALTY:
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs
an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as
otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. (1988 Code § 2.99)
Chapter 6
HOSTING GATHERING WITH UNDERAGE ALCOHOL
POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION
5-6-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 145A.05, subd. 1, to protect public
health and safety and discourage underage possession and consumption of alcohol by holding
persons criminally responsible who host events or gatherings at which underage persons possess or
consume alcohol, regardless of whether the host supplied the alcohol. (Ord. 105, 2nd Series, 8-12-
2010)
5-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 91/200
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any
other distilled spirits, including dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever
process produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing
alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by
volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with
other substances.
EVENT OR GATHERING: Any group of three (3) or more persons who have assembled or gathered
together for a social occasion or other activity.
HOST: To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control, or permit a gathering or event.
PARENT: A person having legal custody of a juvenile as a natural or adoptive parent or step-parent,
as a legal guardian, or as a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation, or any association of one or more
individuals.
UNDERAGE PERSON: Any individual under twenty one (21) years of age. (Ord. 105, 2nd Series, 8-
12-2010)
5-6-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It is unlawful for any person to host an event or gathering, at any location, at which:
A. Alcoholic beverages are present; and
B. The person knows, or reasonably should know, that any underage person will or does consume any
alcoholic beverage or possess any alcoholic beverage with the intent to consume it; and
C. The person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent possession or consumption by the underage
person.
A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present at the event or gathering to
be in violation of this section. (Ord. 105, 2nd Series, 8-12-2010)
5-6-4: EXCEPTIONS:
Section 5-6-3 of this chapter shall not be construed to apply to:
A. Conduct solely between an underage person and that person's parent while in the parent's
household.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 92/200
B. Legally protected religious observances.
C. Conduct of intoxicating liquor licensees, 3.2 percent malt liquor licensees, or bottle club permit
holders who are regulated by Minnesota Statutes chapter 340A.
D. Situations in which an underage person is lawfully in possession of alcoholic beverages during the
course and scope of that person's employment. (Ord. 105, 2nd Series, 8-12-2010)
5-6-5: PENALTY:
Violation of section 5-6-3 of this chapter is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 105, 2nd Series, 8-12-2010)
Chapter 7
BACKGROUND CHECKS
5-7-1: APPLICANTS FOR CITY EMPLOYMENT:
A. Purpose: The purpose and intent of this section is to establish regulations that will allow law
enforcement access to Minnesota's computerized criminal history information for specified noncriminal
purposes of employment background checks for the positions described in subsection B of
this section.
B. Criminal History Employment Background Investigations:
1. The Sleepy Eye Police Department is hereby required, as the exclusive entity within the City, to
do a criminal history background investigation on the applicants for the following positions within
the City, unless the City's hiring authority concludes that a background investigation is not
needed:
a. Employment positions: All regular part-time or full-time employees of the City of Sleepy Eye
and other positions that work with children or vulnerable adults.
2. In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen employment
applicants, the Police Department is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota
Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions computerized criminal history information system in
accordance with BCA policy. Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the
Police Department under the care and custody of the Chief Law Enforcement Official or his or
her designee. A summary of the results of the computerized criminal history data may be
released by the Police Department to the hiring authority, including the City Council, the City
Manager, or other City staff involved in the hiring process.
3. Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the Police Department by
written consent to undertake the investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the
provisions of Minnesota Statutes chapter 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of
the information. Except for the positions set forth in Minnesota Statutes section 364.09, the City
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 93/200
will not reject an applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant's prior conviction unless
the crime is directly related to the position of employment sought and the conviction is for a
felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the City rejects the
applicant's request on this basis, the City shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:
a. The grounds and reasons for the denial.
b. The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minnesota Statutes section
364.06.
c. The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment.
d. That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication. (Ord. 107,
2nd Series, 6-14-2011)
5-7-2: APPLICANTS FOR CITY LICENSES:
A. Purpose: The purpose and intent of this section is to establish regulations that will allow law
enforcement access to Minnesota's computerized criminal history information for specified noncriminal
purposes of licensing background checks.
B. Criminal History License Background Investigations:
1. The Sleepy Eye Police Department is hereby required, as the exclusive entity within the City, to
do a criminal history background investigation on the applicants for the following licenses with
the City:
a. City licenses: For example, employees of liquor establishments, peddler licenses, etc.
2. In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen license applicants,
the Police Department is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of
Criminal Apprehensions computerized criminal history information system in accordance with
BCA policy. Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police
Department under the care and custody of the Chief Law Enforcement Official or his or her
designee. A summary of the results of the computerized criminal history data may be released
by the Police Department to the licensing authority, including the City Council, the City Manager,
or other City staff involved in the license approval process.
3. Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the Police Department by
written consent to undertake the investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the
provisions of Minnesota Statutes chapter 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of
the information. Except for the positions set forth in Minnesota Statutes section 364.09, the City
will not reject an applicant for a license on the basis of the applicant's prior conviction unless the
crime is directly related to the license sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross
misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the City rejects the applicant's request on
this basis, the City shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:
a. The grounds and reasons for the denial.
b. The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minnesota Statutes section
364.06.
c. The earliest date the applicant may reapply for the license.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 94/200
d. That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication. (Ord. 107,
2nd Series, 6-14-2011)
Title 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
6-1-1: CERTAIN STATUTES ADOPTED:
A. Except as otherwise provided in this title, or in title 7 of this Code, the regulatory and procedural
provisions of Minnesota Statutes chapter 169, commonly referred to as the Highway Traffic
Regulation Act, as amended through laws of 1988, is hereby incorporated herein and adopted by
reference, including the penalty provisions thereof.
B. Except as otherwise provided in this title, or in title 7 of this Code, Minnesota Statutes sections
171.01, 171.02, 171.08, 171.22, 171.23 and 171.24, as amended through laws of 1988, are
hereby incorporated herein and adopted by reference, including the penalty provisions thereof.
(1988 Code § 8.01)
6-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except as otherwise defined in this Code, or where the context clearly indicates a contrary intent, the
words and terms defined in Minnesota Statutes chapter 169, shall be applicable to this title and title 7
of this Code. (1988 Code § 7.01)
6-1-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this title and title 7 of this Code are applicable to the drivers of all vehicles and
animals upon streets, including, but not limited to, those owned or operated by the United States, the
State of Minnesota, or any county, town, city, district, or other political subdivision. (1988 Code § 7.02)
6-1-4: SCOPE AND ORDERS OF OFFICERS:
A. Scope: The provisions of this title and title 7 of this Code relate exclusively to the streets, alleys and
private roads in the City, and the operation and parking of vehicles refer exclusively to the
operation and parking of vehicles upon such streets, alleys and private roads.
B. Orders Of An Officer: It is a misdemeanor for any person to wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any
lawful order or direction of any police or peace officer invested by law with authority to direct,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 95/200
control or regulate traffic. (1988 Code § 7.03)
6-1-5: SPECIAL VEHICLE USE BY THE DISABLED:
A. Operation Authorized: Operation of motorized golf carts or four (4) wheel all-terrain vehicles are
hereby authorized on the roadways of all streets, except such as are prohibited by resolution of the
Council, and only in strict compliance with this section. For the purpose of this section, a four (4)
wheel all-terrain vehicle is a motorized flotation-tired vehicle with four (4) low-pressure tires that is
limited in engine displacement of less than eight hundred (800) cubic centimeters and total dry
weight less than six hundred (600) pounds.
B. Permits: Permits shall be issued only to disabled persons as defined by statute. Application for a
permit to operate a motorized golf cart or a four (4) wheel all-terrain vehicle on the roadways of
streets shall include the name and address of the applicant and such other information as may
from time to time be required by the Council. Applications for initial or renewal permits shall be
accompanied by a certificate signed by a physician stating that the applicant is capable of safely
operating a motorized golf cart or a four (4) wheel all-terrain vehicle on the roadway of streets. All
permits shall expire on December 31, unless renewed. The fee for a permit shall be fixed by
resolution of the Council.
C. Standards And Rules Of Operation: It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorized golf cart or
a four (4) wheel all-terrain vehicle on the roadway of a street unless:
1. The operator has in possession a valid, current and unrevoked permit from the City.
2. The operation is on a roadway which has not been designated as prohibited for such operation,
except crossing at an intersection.
3. The operation is during daylight hours between sunrise and sunset.
4. The operation is not during inclement weather, or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke,
fog, or other conditions, or when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons or vehicles
thereon at a distance of five hundred feet (500').
5. The motorized golf cart or four (4) wheel all-terrain vehicle displays a slow-moving vehicle
emblem, as described by statute, on the rear thereof.
6. The motorized golf cart or four (4) wheel all-terrain vehicle is equipped with rear view mirrors as
required by statute for other vehicles.
7. The operator has insurance coverage as provided by statute (presently Minnesota Statutes
section 65B.48, subdivision 5) for motorcycles.
8. The operator observes all traffic laws, except such as cannot reasonably be applied to
motorized golf carts or four (4) wheel all-terrain vehicles. (1988 Code § 8.10; amd. 1996 Code)
6-1-6: LOAD LIMITS:
The Council, upon the recommendation of the Street Superintendent or City Engineer, may from time
to time impose upon vehicular traffic on any part or all of the streets such load limits as may be
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 96/200
necessary or desirable. Such limits, and the specific extent or weight to which loads are limited, shall
be clearly and legibly sign-posted thereon. It is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle on any
street in violation of the limitation so posted. (1988 Code § 7.10; amd. 1996 Code)
6-1-7: TRUCK ROUTES:
It is unlawful for any person to drive a tractor, agricultural implement, truck over nine thousand (9,000)
pounds gross vehicle weight, truck-trailer, tractor-trailer or truck tractor in through traffic, upon any
street except those which have been designated and sign-posted as truck routes. For the purpose of
this title, "through traffic" means originating without the City and with a destination without the City, as
distinguished from "local traffic" which means traffic either originating or having a destination within the
City. (1988 Code § 8.02)
6-1-8: U-TURNS:
It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle by turning so as to proceed in the opposite
direction upon any street except at a street intersection, and then only if the street intersection is not
sign-posted prohibiting a U-turn or otherwise controlled by a traffic signal; provided, that any person
making a permitted U-turn shall yield the right-of-way to all other vehicles. (1988 Code § 8.03)
6-1-9: LEFT TURNS PROHIBITED:
The Chief of Police may, in his discretion, and with the consent of the Council, prohibit left turns
entirely, or during specified hours, at certain intersections. It is unlawful for any person to make a left
turn at any intersection sign-posted prohibiting the same, or make a left turn during the hours of such
sign-posted prohibition. (1988 Code § 8.04)
6-1-10: EXHIBITION DRIVING:
A. Definition: "Exhibition driving", as used in this section, means to stop, start, accelerate or decelerate
a motor vehicle, or to turn such motor vehicle at an unnecessary rate of speed so as to cause tires
to squeal, gears to grind, soil to be thrown, engine backfire, fishtailing or skidding, or, as to two (2)
wheeled or three (3) wheeled motor vehicles, the front wheel to lose contact with the ground or
roadway surface.
B. Misdemeanor; Exception: It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any exhibition driving on any
street, parking lot, or other public or private property, except when an emergency creates necessity
for such operation to prevent injury to persons or damage to property; provided, that this section
shall not apply to driving on a racetrack. For purposes of this section, a "racetrack" means any
track or premises whereon motorized vehicles, horses, dogs, or other animals or fowl legally
compete in a race or timed contest for an audience, the members of which have directly or
indirectly paid a consideration for admission. (1988 Code § 6.10)
6-1-11: ONE-WAY STREETS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 97/200
A. Council Authority: The Council may, by resolution, designate streets as one-way streets.
B. Obedience To Signs: It is a misdemeanor for any person to travel upon any one-way street in a
direction opposite that designated when the same has been duly sign-posted. (1988 Code § 8.06)
6-1-12: DRIVING THROUGH PRIVATE PROPERTY TO AVOID TRAFFIC SIGNAL:
It is unlawful for any person to avoid obedience to any traffic-control device by driving upon or through
any private property. (1988 Code § 8.07)
6-1-12-1: SCHOOL ZONES:
A. The Sleepy Eye Public School may close 4th Avenue SW to motor vehicle traffic excepting school
buses and emergency vehicles between Linden Street SW and Summit Street SW from seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. and from two thirty o'clock (2:30) P.M. to three
thirty o'clock (3:30) P.M. on school days.
B. Traffic arms or markers designating the area as closed shall be put in place by the Sleepy Eye
Public School during the closed time.
C. Any person who operates a motor vehicle and enters the marked area during closed times shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 100, 2nd Series, 10-13-2009)
6-1-13: EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
The provisions of this title shall not apply to vehicles when operated with due regard for safety, under
the direction of police officers in the chase or apprehension of violators of the law or of persons
charged with or suspected of any such violation, nor to Fire Department or fire patrol vehicles when
traveling in response to a fire alarm, nor to public ambulances when traveling in emergencies. This
exemption shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of a
reckless disregard of the safety of others. (1988 Code § 8.08)
6-1-14: BICYCLES:
A. Definition: The term "bicycle", as used in this section, means every device propelled by human
power upon which a person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is over
fourteen inches (14") in diameter, and including any device generally recognized as a bicycle
though equipped with two (2) front or rear wheels.
B. Riding And Parking Restrictions: It is unlawful for any person to ride, park, or leave standing, a
bicycle on any sidewalk within that portion of the City bounded by Third Avenue West on the west,
Oak Street on the north, Third Avenue East on the east, and Walnut Street on the south. Violation
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 98/200
of this subsection shall result in confiscation of the bicycle ridden in such violation for a period of
one week. (1988 Code § 7.11)
6-1-15: PENALTY:
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this title when he performs an
act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows:
A. Where the specific section, subsection, paragraph or provision specifically makes violation a
misdemeanor, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a
manner or under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property,
he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he stands convicted of violation of any
provision of this title, exclusive of violations relating to the standing or parking of an unattended
vehicle, within the immediate preceding twelve (12) month period for the third or subsequent time,
he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.
B. As to any violations not constituting a misdemeanor under the provisions of subsection A of this
section, he shall be punished as for a petty misdemeanor.
C. As to any violation of a provision adopted by reference, he shall be punished as specified in such
provision, so adopted. (1988 Code § 8.99)
Chapter 2
STANDING AND PARKING REGULATIONS
6-2-1: PRESUMPTION OF LIABILITY:
As to any vehicle parking in violation of this title and title 7 of this code, when the driver thereof is not
present, it shall be presumed that the owner or lessee of such vehicle parked the same, or that the
driver was acting as the agent of the owner or lessee. (1988 Code § 9.01)
6-2-2: TRAFFIC AND PARKING CONTROL:
A. Council Action: No device, sign or signal shall be erected or maintained for traffic or parking control
unless the Council shall first have approved and directed the same, except as otherwise provided
in this section; provided, that when traffic and parking control is marked or sign-posted, such
marking or sign-posting shall attest to Council action thereon.
B. Temporary Restrictions: The City, acting through the Chief of Police, may temporarily restrict traffic
or parking for any private, public or experimental purpose. It is the duty of the Chief of Police to so
restrict traffic or parking when a hazardous condition arises or is observed.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 99/200
C. Movement Restrictions And Prohibitions: It is a misdemeanor for any person to drive a vehicle
contrary to lane restrictions or prohibitions painted on any street, or contrary to sign-posted,
fenced, or barricaded restrictions or prohibitions.
D. Parking Restrictions And Prohibitions: It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle, except an
emergency vehicle, contrary to lane restrictions or prohibitions painted on any curb, or contrary to
sign-posted, fenced, or barricaded restrictions or prohibitions.
E. Damaging Or Moving Markings: It is a misdemeanor for any person to deface, mar, damage, move,
remove, or in any way tamper with any structure, work, material, equipment, tools, sign, signal,
barricade, fence, painting or appurtenance in any street unless such person has written permission
from the City or is an agent, employee or contractor for the City, or other authority having
jurisdiction over a particular street, and acting within the authority or scope of a contract with the
City or such other authority. (1988 Code § 7.04)
6-2-3: GENERAL PARKING PROHIBITIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the specific directions of a police officer or traffic-control device
in any of the following places:
A. On a sidewalk;
B. In front of a public or private driveway;
C. Within an intersection;
D. Within ten feet (10') of a fire hydrant;
E. On a crosswalk;
F. Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at any intersection;
G. In a sign-posted fire lane;
H. Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal
located at the side of a roadway;
I. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 100/200
J. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street
opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy five feet (75') of said entrance when
properly sign-posted;
K. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking
would obstruct traffic;
L. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
M. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street;
N. At any place where official signs prohibit or restrict stopping, parking or both;
O. In any alley, except for loading or unloading and then only so long as reasonably necessary for
such loading and unloading to or from adjacent premises; or
P. On any boulevard which has been curbed. (1988 Code § 9.02)
6-2-4: RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLES; PARKING:
A. Definition: The term "recreational camping vehicle" means any of the following:
CAMPING TRAILER: A folding structure, mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation
and vacation uses.
MOTOR HOME: A portable, temporary building to be used for travel, recreation and vacation,
constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
PICKUP COACH: A structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary
dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation.
TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a
temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses, permanently identified "travel trailer"
by the manufacturer of the trailer.
B. Restricted Parking Within Rights-Of-Way: It is unlawful for any person to leave or park a
recreational camping vehicle on or within the limits of any street or right of way for a continuous
period in excess of twenty four (24) hours, except where signs are erected designating the place
as a campsite or in a mobile home park. Provided, however, that during such twenty four (24) hour
period, such vehicle shall not be occupied as living quarters. (1988 Code § 9.03)
6-2-5: UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL:
It is unlawful for any person to move a vehicle not owned, leased or under the control of such person
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 101/200
into any prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. (1988 Code § 9.04)
6-2-6: DIRECTION TO PROCEED:
It is unlawful for any person to stop or park a vehicle on a street when directed or ordered to proceed
by any police officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. (1988 Code
§ 9.05)
6-2-7: PARALLEL AND ANGLE PARKING:
A. Parallel Parking: Except where angle parking is specifically allowed and indicated by curb or street
marking or sign-posting, or all or any of them, each vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way
road where there is an adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle parallel with, and within twelve inches (12") of, the right-hand curb, and, where painted
markings appear on the curb or the street, such vehicle shall be within such markings, front and
rear; provided, that upon a one-way roadway all vehicles shall be so parked, except that the lefthand
wheels of the vehicle may be parallel with and within twelve inches (12") from the left-hand
curb, but the front of the vehicle in any event and with respect to the remainder of the vehicle, shall
be in the direction of the flow of traffic upon such one-way street; and it is unlawful to park in
violation of this subsection. (1988 Code § 9.05)
B. Angle Parking: Where angle parking has been established by Council resolution, and is allowed, as
shown by curb or street marking or sign-posting, or all or any of them, each vehicle stopped or
parked shall be at an angle of approximately forty five degrees (45°) to sixty degrees (60°) with the
front wheel touching the curb and within any parking lines painted on the curb or street; provided,
that the front wheel not touching the curb shall be the portion of the vehicle furthest in the direction
of one-way traffic; and it is unlawful to park in violation of this subsection. (1988 Code § 9.06)
6-2-8: STREETS WITHOUT CURB:
Upon streets not having a curb each vehicle shall be stopped or parked parallel and to the right of the
paving, improved or main traveled part of the street; and it is unlawful to park in violation of this
section. (1988 Code § 9.08)
6-2-9: NO PARKING AND LIMITED PARKING ZONES:
Parking on streets shall be limited as follows:
A. Maximum Time; Unposted Streets: It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave standing any
vehicle upon any street for a continuous period in excess of forty eight (48) hours.
B. Time Limited Parking Established: The Chief of Police may, when authorized by resolution of the
Council, designate certain streets, blocks or portions of streets or blocks as prohibited parking
zones, or five-minute, ten-minute, fifteen-minute, thirty-minute, one-hour, two-hour, four-hour, six7/
1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 102/200
hour, eight-hour, morning or afternoon rush hour limited parking zones and shall mark by
appropriate signs any zones so established. Such zones shall be established whenever necessary
for the convenience of the public or to minimize traffic hazards and preserve a free flow of traffic. It
is unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave standing any vehicle in a prohibited parking zone,
for a period of time in excess of the sign-posted limitation, or during sign-posted hours of prohibited
parking.
C. Tampering Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to remove, erase or otherwise obliterate any
mark or sign placed upon a tire or other part of a vehicle by a police officer for the purpose of
measuring the length of time such vehicle has been parked.
D. Enforcement; Moving Vehicle Within Block: For the purpose of enforcement of this section, any
vehicle moved less than one block in a limited time parking zone shall be deemed to have
remained stationary. (1988 Code § 9.09)
6-2-10: RESTRICTIONS DURING SNOW REMOVAL:
The City Council shall determine the snow removal policy, and may adjust and update said policy as
they deem appropriate. Any adjustments and updates to the snow removal policy must be published in
the Sleepy Eye Herald Dispatch. It is the responsibility of the vehicle owner to be informed of snow
removal policies and be aware of when a snow emergency has been declared. Failure to comply with
the snow removal policy shall be subject to a misdemeanor ticket under this section and/or towing of
the vehicle. (Ord. 118, 2nd Series, 1-14-2014)
6-2-11: TRUCK PARKING:
A. Legal Areas Posted: It is unlawful to park a detached semi-trailer upon any street, City-owned
parking lot, or other public property except such as are specifically designated by the Council by
resolution and sign-posted.
B. Weight Restrictions; Residential District: It is unlawful to park a truck (other than a truck of 7,000
pounds gross vehicle weight, or less), truck-trailer, tractor-trailer or truck-tractor within an area
zoned as a residential district except for the purpose of loading or unloading the same, and then
only during such time as is reasonably necessary for such activity.
C. Weight Restrictions; Business District: It is unlawful to park a commercial vehicle of more than
twelve thousand (12,000) pounds gross vehicle weight upon any street in the business district
except streets as specifically designated by the Council by resolution and sign-posted, but parking
of such vehicle for a period of not more than thirty (30) minutes shall be permitted in such space
for the purpose of necessary access to abutting property while actively loading or unloading when
such access cannot reasonably be secured from an alley or from an adjacent street where truck
parking is not so restricted.
D. Length Of Vehicle: It is unlawful to park a truck or other vehicle using or equipped with a trailer, or
extended body or other extension or projection beyond the original length of such vehicle, or any
passenger bus, diagonally along any street except for a time sufficient to load or unload, and in
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 103/200
such case, only parallel parking shall be permitted. Provided, however, that a truck may stand
backed up to the curb if the weight or bulk of the load makes parallel parking impracticable, but
then only for a period of time sufficient to load or unload.
E. Time Limited: Parking of commercial vehicles is permitted in duly designated and sign-posted
loading zones, and in alleys, for a period of up to twenty (20) minutes; provided, that such alley
parking does not prevent the flow of traffic therein, all of which shall be for the purpose of access to
abutting or adjacent property while actively loading or unloading. (1988 Code § 9.11)
6-2-12: CITY PARKING LOTS:
In City-owned parking lots, the Council may limit the sizes and types of motor vehicles to be parked
thereon, hours of parking, and prescribed method of parking; provided, that such limitations and
restrictions are marked or sign-posted thereon. It is unlawful to park or leave standing any vehicle
backed into a parking place, to drive in a direction opposite the flow of traffic marked by "one-way"
signs or arrows, or to park any vehicle in any City-owned parking lot contrary to the restrictions or
limitations marked or sign-posted therein. (1988 Code § 9.12)
6-2-13: IMPOUNDING AND REMOVING VEHICLES:
When any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street or City-owned parking lot in violation of
any parking regulation, such officer is hereby authorized to require the driver or other person in charge
of such vehicle to remove the same to a position in compliance with this chapter. When any police
officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any street or City-owned parking lot in violation of any parking
regulation, such officer is hereby authorized to impound such unlawfully parked vehicle and to provide
for the removal thereof and to remove the same to a convenient garage or other facility or place of
safety; provided, that if any charge shall be placed against such vehicle for cost of removal or storage,
or both, by anyone called upon to assist therewith the same shall be paid prior to removal from such
place of storage or safekeeping. (1988 Code § 9.13)
6-2-14: VEHICLE REPAIR ON STREET:
It is unlawful for any person to service, repair, assemble or dismantle any vehicle parked upon a
street, or attempt to do so, except to service such vehicle with gasoline or oil or to provide emergency
repairs thereon, but in no event for more than twenty four (24) hours. (1988 Code § 9.14)
6-2-15: PHYSICALLY DISABLED PARKING:
A. Compliance With Law: Statutory parking privileges for the physically disabled shall be strictly
observed and enforced. Police officers are authorized to tag vehicles on either private or public
property in violation of such statutory privileges.
B. Parking Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person, whether or not physically disabled, to stop, park, or
leave standing, a motor vehicle: 1) in a sign-posted fire lane at any time, or 2) in lanes where, and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 104/200
during such hours as, parking is prohibited to accommodate heavy traffic during morning and
afternoon rush hours. (1988 Code § 9.15; amd. 1996 Code)
6-2-16: PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WITHOUT CONSENT:
It is a misdemeanor to park or abandon a motor vehicle on the property of another, or upon an area
developed as an off-street parking facility, without the consent of the owner, lessee or person in
charge of any such property or facility. (1988 Code § 9.16)
6-2-17: PENALTY:
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs
an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows:
A. Where the specific section, subsection, paragraph or provision specifically makes violation a
misdemeanor, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a
manner or under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property,
he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he stands convicted of violation of any
provision of this chapter, exclusive of violations relating to the standing or parking of an unattended
vehicle, within the immediate preceding twelve (12) month period for the third or subsequent time,
he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. (1988 Code § 9.99)
B. The City Council may by resolution establish various fines for parking violations.
C. As to any violations not constituting a misdemeanor under the provisions of subsection A or B of
this section by resolution, shall be punishable as a petty misdemeanor. (Ord. 25, 2nd Series, 10-4-
1994)
Chapter 3
SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
6-3-1: SCOPE OF APPLICATION:
Notwithstanding provisions of this title to the contrary, this chapter shall apply to control of traffic and
regulation of those classes of vehicles falling within the definition of snowmobiles and all-terrain
vehicles, as such vehicles are defined by Minnesota Statutes, as to matters set forth herein. All
provisions of this title, not relating to matters herein stated, apply as equally to snowmobiles and allterrain
vehicles as other vehicles. (Ord. 97, 2nd Series, 4-14-2009)
6-3-2: PRIVATE PROPERTY:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 105/200
It is a misdemeanor to operate a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle on private property without the
permission or consent of the owner or occupant. (Ord. 97, 2nd Series, 4-14-2009)
6-3-3: HOURS OF OPERATION:
It is a misdemeanor to operate a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle within the City from twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of each day, except in an emergency as defined in
subsection 6-3-5B of this chapter. (Ord. 97, 2nd Series, 4-14-2009)
6-3-4: SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
It is a misdemeanor to operate a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle on a sidewalk or public right-of-way,
except that a direct crossing may be made in the same manner as provided for direct crossing of a
City street, except for removal of snow by all-terrain vehicles. (Ord. 97, 2nd Series, 4-14-2009)
6-3-5: OPERATION ON ROADWAYS:
It is a misdemeanor for any person to operate a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle upon a roadway,
except as follows:
A. From the owner's residence, or place of business, or place the vehicle is generally stored, in a
direct route to the nearest departure point from the corporate limits of the City or directly to a
designated snowmobile trail.
B. In an emergency, during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the roadway
renders travel by automobile impractical.
C. To make a direct crossing of a roadway, which shall be made only as follows:
1. The crossing shall be made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees (90°) to the direction of
the roadway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing.
2. The vehicle shall be brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder or main traveled
way of the roadway.
3. The driver shall yield the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic that constitutes an immediate
hazard.
4. In crossing a divided roadway, the crossing shall be made only at an intersection of such
roadway with another public street.
5. Front and rear lights must be illuminated.
D. If operation on a roadway is permitted pursuant to one of the exceptions set forth above, such
operation shall be subject to the following uses:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 106/200
1. At least one head lamp and one tail lamp, each minimum candle power as prescribed by laws or
regulations of the State of Minnesota, shall be illuminated.
2. Reflector material of a minimum area of sixteen (16) square inches shall be mounted on each
side forward of the handlebars.
3. The vehicle shall be equipped with brakes which conform to standards prescribed by laws or
regulations of the State of Minnesota and which are in good working order.
4. Any sled, trailer, or other device being towed must be equipped with reflective materials as
required by laws and regulations of the State of Minnesota.
5. No snowmobile equipped with metal traction devices shall be operated on a roadway.
6. The vehicle shall not be driven at a speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour.
7. If two (2) or more vehicles are being driven to a group, they shall travel in single file.
8. Except as may otherwise be provided herein or by State Statute, all traffic laws shall apply to
snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles in the same manner as to other motor vehicles, except
those which by their nature have no application. (Ord. 97, 2nd Series, 4-14-2009)
6-3-6: OPERATION ON PUBLIC LANDS AND WATERS:
It is a misdemeanor to operate a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle upon lands or waters owned by or
under the control of the City, except by written permit authorized by resolution of the City Council, or in
areas that are sign-posted to permit such operation. The provisions of subsection 6-3-5D of this
chapter shall apply to operation on lands or waters owned by or under the control of the City. (Ord. 97,
2nd Series, 4-14-2009)
6-3-7: MINIMUM AGE OF SNOWMOBILE OPERATOR:
No person under fourteen (14) years of age shall make a direct crossing of a street or operate a
snowmobile on a roadway. A person fourteen (14) years of age or older, but less than eighteen (18)
years of age, may make a direct crossing of a street only if the person has in immediate possession a
valid snowmobile safety certificate or a valid driver's license or identification card with a valid
snowmobile qualification indicator. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall otherwise operate a
snowmobile on a roadway. No person under the age of fourteen (14) years shall operate a
snowmobile on any public land or water unless accompanied on the same or an accompanying
snowmobile by the person's parent, legal guardian, or other person eighteen (18) years of age or older
designated by the parent or guardian. (Ord. 97, 2nd Series, 4-14-2009)
6-3-8: MINIMUM AGE OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE OPERATOR:
A person under twelve (12) years of age shall not make a direct crossing of a street, operate an allterrain
vehicle on a public street or right-of-way, or operate an all-terrain vehicle on lands or waters
owned by or under the control of the City. A person twelve (12) years of age or older, but less than
sixteen (16) years of age, may make a direct crossing of a street only if the person possesses a valid
all-terrain vehicle safety certificate and is accompanied on another all-terrain vehicle by a person
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 107/200
eighteen (18) years of age or older who holds a valid driver's license. No person under the age of
sixteen (16) shall otherwise operate an all-terrain vehicle on a roadway. (Ord. 97, 2nd Series, 4-14-
2009)
6-3-9: CERTAIN STATUTES ADOPTED:
Minnesota Statutes, sections 84.81 through 84.928, inclusive, together with rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder, are hereby adopted by reference, incorporated herein and made a part
hereof, except as otherwise provided herein. (Ord. 97, 2nd Series, 4-14-2009)
Title 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
7-1-1: ICE AND SNOW ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS:
A. Ice And Snow A Nuisance: All snow and ice remaining upon public sidewalks is hereby declared to
constitute a public nuisance and shall be abated by the owner or tenant of the abutting private
property within forty eight (48) hours after such snow or ice has ceased to be deposited.
B. City To Remove Snow And Ice: The City may cause to be removed from all public sidewalks,
beginning forty eight (48) hours after snow or ice has ceased to fall, all snow or ice which may be
discovered thereon, and it shall keep a record of the cost of such removal and the private property
adjacent to which such accumulations were found and removed.
C. Cost Of Removal To Be Assessed: The City Clerk shall, upon direction of the Council, and on
receipt of the information provided for in the preceding subsection, extend the cost of such removal
of snow or ice as a special assessment against the lots or parcel of ground abutting on walks
which were cleared, and such special assessments shall at the time of certifying taxes to the
County Auditor be certified for collection as other special assessments are certified and collected.
D. Civil Suit For Cost Of Removal: The City Attorney shall, in the alternative, upon direction of the
Council, bring suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover from the persons owning land
adjacent to which sidewalks were cleared, as provided in subsection B of this section, the cost of
such clearing and the cost and disbursement of a civil action therefor. (1988 Code § 7.05)
7-1-2: CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND GUTTERS:
A. Methods Of Procedure:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 108/200
1. Abutting or affected property owners may contract for, construct or reconstruct roadway
surfacing, sidewalk or curb and gutter in accordance with this section if advance payment is
made therefor or arrangements for payment considered adequate by the City are completed in
advance.
2. With or without petition by the methods set forth in the Local Improvement Code of Minnesota
Statutes, presently beginning with section 429.011, as the same may from time to time be
amended. (1988 Code § 7.06)
3. The City may inspect sidewalks, proposed sidewalk areas, curb and gutter or proposed curb and
gutter areas. The City Council shall have the power as specified in section 429.021 of Minnesota
Statutes Annotated to order construction of sidewalks or curb and gutter and may require repair,
reconstruction and maintenance of existing sidewalks or curb and gutter. The City may assess
the costs of such construction or improvements to the abutting or benefited property owner.
Abutting or affected property owners may construct, reconstruct or contract for roadway
surfacing, sidewalk or curb and gutter as provided in this section. (Ord. 51, 2nd Series, 12-1-
1998)
B. Permit Required: It is a misdemeanor to construct or reconstruct a sidewalk, curb and gutter,
driveway, or roadway surfacing in any street or other public property in the City without a permit in
writing from the City. Application for such permit shall be made on forms approved and provided by
the City and shall sufficiently describe the contemplated improvements, the contemplated date of
beginning of work, and the length of time required to complete the same; provided, that no permit
shall be required for any such improvement ordered installed by the Council. All such applications
shall contain an agreement by the applicant to be bound by this chapter and plans and
specifications consistent with the provisions of this chapter and good engineering practices shall
also accompany the application. A permit from the City shall not relieve the holder from damages
to the person or property of another caused by such work.
C. Specifications And Standards: All construction and reconstruction of roadway surfacing, sidewalk
and curb and gutter improvements, including curb cuts, shall be strictly in accordance with
specifications and standards on file in the Office of the City Clerk and open to inspection and
copying there. Such specifications and standards may be amended from time to time by the City,
but shall be uniformly enforced.
D. Inspection: The City shall inspect such improvements as deemed necessary or advisable. Any work
not done according to the applicable specifications and standards shall be removed and corrected
at the expense of the permit holder. Any work done hereunder may be stopped by the City if found
to be unsatisfactory or not in accordance with the specifications and standards, but this shall not
place a continuing burden upon the City to inspect or supervise such work. (1988 Code § 7.06)
7-1-3: STREET OBSTRUCTIONS:
A. Obstructions: It is a misdemeanor for any person to place, deposit, display or offer for sale, any
fence, goods or other obstructions upon, over, across or under any street (including boulevards)
without first having obtained a written permit from the Council, and then only in compliance in all
respects with the terms and conditions of such permit, and taking precautionary measures for the
protection of the public. An electrical cord or device of any kind is hereby included, but not by way
of limitation, within the definition of an obstruction.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 109/200
B. Fires: It is a misdemeanor for any person to build or maintain a fire upon a street.
C. Dumping In Streets: It is a misdemeanor for any person to throw or deposit in any street any nails,
dirt, glass or glassware, cans, discarded cloth or clothing, metal scraps, garbage, leaves, grass or
tree limbs, paper or paper products, shreds or rubbish, oil, grease or other petroleum products, or
to empty any water containing salt or other injurious chemical thereon. It is a violation of this
section to haul any such material, inadequately enclosed or covered, thereby permitting the same
to fall upon streets. It is also a violation of this section to place or store any building materials or
waste resulting from building construction or demolition on any street without first having obtained
a written permit from the Council.
D. Signs And Other Structures: It is a misdemeanor for any person to place or maintain a sign,
advertisement, or other structure in any street without first having obtained a written permit from
the Council. In a district zoned for commercial or industrial enterprises, special permission allowing
an applicant to erect and maintain signs overhanging the street may be granted upon such terms
and conditions as may be set forth in the zoning or construction provisions of this Code.
E. Placing Snow Or Ice In Roadway Or On Sidewalk:
1. It is a misdemeanor for any person, not acting under a specific contract with the City or without
special permission from the City, to remove snow or ice from private property and place the
same in any roadway or on a sidewalk.
2. Where permission is granted by the City, the person to whom such permission is granted shall
be initially responsible for payment of all direct or indirect costs of removing the snow or ice from
the street or sidewalk. If not paid, collection shall be by civil action or assessment against the
benefited property as any other special assessment.
F. Continuing Violation: Each day that any person continues in violation of this section shall be a
separate offense and punishable as such.
G. Condition: Before granting any permit under any of the provisions of this section, the Council may
impose such insurance or bonding conditions thereon as it, considering the projected danger to
public or private property or to persons, deems proper for safeguarding such persons and property.
Such insurance or bond shall also protect the City from any suit, action or cause of action arising
by reason of such obstruction. (1988 Code § 7.07)
7-1-4: PENALTY:
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs
an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows:
A. Where the specific section, subsection, paragraph or provision specifically makes violation a
misdemeanor, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a
manner or under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 110/200
he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he stands convicted of violation of any
provision of this chapter, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.
B. As to any violation not constituting a misdemeanor under the provisions of subsection A of this
section, he shall be punished as for a petty misdemeanor. (1988 Code § 7.99; amd. 1996 Code)
Chapter 2
EXCAVATIONS
7-2-1: UNLAWFUL ACT:
It is a misdemeanor for any person, except: a) a City employee acting within the course and scope of
his employment, b) a contractor acting within the course and scope of a contract with the City, or c) a
franchisee acting within the course and scope of its franchise from the City, to make any excavation,
opening or tunnel in, over, across or under a street or other public property without first having
obtained a written permit from the City Clerk as herein provided. (1988 Code § 7.08)
7-2-2: APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION:
A. Application: Application for a permit to make a street opening or excavation shall describe with
reasonable particularity the name and address of the applicant, the place of the proposed
excavation, its purpose and size, the name and address of all owners, and the legal description of
the premises to be served by the excavation, and such other information as may be necessary or
desirable to facilitate the investigation, estimate costs, and prepare an agreement. Applications
shall be accepted from, and permits issued to, all of the owners of the premises to be served by
the excavation; provided, that if the owners will not actually perform the work, their contractor or
other person must make the application as their agent.
B. Investigation: The City Clerk shall refer the application to the Street Superintendent and/or City
Engineer who shall cause such investigation to be made as he may deem necessary to determine
the estimated cost of repair, including backfilling, compacting, resurfacing and replacement, and
the time and manner of procedure and the time limitation upon such excavation. The Street
Superintendent and/or City Engineer shall estimate the cost, including temporary and permanent
repairs due to weather and other conditions, and the cost of such investigation shall be included in
the estimate. (1988 Code § 7.08)
7-2-3: MANNER OF PERFORMANCE:
All temporary and permanent repairs, including backfilling, compacting, and resurfacing, shall be
made, or contracted for, by the permittee strictly in accordance with specifications for street opening
repairs as promulgated by the City and under the direction of the Street Superintendent and/or City
Engineer. If the Street Superintendent and/or City Engineer finds that those specifications are not
being strictly adhered to, he shall stop the work immediately and it shall be treated as abandoned. The
Street Superintendent and/or City Engineer shall endorse the permit as satisfactorily completed or
abandoned. The specifications for street opening repairs and the duties of the Street Superintendent
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 111/200
and/or City Engineer shall apply equally to all excavations by permittees, City employees, contractors
with the City, and franchisees. (1988 Code § 7.08)
7-2-4: ABANDONMENT:
Work shall progress expeditiously to completion in accordance with any time limitation placed thereon
so as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience to the public. In the event that work is not performed in
accordance with the permit, or shall cease or be abandoned, the City Clerk may give notice in writing
to the permittee(s) to complete the work within seven (7) days or the City will perform the work in
which case the cost thereof shall be a continuing obligation, jointly and severally, of the permittee and
owners of the premises to be served. (1988 Code § 7.08; amd. 1996 Code)
7-2-5: INSURANCE; INDEMNIFICATION; BOND:
No permit shall be issued until:
A. Insurance: The applicant has furnished the City satisfactory evidence in writing that the applicant
will keep in effect public liability insurance of not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for
any person, and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any occurrence, and property
damage insurance of not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), issued by an insurance
company authorized to do business in the State of Minnesota and on which the City is named as a
co-insured, and
B. Indemnification: The applicant and all owners have agreed in writing to indemnify and hold the City
harmless from any liability for injury or damage arising out of the action of the applicant in
performance of the work, or any expense whatsoever incurred by the City incident to a claim or
action brought or commenced by any person arising therefrom, and
C. Bond: A surety bond payable to the City in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) is filed
with the City Clerk insuring performance in accordance with the permit. (1988 Code § 7.08)
7-2-6: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
The City Clerk shall issue such permit only after:
A. Completion of such investigation,
B. Payment by the applicant in advance of all estimated costs to be incurred by the City,
C. Agreement by the applicant and owners to the conditions of time and manner of performance,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 112/200
D. Agreement by the applicant and owners to pay all actual costs of repairs over and above the
estimate,
E. Agreement in writing by the applicant and owners to be bound by all of the provisions of this
chapter and the specifications hereinbefore referred to, and
F. Agreement by the applicant(s) to such other and additional conditions as the Council may deem
necessary. (1988 Code § 7.08)
7-2-7: COST ADJUSTMENT; WARRANTY:
Within sixty (60) days following completion of permanent repairs, the City Clerk shall determine actual
costs of repairs, including cost of investigation, and prepare and furnish to such permittee(s) an
itemized statement thereof and claim additional payment from, or make refund (without interest) to,
the permittee(s), as the case may be. The permittee(s) shall be responsible for any damages by way
of settlement or defect in the resurfacing for a period of one year following the completion of the work.
(1988 Code § 7.08)
7-2-8: ASSESSMENT:
Any uncollected costs to the City may, at the option of the City, be collected in a civil action, or certified
as a special assessment. (1988 Code § 7.08)
7-2-9: PENALTY:
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs
an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows:
A. Where the specific section, subsection, paragraph or provision specifically makes violation a
misdemeanor, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a
manner or under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property,
he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he stands convicted of violation of any
provision of this chapter, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.
B. As to any violation not constituting a misdemeanor under the provisions of subsection A of this
section, he shall be punished as for a petty misdemeanor. (1988 Code § 7.99; amd. 1996 Code)
Chapter 3
TREES, SHRUBS AND WEEDS
7-3-1: CITY TO CONTROL TREE PLANTING:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 113/200
The City shall have control and supervision of planting shrubs and trees upon, or overhanging, all the
streets or other public property. The City may establish and enforce uniform standards relating to the
kinds and types of trees to be planted and the placement thereof. Such standards shall be kept on file
in the Office of the City Clerk and may be revised from time to time by action of the Council upon the
recommendation of the Park and Recreation Board. (1988 Code § 7.09)
7-3-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to plant or remove trees or other plants which are upon City property,
including rights-of-way, without first procuring from the City a permit in writing to do so. (1988 Code
§ 7.09)
7-3-3: DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNERS:
A. Grass And Weeds: Every owner of property abutting on any street shall cause the grass and weeds
to be cut from the line of such property nearest to such street to the center of such street. If the
grass or weeds in such a place attain a height in excess of six inches (6") it shall be prima facie
evidence of a failure to comply with this section. Every owner of property abutting on any street
shall, subject to the provision herein requiring a permit therefor, trim, cut and otherwise maintain all
trees and shrubs from the line of such property nearest to such street to the center of such street.
(1988 Code § 7.09; amd. Ord. 84, 2nd Series, 8-8-2006)
B. Dangerous And Hazardous Trees: When the Parks Director for the City of Sleepy Eye determines
that there are dangerous or hazardous trees located on the boulevard or in the area from a
property owner's property line to the center of the street, he shall notify the owner of said abutting
property that the trees must be removed. The cost of the removal of the trees, together with the
removal of the stump, shall be split on a 50-50 basis between the abutting property owner and the
City of Sleepy Eye. In the event that the abutting property owner refuses to remove the tree or
refuses to make payment for fifty percent (50%), the remaining sections of this title and chapter
shall apply. (Ord. 84, 2nd Series, 8-8-2006)
7-3-4: CITY MAY ORDER WORK DONE:
The City may, in cases of failure to comply with this chapter, perform such work with employees of the
City, keeping an accurate account of the cost thereof for each lot, piece or parcel of land abutting upon
such street. (1988 Code § 7.09)
7-3-5: ASSESSMENT:
If such maintenance work is performed by the City as set forth in section 7-3-4 of this chapter, the City
Clerk shall forthwith upon completion thereof ascertain the cost attributable to each lot, piece or parcel
of abutting land. The City Clerk shall, at the next regular meeting thereof, present such certificate to
the Council and obtain its approval thereof. When such certificate has been approved it shall be
extended as to the cost therein stated as a special assessment against such abutting land and such
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 114/200
special assessment shall, at the time of certifying taxes to the County Auditor, be certified for
collection as other special assessments are certified and collected. (1988 Code § 7.09)
7-3-6: PENALTY:
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs
an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows:
A. Where the specific section, subsection, paragraph or provision specifically makes violation a
misdemeanor, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a
manner or under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property,
he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he stands convicted of violation of any
provision of this chapter, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.
B. As to any violation not constituting a misdemeanor under the provisions of subsection A of this
section, he shall be punished as for a petty misdemeanor. (1988 Code § 7.99; amd. 1996 Code)
7-3-7: NOXIOUS OR POISONOUS VEGETATION:
In any area the existence of any noxious or poisonous vegetation, such as poison ivy, ragweed, or
other poisonous plants, or any weeds, grass over six inches (6") tall, brush or plants, which are a fire
hazard or otherwise detrimental to the health or appearance of the neighborhood must be cut and
eliminated. Failure to eliminate the condition will allow the City to proceed under sections 7-3-4, 7-3-5,
and 7-3-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 77, 2nd Series, 5-10-2005)
Chapter 4
PUBLIC PARKS
7-4-1: RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The Council may by resolution adopt, and from time to time amend, rules and regulations governing
public parks. It is unlawful to violate such rules and regulations as are conspicuously sign-posted in
such parks. (1988 Code § 10.51)
7-4-2: HOURS:
It is unlawful for any person to park, be in or remain in, or leave any vehicle in any park between the
hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of the day following; provided,
however, that this section shall not apply to those vehicles or persons involved in organized activities
which are authorized by permit issued by the City to remain in a park, or to persons equipped with
camping vehicles or tents in designated areas; provided, that such camping shall be limited to a
maximum of seven (7) days. (1988 Code § 10.53)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 115/200
7-4-3: GLASS BEVERAGE CONTAINERS PROHIBITED:
It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to possess, keep, or allow to be kept within the area of any
City park, beverage containers made partially or entirely of glass, or any other material which is
breakable and results in sharp or potentially harmful pieces when broken. This section shall apply to
bringing any such beverage containers into a City park, the use of such a beverage container within
the City park, or the actual or constructive possession of such a beverage container within a City park.
Notice shall be posted once each year in one location in each City park. (1988 Code § 10.53)
7-4-4: PENALTY:
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs
an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, or performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure
is prohibited or declared unlawful by a Code adopted by reference by this chapter, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific
provisions hereof. (1988 Code § 10.99)
Chapter 5
FRANCHISES
7-5-1: DEFINITION:
The term "franchise" as used in this chapter shall be construed to mean any special privileges granted
to any person in, over, upon, or under any of the streets or public places of the City, whether such
privilege has heretofore been granted by it or by the State of Minnesota, or shall hereafter be granted
by the City or by the State of Minnesota. (1988 Code § 2.72)
7-5-2: FRANCHISE ORDINANCES:
The Council may grant franchises by ordinance. Franchise rights shall always be subject to the
superior right of the public to the use of streets and public places. All persons desiring to make any
burdensome use of the streets or public places, inconsistent with the public's right in such places, or
desiring the privilege of placing in, over, upon, or under any street or public place any permanent or
semi-permanent fixtures for the purpose of constructing or operating railways, telegraphing, or
transmitting electricity, or transporting by pneumatic tubes, or for furnishing to the City or its
inhabitants or any portion thereof, transportation facilities, water, light, heat, power, gas, or any other
such utility, or for any other purpose, shall be required to obtain a franchise before proceeding to make
such use of the streets or public places or before proceeding to place such fixtures in such places.
(1988 Code § 2.72)
7-5-3: POWER OF REGULATION RESERVED:
The City shall have the right and power to regulate and control the exercise by any person of any
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 116/200
franchise however acquired and whether such franchise has been heretofore granted by it or by the
State of Minnesota. (1988 Code § 2.72)
7-5-4: CONDITIONS IN EVERY FRANCHISE:
All conditions specified in this chapter shall be a part of every franchise even though they may not be
expressly contained in the franchise:
A. Comply With Code And Charter: That the grantee shall be subject to and will perform on its part all
the terms of this chapter and will comply with all pertinent provisions of the City Charter and this
Code, as the same may from time to time be amended.
B. Fixed Fares, Rates And Charges: That the grantee shall in no case claim or pretend to exercise
any power to fix fares, rates, and charges; but that such fares, rates, and charges shall at all times
be just, fair and reasonable for the services rendered and shall in all cases be fixed and from time
to time changed, unless regulated by an agency of the State of Minnesota, in the manner following:
1. A reasonable rate shall be construed to be one which will, with efficient management, normally
yield above all operating expenses and depreciation, a fair return upon all money invested.
2. If possible, maximum rates and charges shall be arrived at by direct negotiation with the
Council.
3. If direct negotiations fail to produce agreement, the Council shall, not less than thirty (30) days
before the expiration of any existing rate schedule or agreement, appoint an expert as its
representative, the franchisee shall likewise appoint an expert as its representative and the two
(2) of them shall appoint a third person, preferably an expert, and the three (3) of them shall
constitute a Board of Arbitration. The board shall report its findings as soon as possible and the
rates and charges it shall agree upon by majority vote shall be legal and binding, subject only to
review by a court of competent jurisdiction upon application of one of the parties.
C. Reasonable Extensions Required: That the Council shall have the right to require reasonable
extensions of any public service system from time to time, and to make such rules and regulations
as may be required to secure adequate and proper service and to provide sufficient
accommodations for the public.
D. No Stock Issued: That the grantee shall not issue any capital stock on account of the franchise or
the value thereof, and that the grantee shall have no right to receive upon condemnation
proceedings brought by the City to acquire the public utility exercising such franchise, any return
on account of the franchise or its value.
E. Sale Or Lease Of Franchise: That no sale or lease of said franchise shall be effective until the
assignee or lessee shall have filed with the City an instrument, duly executed, reciting the facts of
such sale or lease, accepting the terms of the franchise, and agreeing to perform all the conditions
required of the grantee thereunder.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 117/200
F. Council Authority: That every grant in said franchise contained of permission for the erection of
poles, masts, or other fixtures in the streets and for the attachment of wires thereto, or for the
laying of tracks in, or of pipes or conduits under the streets or public places, or for the placing in
the streets or other public places of any permanent or semi-permanent fixtures whatsoever, shall
be subject to the conditions that the Council shall have the power to require such alterations
therein, or relocation or rerouting thereof, as the Council may at any time deem necessary for the
safety, health, or convenience of the public, and particularly that it shall have the power to require
the removal of poles, masts, and other fixtures bearing wires and the placing underground of all
facilities for whatsoever purpose used.
G. City Acquisition: Every franchise shall contain a provision granting the City the right to acquire the
same in accordance with statute.
H. Pay Fees To City: That the franchisee may be obligated by the City to pay the City fees to raise
revenue or defray increased costs accruing as a result of utility operations, or both, including, but
not limited to, a sum of money based upon gross operating revenues or gross earnings from its
operations in the City. (1988 Code § 2.72)
7-5-5: FURTHER PROVISIONS OF FRANCHISES:
The enumeration and specification of particular matters which must be included in every franchise or
renewal or extension thereof, shall not be construed as impairing the right of the City to insert in any
such franchise or renewal or extension thereof such other and further conditions and restrictions as
the Council may deem proper to protect the City's interests, nor shall anything contained in this
chapter limit any right or power possessed by the City over existing franchises. (1988 Code § 2.72)
7-5-6: PENALTY:
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs
an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as
otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. (1988 Code § 2.99)
Title 8
UTILITY SERVICES
Chapter 1
RULES AND REGULATIONS, RATES AND CHARGES
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings stated:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 118/200
COMPANY, GRANTEE, AND FRANCHISEE: Any public utility system to which a franchise has been
granted by the City.
CONSUMER AND CUSTOMER: Any user of a utility.
MUNICIPAL UTILITY: Any City-owned utility system, including, but not by way of limitation, water,
sewerage, electric and refuse service.
PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION: The Public Utilities Commission of the City and certain specific
references herein to the "City" shall include the City acting through the Public Utilities Commission
where the language or context clearly indicates such reference.
SERVICE: Providing a particular utility to a customer or consumer.
UTILITY: All utility services, whether the same be public City-owned facilities or furnished by public
utility companies. (1988 Code § 3.01; amd. Ord. 88, 2nd Series, 2-13-2007)
8-1-2: FIXING RATES AND CHARGES:
All rates and charges for Municipal utilities, including, but not by way of limitation, rates for service,
permit fees, deposit, connection and meter testing fees, disconnection fees, reconnection fees
including penalties for nonpayment if any, except such as are fixed and determined by the Public
Utilities Commission, shall be fixed, determined and amended by the Council and adopted by
resolution. Such resolution, containing the effective date thereof, shall be kept on file and open to
inspection in the Office of the City Clerk and shall be uniformly enforced. For the purpose of fixing
such rates and charges, the Council may categorize and classify under the various types of service;
provided, that such categorization and classification shall be included in the resolution authorized by
this section. (1988 Code § 3.02)
8-1-3: CONTRACTUAL CONTENTS:
Provisions of this chapter relating to Municipal utilities shall constitute portions of the contract between
the City and all consumers of Municipal utility services, and every such consumer shall be deemed to
assent to the same. (1988 Code § 3.03)
8-1-4: BILLING, PAYMENT; DELINQUENCY:
All Municipal utilities shall be billed monthly or quarterly and a utilities statement or statements shall be
mailed to each consumer each month. All utilities charges shall be delinquent if they are unpaid at the
close of business on the twenty fifth day of each month following such billing; provided, that if the
twenty fifth day shall fall on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the time shall be extended to the
close of business on the next succeeding day on which business is normally transacted. No discount
shall be allowed for delinquent utility bills. If service is suspended due to delinquency, it shall not be
restored at that location until a reconnection charge has been paid for each utility reconnected in
addition to amounts owed for service. (1988 Code § 3.04)
8-1-5: APPLICATION, CONNECTION AND SALE OF SERVICE:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 119/200
Application for Municipal utility services shall be made upon forms supplied by the City, and strictly in
accordance therewith. No connection shall be made until consent has been received from the City to
make the same. All Municipal utilities shall be sold and delivered to consumers under the then
applicable rate applied to the amount of such utilities taken as metered or ascertained in connection
with such rates. (1988 Code § 3.04)
8-1-6: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
All Municipal utilities may be shut off or discontinued whenever it is found that:
A. Requirements Violated: The owner or occupant of the premises served, or any person working on
any connection with the Municipal utility systems, has violated any requirement of this Code
relative thereto, or any connection therewith, or,
B. Unpaid Bill: Any charge for a Municipal utility service imposed on the present owner or occupant of
the premises served is unpaid after due notice thereof, or,
C. Fraud Or Misrepresentation: There is fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or occupant in
connection with any application for service or delivery or charges therefor. (1988 Code § 3.04)
8-1-7: OWNERSHIP OF MUNICIPAL UTILITIES:
Ownership of all Municipal utilities, plants, lines, mains, extensions and appurtenances thereto, shall
be and remain in the City and no person shall own any part or portion thereof; provided, however, that
private facilities and appurtenances are not intended to be included in Municipal ownership. (1988
Code § 3.04)
8-1-8: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
By applying for, or receiving, a Municipal utility service, a customer irrevocably consents and agrees
that any City employee acting within the course and scope of his employment may enter into and upon
the private property of the customer, including dwellings and other buildings, at all reasonable times
under the circumstances, in or upon which private property a Municipal utility, or connection therewith,
is installed, for the purpose of inspecting, repairing, reading meters, connecting or disconnecting the
Municipal utility service. (1988 Code § 3.04)
8-1-9: MUNICIPAL UTILITY SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY:
Premises located outside the City shall not be connected to or served by any Municipal utility, except
such premises as are publicly owned or presently served, with the exception of the electrical service.
Persons needing Municipal utility service whose service property is located outside the corporate
limits must initiate and complete annexation proceedings prior to being provided with such service or
services. Exceptions may be made with a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the Council. (1988 Code § 3.04)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 120/200
8-1-10: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It is unlawful for any person to:
A. Vandalize; Interfere; Obstruct: Wilfully or carelessly break, injure, mar, deface, disturb, or in any
way interfere with any buildings, attachments, machinery, apparatus, equipment, fixture, or
appurtenance of any Municipal utility or Municipal utility system, or commit any act tending to
obstruct or impair the use of any Municipal utility.
B. Unpermitted Connections: Make any connection with, opening into, use, or alter in any way any
Municipal utility system without first having applied for and received written permission to do so
from the City.
C. Reconnect Discontinued Service: Turn on or connect a utility when the same has been turned off or
disconnected by the City for nonpayment of a bill, or for any other reason, without first having
obtained a permit to do so from the City.
D. Steal Services: "Jumper" or by any means or device fully or partially circumvent a Municipal utility
meter, or to knowingly use or consume unmetered utilities or use the services of any utility system,
the use of which the proper billing authorities have no knowledge. (1988 Code § 3.04)
8-1-11: ELECTRIC ENERGY FRANCHISES:
A. Franchise Required: Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall transmit, furnish, deliver
or receive or cause to be transmitted, furnished, delivered or received electric energy for light,
power, heat and other purposes for public and/or private use within and through the limits of the
City, or place or maintain any permanent or semi-permanent fixtures in, over, upon, or under any
street or public place for the purpose of operating a public utility or transmitting, furnishing,
delivering or receiving, or causing to be transmitted, furnished, delivered, or received electric
energy or for any other purpose, except pursuant to a franchise from the City. A franchise shall be
granted only by ordinance. Every ordinance granting a franchise shall contain all the terms and
conditions of the franchise. The grantee shall bear the costs of publication of the franchise
ordinance and shall make a sufficient deposit with the City Clerk to guarantee publication before
the ordinance is passed.
B. Term: No exclusive or perpetual franchise or privilege shall ever be created, nor shall any exclusive
franchise or privilege be granted for a period of more than twenty (20) years.
C. Franchise Fee: As a part of any franchise ordinance adopted, the City may impose upon the
grantee a franchise fee. The franchise fee shall be expressed as a specified charge per kilowatt
hour of electric energy transmitted, furnished, delivered, or received, which fee shall be calculated
by the City Council and imposed upon each kilowatt hour of electric energy transmitted, furnished,
delivered or received within the City. The franchise fee may be changed by ordinance from time to
time; however, no change shall be adopted until at least thirty (30) days after written notice
enclosing such proposed ordinance has been served upon the grantee by certified mail. The
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 121/200
franchise fee may not be changed more often than once in each calendar year. (Ord. 31, 2nd
Series, 12-5-1995)
8-1-12: PENALTY:
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this title when he performs an
act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as
otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. (1988 Code § 3.99)
Chapter 2
REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
8-2-1: DEFINITION:
"Refuse" includes all drained organic material resulting from the preparation of food and spoiled or
decayed food from any source, bottles, cans, glassware, paper or paper products, crockery, ashes,
rags, and discarded clothing, tree and lawn clippings and solid market and industrial wastes. (1988
Code § 3.20)
8-2-2: STORAGE AND TRANSPORTING REFUSE:
A. Storage: It is unlawful for any person to store refuse except as herein provided.
B. Transporting: It is unlawful for any person to transport refuse on any street unless it is carried in a
vehicle equipped with a leak-proof body or container and completely covered with a heavy canvas
or top to prevent loss of contents. (1988 Code § 3.20)
8-2-3: CONTAINERS:
All refuse shall be stored in clean, rust-resistant, watertight, nonabsorbent and washable closed
containers, approved for the purpose by the City; provided, however, that tree clippings may be stored
in tied bundles no longer than four feet (4') and lawn clippings and paper may be stored in containers
protected from wind and other elements. (1988 Code § 3.20)
8-2-4: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF REFUSE:
The City shall provide for collection and disposal of all refuse in a sanitary manner to ensure the
health, safety and general welfare of its residents, under such terms and conditions as the City may,
from time to time, deem appropriate. Containers shall be placed at the designated collection point on
days specified by the City. Collection points will generally be the alley adjacent to the property from
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 122/200
which refuse is collected; but where there is no alley, the curb line in front of such property. (1988
Code § 3.20)
8-2-5: PREMISES SERVED:
The collection and disposal of refuse provided for in this chapter shall be from premises used and
occupied for residential purposes, including apartment buildings containing twenty five (25) dwelling
units or less. Occupants of premises used for commercial and industrial purposes, including
apartment buildings containing more than twenty five (25) dwelling units, shall provide for their own
refuse collection and disposal. (1988 Code § 3.20)
8-2-6: COMMERCIAL REFUSE:
The City may, by resolution, establish rules and regulations relating to removal of commercial refuse.
Any violation of such rules and regulations shall constitute a petty misdemeanor and the City may
provide for removal thereof and charge the cost to the property owner. (1988 Code § 3.20)
8-2-7: DISPOSAL OF CERTAIN REFUSE AT CITY FARM:
A. Restrictions: Disposing of garbage, refuse and appliances at the City farm shall be prohibited
except for the disposal of yard waste, including tree and lawn clippings, grass, leaves and garden
waste. Only residents of the City may make deposits of material at the City farm.
B. Penalty: Any violation of such rule shall constitute a petty misdemeanor and the City may provide
for removal thereof and charge the cost to the violator. (Ord. 4, 2nd Series, 6-5-1989)
Chapter 3
WATER SERVICE
8-3-1: DEFICIENCY OF WATER; SHUTTING OFF WATER:
The City is not liable for any deficiency or failure in the supply of water to customers whether
occasioned by shutting the water off for the purpose of making repairs or connections or by any other
cause whatever. In case of fire, or alarm of fire, water may be shut off to ensure a supply for
firefighting. In making repairs or construction of new works, water may be shut off at any time and kept
off so long as may be necessary. (1988 Code § 3.30)
8-3-2: REPAIR OF LEAKS:
It is the responsibility of the consumer or owner to maintain the service pipe from the main into the
house or other building. In case of failure upon the part of any consumer or owner to repair any leak
occurring in his service pipe within twenty four (24) hours after oral or written notice has been given
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 123/200
the owner or occupant of the premises, the water may be shut off and will not be turned on until a
reconnection charge has been paid and the water service has been repaired. When the waste of
water is great or when damage is likely to result from the leak, the water will be turned off if the repair
is not proceeded with immediately. (1988 Code § 3.30)
8-3-3: ABANDONED SERVICES PENALTIES:
All service installations connected to the water system that have been abandoned or, for any reason,
have become useless for further service shall be disconnected at the main. The owner of the
premises, served by this service, shall pay the cost of the excavation and the restoration. The City
shall perform the actual disconnection and all pipe and appurtenances removed from the street rightof-
way shall become the property of the City. When new buildings are erected on the site of old ones,
and it is desired to increase the old water service, a new permit shall be taken out and the regular
tapping charge shall be made as if this were a new service. It is unlawful for any person to cause or
allow any service pipe to be hammered or squeezed together at the ends to stop the flow of water, or
to save expense in improperly removing such pipe from the main. Also, such improper disposition
thereof shall be corrected by the City and the cost incurred shall be borne by the person causing or
allowing such work to be performed. (1988 Code § 3.30)
8-3-4: SERVICE PIPES:
Every service pipe must be laid in such manner as to prevent rupture by settlement. The service pipe
shall be placed not less than seven feet (7') below the surface in all cases so arranged as to prevent
rupture and stoppage by freezing. Frozen service pipes between the main and the building shall be
the responsibility of the owner. Service pipes must extend from the mains to the inside of the building;
or if not taken into a building then to the hydrant or other fixtures which they are intended to supply. A
valve, the same size as the service pipe, shall be placed close to the inside wall of the building, ahead
of the meter and well protected from freezing. Joints on copper tubing shall be flared or compressionfitted,
and kept to a minimum. Not more than one joint shall be used for a service up to seventy feet
(70') in length. All joints shall be left uncovered until inspected. Minimum size connection with the
water mains shall be three-fourths inch (3/4") in diameter. (1988 Code § 3.30)
8-3-5: PRIVATE WATER SUPPLIES; CROSS-CONNECTIONS:
No water pipe of the City water system shall be connected with any pump, well, pipe, tank or any
device that is connected with any other source of water supply and when such are found, the City
shall notify the owner or occupant to disconnect the same and, if not immediately done, the City water
shall be turned off. Before any new connections to the City system are permitted, the City shall
ascertain that no cross-connections will exist when the new connection is made. When a building is
connected to "City water" the private water supply may be used only for such purposes as the City
may allow. (1988 Code § 3.30)
8-3-6: PROHIBITED USES OR RESTRICTED HOURS:
Whenever the City shall determine that a shortage of water threatens the City, it may entirely prohibit
water use or limit the times and hours during which water may be used from the City water system for
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 124/200
lawn and garden sprinkling, irrigation, car washing, air conditioning, and other uses, or either or any of
them. It is unlawful for any water consumer to cause or permit water to be used in violation of such
determination after public announcement thereof has been made through the news media specifically
indicating the restrictions thereof. (1988 Code § 3.30)
8-3-7: PRIVATE FIRE HOSE CONNECTIONS:
Owners of structures with self-contained fire protection systems may apply for and obtain permission
to connect the street mains with hydrants, large pipes, and hose couplings, for use in case of fire only,
at their own installation expense and at such rates as the Council may adopt by resolution as herein
provided. (1988 Code § 3.30)
8-3-8: OPENING HYDRANTS:
It is unlawful for any person, other than members of the Fire Department or other person duly
authorized by the City, in pursuance of lawful purpose, to open any fire hydrant or attempt to draw
water from the same or in any manner interfere therewith. It is also unlawful for any person so
authorized to deliver or suffer to be delivered to any other person any hydrant key or wrench, except
for the purposes strictly pertaining to their lawful use. (1988 Code § 3.30)
8-3-9: UNMETERED SERVICE:
Unmetered service may be provided for construction, flooding skating rinks, and any other purpose.
Such service shall be at a duly adopted rate. Where it is difficult or impossible to accurately measure
the amount of water taken, unmetered service may be provided and the unmetered rate applied;
provided, however, that by acceptance thereof the consumer agrees to have the City estimate the
water used. In so estimating the City shall consider the use to which the water is put and the length of
time of unmetered service. (1988 Code § 3.30)
8-3-10: WATER METERS:
The Public Utilities Commission shall adopt rules and regulations relating to water meters. (1988 Code
§ 3.30)
8-3-11: CODE COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENT:
All piping, connections and appurtenances shall be installed and performed strictly in accordance with
the Minnesota Plumbing Code. Failure to install or maintain the same in accordance therewith, or
failure to have or permit required inspections shall, upon discovery by the City, be an additional
ground for termination of water service to any consumer. (1988 Code § 3.30)
8-3-12: ADDITIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 125/200
The Council may, by resolution, adopt such additional rules and regulations relating to placement, size
and type of equipment as it, in its discretion, deems necessary or desirable. Copies of such additional
rules and regulations shall be kept on file in the Office of the City Clerk, and uniformly enforced. (1988
Code § 3.30)
Chapter 4
SEWERAGE SERVICE
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter shall
have the meanings hereinafter designated:
ASTM: American Society for Testing Materials.
ACT: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act also referred to as the Clean Water Act, as amended,
33 USC 1251 et seq.
AUTHORITY: The City of Sleepy Eye, Minnesota, or its representative thereof.
BOD5 OR BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND: The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees
centigrade (20°C) in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/L).
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the
discharge from waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning immediately outside the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of
disposal, also referred to as a house connection or service connection.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the chemical oxidation of
organic matter as determined by standard laboratory procedures, and as expressed in terms of
milligrams per liter (mg/L).
CITY ENGINEER: An employee of the City holding that position, if there is one, or otherwise the City's
consulting engineering firm.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH, and fecal coliform
bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES/SDS permit if the treatment facilities are
designed to treat such pollutants to a degree which complies with effluent concentration limits
imposed by the permit.
CONTROL MANHOLE: A structure specially constructed for the purpose of measuring flow and
sampling of wastes.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
FECAL COLIFORM: Any number of organisms common to the intestinal tract of persons and animals
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 126/200
whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of pollution.
FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state, such that it will separate by gravity from
wastewater.
GARBAGE: Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and
serving of food.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: Any pollutant that is not defined as a "compatible pollutant" including
nonbiodegradable dissolved solids.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Gaseous, liquid, and solid wastes resulting from industrial or manufacturing
processes, trade or business, or from the development, recovery, and processing of natural resources,
as distinct from residential or domestic strength wastes.
INDUSTRY: Any nongovernmental or nonresidential user of a publicly owned treatment works which is
identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, latest edition, which is categorized in
Divisions A, B, D, E, and I.
INFILTRATION: Water entering the sewage system (including building drains and pipes) from the
ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, and manhole walls.
INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I): The total quantity of water from both infiltration and inflow.
INFLOW: Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system (including building drains) from
sources such as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar drains, yard and area drains, foundation drains,
drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-connections from storm sewers, catch
basins, surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage.
INTERFERENCE: The inhibition or disruption of the City's wastewater disposal system processes or
operations which causes or significantly contributes to a violation of any requirement of the City's
NPDES and/or SDS permit. The term includes sewage sludge use or disposal by the City in
accordance with published regulations providing guidelines under section 405 of the Act or any
regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic
Substances Control Act, or more stringent State criteria applicable to the method of disposal or use
employed by the City.
MPCA: Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: Federal regulations establishing
pretreatment standards for introduction of pollutants in publicly-owned wastewater treatment facilities
which are determined to be not susceptible to treatment by such treatment facilities or would interfere
with the operation of such treatment facilities, pursuant to section 307(b) of the Act.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT: A permit issued
by the MPCA, setting limits on pollutants that a permittee may legally discharge into navigable waters
of the United States pursuant to sections 402 and 405 of the Act.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewers, which overflow into a
watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or ground water.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration, or during which the only pollutant added, is heat.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 127/200
NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTE: Wastewater that is primarily introduced by residential
users with a BOD5 concentration not greater than two hundred twenty five milligrams per liter (225
mg/L) and a suspended solids (TSS) concentration not greater than two hundred fifty milligrams per
liter (250 mg/L).
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in terms of grams per liter of
solution.
PRETREATMENT: The treatment of wastewater from industrial sources prior to the introduction of the
waste effluent into a publicly-owned treatment works.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2")
(1.27 cm) in any dimension.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
Collection Sewer: A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect wastewaters from individual point
source discharges and connections.
Combined Sewer: A sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and a storm sewer.
Forcemain: A pipe in which wastewater is carried under pressure.
Interceptor Sewer: A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport wastewater from collection
sewers to a treatment facility.
Private Sewer: A sewer which is not owned and maintained by a public authority.
Public Sewer: A sewer owned, maintained and controlled by a public authority.
Sanitary Sewer: A sewer intended to carry only liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of ground,
storm, and surface waters which are not admitted intentionally.
Storm Sewer Or Storm Drain: A drain or sewer intended to carry stormwaters, surface runoff,
ground water, subsurface water, street wash water, drainage, and unpolluted water from any
source.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: Any industrial user of the wastewater treatment facility which has
a discharge flow: a) in excess of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons per average work day, or b)
has exceeded five percent (5%) of the total flow received at the treatment facility, or c) whose waste
contains a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act, or d) whose discharge
has a significant effect, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the
wastewater disposal system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or emissions
generated by the treatment system.
SLUG: Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent, or in
quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5)
times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal operation, and shall
adversely affect the collection and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 128/200
STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (SDS) PERMIT: Any permit (including any terms, conditions and
requirements thereof) issued by the MPCA pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 115.07 for a disposal
system as defined by Minnesota Statutes 115.01, subdivision 8.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) OR TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS): The total suspended matter
that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and is
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, latest edition, and referred to as nonfilterable residue.
TOXIC POLLUTANT: The concentration of any pollutant or combination of pollutants which upon
exposure to or assimilation into any organism will cause adverse effects as defined in standards
issued pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act.
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect, or water
that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards, and would not be benefited by
discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.
USER: Any person who discharges or causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the City's
wastewater disposal system.
WPCF: The Water Pollution Control Federation.
WASTEWATER: The spent water of the City and referred to as sewage. From the standpoint of
source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial
buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with any ground water, surface water and
stormwater that may be present.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS OR TREATMENT WORKS: An arrangement of any devices,
facilities, structures, equipment, or processes owned or used by the City for the purpose of the
transmission, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of Municipal sewage, domestic sewage or
industrial wastewater, or structures necessary to recycle or reuse water including interceptor sewers,
outfall sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power, and other equipment and their appurtenances;
extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof; elements essential to
provide a reliable recycled water supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and
any works including land which is an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate
disposal of residues resulting from such treatment.
WATERCOURSE: A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water, either continuously or
intermittently. (1988 Code § 3.40; amd. 1996 Code)
8-4-2: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
A. Objectionable Waste: It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in
any unsanitary manner on public or private property, any human or animal excrement, garbage or
objectionable waste.
B. Wastewater Or Polluted Waters: It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet any wastewater or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 129/200
C. Privy, Privy Vault, Septic Tank, Cesspool Or Other Facility: Except as provided hereinafter, it is
unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. (1988 Code § 3.40)
8-4-3: CONNECTION REQUIRED:
A. Owner Responsibility: The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes from which wastewater is discharged, and which is
abutting any street in which there is a public sanitary sewer of the City, shall be required at the
owner's expense to install a suitable service connection to the public sewer within thirty (30) days
of the date said public sewer is operational, provided said public sewer is within five hundred feet
(500') of the structure generating the wastewater. All future buildings constructed on property
adjacent to the public sewer shall be required to immediately connect to the public sewer. If sewer
connections are not made pursuant to this section, an official thirty (30) days' notice shall be
served instructing the affected property owner to make said connection.
B. City Abate Failure: In the event an owner shall fail to connect to a public sewer in compliance with a
notice, the City may undertake to have said connection made and shall assess the cost thereof
against the benefited property. (1988 Code § 3.40)
8-4-4: PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL:
A. Unavailability Of Public Sewer: Where a public sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be
connected to a private wastewater disposal system.
B. Permit Required: Prior to commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system,
the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the City. The application for such permit shall
include plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the City.
C. Compliance With City Standards: A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not
become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the City. The City shall be
allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the
permit shall notify the City when work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground
portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within seventy two (72) hours of the receipt of
notice.
D. Compliance With MCAR Standards: The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private
wastewater disposal system shall comply with all requirements of 6 MCAR 4.8040, entitled
"Individual Sewage Treatment System Standards". No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet.
E. City Connection Required When Available: At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a
property serviced by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to
the public sewer within thirty (30) days, and within thirty (30) days any septic tanks, cesspools, and
similar private wastewater disposal systems shall be cleaned of sludge. The bottom shall be
broken to permit drainage, and the tank or pit filled with suitable material.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 130/200
F. Owner Responsibility: The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the City. (1988 Code § 3.40)
8-4-5: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
A. Sufficient Downstream Capacity Required: Any new connection to the sanitary sewer system shall
be prohibited unless sufficient capacity is available in all downstream facilities including, but not
limited to, capacity for flow, BOD5, and suspended solids, as determined by the City Engineer.
(1988 Code § 3.40; amd. 1996 Code)
B. Permit Application; Contents: There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: 1) for
residential and commercial service, and 2) for service to establishments producing industrial
wastes. In either case, the application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or any
other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the City. The industry, as a condition of
permit authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater constituents,
characteristics, and type of activity.
C. Owner Bears Costs: All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or
damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
D. Independent Connections Required; Exception; Liability: A separate and independent building
sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another
on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building
through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway. The building sewer from the front building may
be extended to the rear building and the whole considered one building sewer. The City does not
and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any
such connection aforementioned.
E. Use Of Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found, on examination and test, to meet all requirements of this section.
F. Compliance With Standards: The size, slopes, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and
backfilling of the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the State of Minnesota Plumbing
Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the City. In the absence of Code provisions or in
the amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9, shall apply.
G. Elevation Requirements: Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewer carried by such building drain shall be lifted
by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. (1988 Code § 3.40)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 131/200
H. Prohibited Discharges; Discharge Of Water From Roof, Surface, Swimming Pool Or Other Natural
Precipitation:
1. Purpose: In adopting this subsection, the City Council finds that the discharge of water from any
roof, surface, ground, sump pump, footing tile or swimming pool or other natural precipitation
into the City sewerage system will and has on numerous occasions in the past, flooded and
overloaded the sewerage system to such an extent as to cause significant and grave damage to
the property of large numbers of City residents. Such damage is caused by the backup of
sewage into the living quarters of residents and in addition to other damage creates a hazard to
health. The City Council, therefore, finds it essential to the maintenance of health and to
minimize damage to property that the provisions of this subsection H be strictly enforced to avoid
emergencies in the future.
2. Definition; Method: No water from any roof, surface, ground, sump pump, footing tile, swimming
pool or other natural precipitation shall be discharged into the sanitary sewerage system.
Dwellings and other buildings and structures which require, because of the infiltration of water
into basements, crawl spaces and the like, a sump pump system to discharge excess water,
shall have a permanently installed discharge line which shall not at any time discharge water into
the sanitary sewerage system, except as provided herein. A permanent installation shall be one
which provides for year-around discharge capability to either the outside of the dwelling, building
or structure, or is connected to the City storm sewer or discharges through the curb and gutter to
the street. It shall consist of a rigid discharge line, without valving or quick connections for
altering the path of discharge, and if connected to the City storm sewer line, include a check
valve.
3. Disconnection: Before April 1, 1992, any person having a roof, surface, ground, sump pump,
footing tile or swimming pool now connected and/or discharging into the sanitary sewer system
shall disconnect and/or remove same. Any disconnects or openings in the sanitary sewer shall
be closed or repaired in an effective, workmanlike manner, as approved by the building official.
4. Inspection: Every person owning improved real estate that discharges into the City sanitary
sewer system shall allow an employee of the City or their designated representative to inspect
the buildings to confirm that there is no sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the
sanitary sewer system. In lieu of having the City inspect their property, any person may furnish a
certificate from a licensed plumber certifying that their property is in compliance with this
subsection. Any person refusing to allow their property to be inspected or refusing to furnish a
plumber's certificate within fourteen (14) days of the date City employee(s) or their designated
representatives are denied admittance to the property, shall immediately become subject to the
surcharge hereinafter provided for. Any property found to violate this subsection shall make the
necessary changes to comply with this subsection and furnish proof of the changes to the City
by April 1, 1992.
5. Future Inspections: At any future time, if the City has reason to suspect that an illegal
connection may exist in a premises, the owner, by written notice shall comply with the provisions
of subsection H4 of this section. (Ord. 13, 2nd Series, 6-4-1991)
6. Waivers: A property owner may request a waiver allowing water prohibited by other provisions of
this subsection to be discharged into the sanitary sewer. The property owner shall make
application for the waiver by applying at the City Clerk's Office. A City employee or designee of
the City shall remove the seal allowing unauthorized water into the sanitary sewer. Upon
approval of a waiver, a property owner shall be allowed to temporarily discharge directly into the
sanitary sewer system between the dates of October 15 through April 1, and provided the
applicant agrees to pay an additional fee as established by resolution of the City Council for the
additional sewer service. The holder of a waiver shall disconnect from the sanitary sewer and
have sealed the connection which allowed the unauthorized water into the sanitary sewer by a
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 132/200
City employee or party designated by the City. Failure to seal the connection as specified will
place the waiver holder in violation of this subsection. (Ord. 16, 2nd Series, 10-6-1992)
7. Penalty: A surcharge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month is hereby imposed and added
to every sewer billing mailed on and after April 1, 1992, to property owners who are not in
compliance with this subsection. The surcharge shall be added every month through October,
1992, until the property is in compliance. The surcharge shall continue to be levied monthly for
the months of April through October (both inclusive) of every year, on properties not complying
with this subsection.
I. Compliance With Acceptable Standards: The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the State of Minnesota Plumbing Code or other applicable
rules and regulations of the City, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight, and verified by proper testing to prevent the inclusion of infiltration/inflow. Any deviation
from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the City prior to installation.
J. Inspection Notice: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the City when the building
sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and inspection
shall be made under the supervision of the City Engineer or authorized representative thereof.
K. Public Safety: All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and
other public property disturbed in the course of the work, shall be restored in a manner satisfactory
to the City. (1988 Code § 3.40; amd. 1996 Code)
8-4-6: USE OF PUBLIC SERVICES:
A. Acceptable Discharges; Stormwater And All Other Unpolluted Drainage: Stormwater and all other
unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designed as storm
sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the City and other regulatory agencies. Industrial cooling
water of unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet on
approval of the City and upon approval and the issuance of a discharge permit by the MPCA.
B. Prohibited Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
1. Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient
either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in
any other way to the wastewater disposal system or to the operation of the system. Prohibited
materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene,
ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides,
hydrides, and sulfides.
2. Solid or viscous substances which will cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other
interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to,
grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension, animal guts or
tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes,
cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 133/200
rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastic, asphalt residues, residues from
refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes.
3. Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 or greater than 9.5 or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the
wastewater disposal system.
4. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other pollutants, to inhibit or disrupt any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard
to humans or animals, or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater disposal
system. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to
section 307(a) of the Act.
C. Limited Discharges: The following described substances, materials, water, or wastes shall be
limited in discharges to Municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either
sewers, the wastewater treatment works treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream and/or soil, vegetation and ground water, or will not otherwise
endanger lives, limbs, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The City Engineer may set
limitations lower than limitations established in the regulations below if, in his opinion, such more
severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming his opinion as to the
acceptability of wastes, the City Engineer will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of
subject waste in reaction to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the
sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, the City's NPDES and/or SDS permit, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and
other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or
wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the
engineer are as follows:
1. Any wastewater having a temperature greater than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150°F) (65.6°C), or causing, individually or in combination with other wastewater, the influent at
the wastewater treatment plant to have a temperature exceeding one hundred four degrees
Fahrenheit (104°F) (40°C), or having heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the
wastewater treatment works resulting in interference therein.
2. Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one
hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/L) or containing substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between thirty two degrees (32°) (0°C) and one hundred fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (150°F) (65.6°C); and any wastewater containing oil and grease concentrations of
mineral origin of greater than one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/L), whether emulsified or
not.
3. Any quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a "slug" as defined herein.
4. Any garbage not "properly shredded", as defined herein. Garbage grinders may be connected to
sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments,
or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food on the premises or when
served by caterers.
5. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with
other wastes are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to
prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair.
6. Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not
limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 134/200
7. Noncontact cooling water or unpolluted storm, drainage, or ground water.
8. Wastewater containing inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime
slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride
and sodium sulfate) in such quantities that would cause disruption with the wastewater disposal
system.
9. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by the City Engineer in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
10. Any waters or wastes containing the following substances to such degree that any such
material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works is in excess of
the following limits for such materials:
0.5 mg/L arsenic
0.5 mg/L cadmium
1.5 mg/L copper
0.5 mg/L cyanide
1.5 mg/L lead
0.05 mg/L mercury
1.5 mg/L nickel
0.5 mg/L silver
0.5 mg/L total chromium
1.5 mg/L zinc
Phenolic compounds which cannot be removed by City's wastewater treatment system
11. Any wastewater which creates conditions at or near the wastewater disposal system which
violates any statute, rule, regulation, or ordinance of any regulatory agency, or State or Federal
regulatory body.
12. Any waters or wastes containing BOD5 or suspended solids of such character and quantity that
unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the wastewater treatment
works, except as may be permitted by specific written agreement subject to the provisions of
subsection P of this section.
D. Protection Of Public Sewer: If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers which contain substances or possess the characteristics
enumerated in subsection C of this section and/or which in the judgment of the City Engineer, may
have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater treatment facilities, processes, or equipment;
receiving waters, and/or soil, vegetation, and ground water; or which otherwise create a hazard to
life or constitute a public nuisance, the City may:
1. Reject the wastes,
2. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers, pursuant to
section 307(b) of the Act and all addendums thereof,
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or,
4. Require payment to cover the added costs of handling, treating, and disposing of wastes not
covered by existing taxes or sewer service charges.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 135/200
E. Pretreatment Equipment Standards: If the City permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design, installation, and maintenance of the facilities and equipment shall be made at the
owner's expense, and shall be subject to the review and approval of the City pursuant to the
requirements of the MPCA.
F. Dilution Prohibited: No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any manner, attempt to
dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance
with the limitations contained in this section or contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or any State requirements.
G. Maintenance Of Special Facilities: Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or
required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation at the expense of the owner.
H. Interceptors Provided: Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the City Engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable
grease in excessive amounts, as specified in this section, any flammable wastes as specified in
this section, sand or other harmful ingredients; except, that such interceptors shall not be required
for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of the type to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner
shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal of the captured materials by appropriate
means, and shall maintain a record of dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by
the City Engineer. Any removal and hauling of the collecting materials not performed by the
owner's personnel, must be performed by a currently licensed waste disposal firm.
I. Control Manholes: Where required by the City, the owner of any property serviced by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure, or control manhole, with such
necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling, and measurement of wastes. Such structure shall be accessible and safely located, and
shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the City. The structure shall be installed
by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by the owner to be safe and accessible at all
times.
J. Owner Responsible For Tests: The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes may, at the discretion of the City, be required to provide laboratory
measurements, tests, or analyses of waters or wastes to illustrate compliance with this section and
any special condition for discharge established by the City or regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type, and frequency of sampling and laboratory
analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the City. The industry must supply
a complete result of the analysis measurements, or tests showing that all Federal, State and local
standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory
analyses to the City at such times and in such manner as prescribed by the City. The owner shall
bear the expense of all measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the City. At such times
as deemed necessary, the City reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis
by an independent laboratory.
K. Tests And Analyses Paid By Owner: All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this section shall be determined in accordance
with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 136/200
published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location, times, duration
and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the City
Engineer.
L. Slugs And Accidental Discharges: Where required by the City, the owner of any property serviced
by a sanitary sewer shall provide protection from an accidental discharge of prohibited materials or
other substances regulated by this section. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental
discharges of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's expense.
Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be
submitted to the City Engineer for review and approval prior to construction of the facility. Review
and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve any user from the
responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this section.
Users shall notify the City immediately upon having a slug or accidental discharge of substances of
wastewater in violation of this section to enable countermeasures to be taken by the City Engineer
to minimize damage to the wastewater treatment works. Such notification will not relieve any user
of any liability for any expense, loss or damage to the wastewater treatment system or treatment
process, or for any fines imposed on the City on account thereof under any State and Federal law.
Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or discover such a discharge, are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.
M. Catch Basin/Waste Trap: No person, having charge of any building or other premises which drains
into the public sewer, shall permit any substance or matter which may form a deposit or obstruction
to flow or pass into the public sewer. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of written notice from the
City, the owner shall install a suitable and sufficient catch basin or waste trap, or if one already
exists, shall clean out, repair or alter the same, and perform such other work as the City Engineer
may deem necessary. Upon the owner's refusal or neglect to install a catch basin or waste trap or
to clean out, repair, or alter the same after the period of thirty (30) days, the City may cause such
work to be completed at the expense of the owner or representative thereof.
N. Repairs/Maintenance: Whenever any service connection becomes clogged, obstructed, broken or
out of order, or detrimental to the use of the public sewer, or unfit for the purpose of drainage, the
owner shall repair or cause such work to be done as the City Engineer may direct. Each day after
thirty (30) days that a person neglects or fails to so act shall constitute a separate violation of this
subsection and the City may then cause the work to be done, and recover from such owner or
agency the expense thereof by a civil action.
O. Car-Wash Wastewater: The owner or operator of any motor vehicle washing or servicing facility
shall provide and maintain in serviceable condition at all times, a catch basin or waste trap in the
building drain system to prevent grease, oil, dirt or any mineral deposit from entering the public
sewer system.
P. Cost Of Damages Assessed To Owner: In addition to any penalties that may be imposed for
violation of any provision of this section, the City may assess against any person the cost of
repairing or restoring sewers or associated facilities damaged as a result of the discharge of
prohibited wastes. (1988 Code § 3.40; amd. 1996 Code)
8-4-7: UTILITY DISCONNECTION AFTER BUILDING DEMOLITION, REMOVAL OR
ABANDONMENT:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 137/200
A. Disconnect And Seal: When any structure, house or commercial building is taken down, removed
or abandoned, and that structure had a City sanitary sewer connection, that connection will be
disconnected and sealed at the property line.
B. Time Frame; Waiver: The owner of the property shall have thirty (30) days from the date of removal
to make said utility disconnection. This section may be waived upon application and approval by
the City Council. (Ord. 20, 2nd Series, 10-5-1993)
Chapter 5
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
8-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of the terms used in this chapter
shall be as hereinafter designated:
ADMINISTRATION: Those fixed costs attributable to administration of the wastewater treatment works
(i.e., billing and associated bookkeeping and accounting costs).
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND OR BOD5: The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees
Celsius (20°C), expressed in milligrams per liter.
DEBT SERVICE CHARGE: A charge levied on users of wastewater treatment facilities for the cost of
repaying money bonded to construct said facilities.
EXTRA STRENGTH WASTE: Wastewater having a BOD5 and/or TSS greater than domestic waste as
defined herein and not otherwise classified as an incompatible waste.
INCOMPATIBLE WASTE: Waste that either singly or by interaction with other wastes interferes with
any waste treatment process, constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance or
creates any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment works.
INDUSTRIAL USERS OR INDUSTRIES: Are:
A. Entities that discharge into a publicly-owned wastewater treatment works, liquid wastes resulting
from the processes employed in industrial or manufacturing processes, or from the development
of any natural resources. These are identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual,
1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemental under one of the
following divisions:
1. Division A - Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing.
2. Division B - Mining.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 138/200
3. Division D - Manufacturing.
4. Division E - Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas, and Sanitary Sewers.
5. Division I - Services.
B. For the purpose of this definition, domestic waste shall be considered to have the following
characteristics:
1. BOD5: Less than two hundred twenty five milligrams per liter (225 mg/L).
2. Suspended solids: Less than two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/L).
C. Any nongovernmental user of a publicly-owned treatment works which discharges wastewater
to the treatment works which contains toxic pollutants or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in
sufficient quantity either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of
any Municipal systems, or to injure or to interfere with any sewage treatment process, or which
constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance, or creates any hazard in
or has an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER: The liquid processing wastes from an industrial manufacturing
process, trade, or business including, but not limited to, all Standard Industrial Classification Manual
Divisions A, B, D, E, and I manufacturers as distinct from domestic wastewater.
NONRESIDENTIAL USER: Any place of business which discharges sanitary waste as distinct from
industrial wastewater.
NONRESIDENTIAL WASTEWATERS: Domestic wastewater, emanating from a place of business as
distinct from industrial wastewater.
NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER: Wastewater that is primarily produced by
residential users, with BOD5 concentrations not greater than two hundred twenty five milligrams per
liter (225 mg/L) and suspended solids concentrations not greater than two hundred fifty milligrams per
liter (250 mg/L).
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE: Activities required to provide for the dependable and economical
functioning of the treatment works, throughout the design or useful life, whichever is longer, of the
treatment works and at the level of performance for which the treatment works were constructed.
Operation and maintenance includes replacement.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS: Expenditures for operation and maintenance, including
replacement.
PUBLIC WASTEWATER AND COLLECTION SYSTEM: A system of sanitary sewers owned,
maintained, operated and controlled by the City.
REPLACEMENT: Obtaining and installing of equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 139/200
necessary during the design life or useful life, whichever is longer, of the treatment works to maintain
the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed.
REPLACEMENT COSTS: Expenditures for replacement.
RESIDENTIAL USER: A user of the treatment facilities whose premises or building is used primarily
as a residence for one or more persons, including dwelling units such as detached and semi-detached
housing, apartments, and mobile homes; and which discharges primarily normal domestic strength
sanitary wastes.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer intended to carry only liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with minor quantities of ground,
storm, and surface waters which are not admitted intentionally.
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE: The aggregate of all charges, including charges for operation,
maintenance, replacement, debt service, and other sewer related charges that are billed periodically
to users to the City's wastewater treatment facilities.
SEWER SERVICE FUND: A fund into which income from sewer service charges is deposited along
with other income, including taxes intended to retire debt incurred through capital expenditure for
wastewater treatment. Expenditure of the Sewer Service Fund will be for operation, maintenance and
replacement costs; and to retire debt incurred through capital expenditure for wastewater treatment.
SLUG: Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent, or in
quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5)
times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal operation and shall
adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION MANUAL: Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) OR TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS): The total suspended matter
that either floats on the surface of or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and is
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, latest edition, and referred to as nonfilterable residue.
TOXIC POLLUTANT: The concentration of any pollutant or combination of pollutants as defined in
standards issued pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act, which upon exposure to or assimilation into
any organism will cause adverse effects.
USER CHARGE: A charge levied on users of a treatment works for the user's proportionate share of
the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement.
USERS: Those residential, nonresidential and industrial establishments which are connected to the
public sewer collection system.
WASTEWATER: The spent water of the City, also referred to as sewage. From the standpoint of
source it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial
buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with any ground water, surface water and
stormwater that may be present.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS OR TREATMENT WORKS: An arrangement of any devices,
facilities, structures, equipment, or processes owned or used by the City for the purpose of the
transmission, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of Municipal sewage, domestic sewage or
industrial wastewater, or structures necessary to recycle or reuse water including interceptor sewers,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 140/200
outfall sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power, and other equipment and their appurtenances;
extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof; elements essential to
provide a reliable recycled water supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and
any works including land which is an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate
disposal of residues resulting from such treatment. (1988 Code § 3.41)
8-5-2: SEWER SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM:
A. Expenditures: The sewer service charge system will be used to effect all expenditures incurred for
annual operation, maintenance, and replacement and for debt service on capital expenditure
incurred in constructing the wastewater treatment works, and a proportionate share of the cost of
operation, and deposited in the Sewer Service Fund.
B. Administration Of Fund: The Sewer Service Fund will be administered in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. (1988 Code § 3.41)
8-5-3: DETERMINATION OF SEWER SERVICE CHARGES:
A. User Classes: Users shall be identified as belonging to one of the following user classes: 1)
residential; 2) nonresidential; or, 3) industrial. Allocation of users to user classes shall be based on
the substantive intent of the definitions of these classes contained herein.
B. Operation, Maintenance And Repair Costs Established: Each user shall pay operation,
maintenance, and replacement costs in proportion to the user's proportionate contribution of
wastewater flows and loadings to the treatment plant, with the minimum rate for loadings of BOD
and TSS being the rate established for concentrations of two hundred twenty five milligrams per
liter (225 mg/L) BOD and two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/L) TSS (i.e., normal
domestic strength wastewater). Those industrial users discharging segregated normal domestic
strength wastewater only, can be classified as nonresidential users for the purpose of rate
determination.
C. Billable Wastewater Volume Calculated: The charges assessed residential users and those users
of other classes discharging normal domestic strength wastewater shall be established
proportionately according to billable wastewater volume. Billable wastewater volume shall be
calculated as follows:
1. Residential Users: Billable wastewater volume for residential users shall be calculated on the
basis of metered water usage as averaged between the months of December, January and
February. The City may require residential users to install water meters for the purpose of
determining billable wastewater volume.
2. Nonresidential Users And Industrial Users: The billable wastewater volume of nonresidential
users will be determined on one hundred percent (100%) of the metered water usage as
recorded monthly throughout the year or calculated on the basis of wastewater flow meters. The
City may, at its discretion, require nonresidential users to install such additional water meters or
wastewater flow meters as may be necessary to determine billable wastewater volume.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 141/200
3. Multiple User Classes: Where one water meter serves different user classes, the City shall
determine which appropriate user class of billings shall be used.
D. Determination Of User Charges: User charges for normal domestic users shall be determined as
follows:
1. Calculation Of Unit Cost For Treatment Of Normal Domestic Strength Wastewater:
Uomr =
Comr
Tbwv
Where:
Uomr = Unit cost for operation, maintenance and replacement in $/100 cubic feet
Comr = Total annual OM&R costs
Tbwv = Total annual billable wastewater volume in 100 cubic feet
2. Calculation Of User Charge:
Uc = Uomr x bwv
Where:
Uc = User charge
Uomr = Unit cost for operation, maintenance and replacement in $/100 cubic feet
bwv = Billable wastewater volume of a particular user in 100 cubic feet
E. Recovery Of Local Construction Costs: Construction costs of the facility will be recovered through a
debt service charge calculated using usage and connection charges as follows:
1. Calculation Of Debt Service Unit Cost For Wastewater Volume:
Uds = Cds
Tbwv
Where:
Uds = Unit cost for debt service in $/100 cubic feet
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 142/200
Cds1 = Cost of annual debt service assigned for wastewater volume
Tbwv = Total annual billable wastewater volume in 100 cubic feet
Note:
1. City may reduce the cost of annual debt service through the use of other City funds at its
discretion.
2. Calculation Of Debt Service Billable Connection Cost:
UD =
CDC
TC
Where:
UD = Unit billable connection cost for debt service
CDC
1 = Costs of annual debt service assigned for connections
Tc = Total number of billable connections
Note:
1. City may reduce the cost of annual debt service through the use of other City funds at its
discretion.
3. Calculation Of Debt Service Charge:
Dc = Uds x bwv = UD x U
Where:
Dc = Debt service charge
Uds = Unit cost for debt service in $/100 cubic feet
bwv = Billable wastewater volume of a particular user in 100 cubic feet
UD = Unit billable connection cost
U = Number of billable connections for a particular user
F. Determination Of Sewer Service Charges: The charge for a particular connection shall be
determined as follows:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 143/200
SSC = Uc + Dc
Where:
SSC = Sewer service charge
Uc = User charge
Dc = Debt service charge
G. Additional Assessment Allowed: The sewer service charges established in this chapter shall not
prevent the assessment of additional charges to users who discharge wastes with concentrations
greater than normal domestic strength or wastes of unusual character, or contractual agreements
with such users, as long as the following conditions are met:
1. The user pays operation, maintenance, and replacement costs in proportion to the user's
proportionate contribution of wastewater flows and loadings to the treatment plant, and no user
is charged at a rate less than that of "normal domestic strength wastewater".
2. The measurements of such wastes are conducted according to the latest edition of "Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" in a manner acceptable to the City.
H. Greater Than Normal Domestic Strength/Unusual Character: A study of unit costs of collection and
treatment processes attributable to flow, BOD, TSS and other significant loadings may be
developed for determining the proportionate allocation of costs to flows and loadings for users
discharging wastes of greater than normal domestic strength or wastes of unusual character. (1988
Code § 3.41)
8-5-4: SEWER SERVICE FUND:
A. Establishment: A Sewer Service Fund is hereby established as an income fund to receive all
revenues generated by the sewer service charge system, and all other income dedicated to the
operation, maintenance, replacement and construction of the wastewater treatment works,
including taxes, special charges, fees, and assessments intended to retire construction debt. The
following accounts are established as income and expenditure accounts within the Sewer Service
Fund:
1. Operation and maintenance and equipment replacement account.
2. Debt retirement account.
B. Revenue: All revenue generated by the sewer service charge system, and all other income
pertinent to the treatment system, including taxes and special assessments dedicated to retire
construction debt, shall be held by the City Clerk separate and apart from all other funds of the
City. Funds received by the Sewer Service Fund shall be transferred to the operation and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 144/200
maintenance and equipment replacement account, and the debt retirement account in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. (1988 Code § 3.41)
Chapter 6
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS AND WATER
WELLS
8-6-1: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
It is unlawful to construct, reconstruct or maintain any private sewage disposal system which is not in
full compliance with the Individual Sewage Treatment Standards of the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency. (1988 Code § 4.10)
8-6-2: PRIVATE WATER WELLS:
The Water Well Construction Code adopted by the Minnesota State Board of Health is hereby adopted
by reference as though set forth verbatim herein. One copy of said Code shall be marked City of
Sleepy Eye - Official Copy and kept on file in the Office of the City Clerk and open to inspection and
use by the public. It is unlawful to construct any private water well except in accordance with said
Code. (1988 Code § 4.10)
Title 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODES
9-1-1: BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
The Minnesota State Building Code, as adopted by the Commissioner of Administration pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes chapter 16B.59 to 16B.75, including all of the amendments, rules and regulations
established, adopted and published from time to time by the Minnesota Commissioner of
Administration, through the Building Codes and Standards Division is hereby adopted by reference
with the exception of the optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this chapter. The Minnesota
State Building Code is hereby incorporated in this section as if fully set out herein. (Ord. 93, 2nd
Series, 3-11-2008)
9-1-2: APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 145/200
A. The application, administration, and enforcement of the Code shall be in accordance with
Minnesota State Building Code. The Code shall be enforced within the extraterritorial limits
permitted by Minnesota Statutes 15B.62, subdivision 1, when so established by this chapter.
B. The Code enforcement agency of the City of Sleepy Eye is the City Council.
C. This Code shall be enforced by the Minnesota certified building official designated by the City of
Sleepy Eye to administer the Code1. (Ord. 93, 2nd Series, 3-11-2008)
9-1-3: PERMITS AND FEES:
A. The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in Minnesota Statutes
16B.62, subdivision 1.
B. Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this Code in accordance with the fee schedule
adopted by the City of Sleepy Eye by resolution passed by the City Council. In addition, a
surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work governed by this Code in
accordance with Minnesota Statutes 16B.70. (Ord. 93, 2nd Series, 3-11-2008)
9-1-4: RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS:
All residential houses shall conform to the following minimum requirements in addition to specific
requirements set out in other areas of the City Code:
A. Foundations: All houses shall be placed on a permanent lateral foundation and which complies with
the Uniform Building Code as adopted in Minnesota, and which are solid for the complete
circumference of the house.
B. Roofs: All houses shall have a pitched roof of three inches (3") per twelve inches (12") of run, and
shall have eaves of not less than six inches (6"). (Ord. 52, 2nd Series, 1-5-1999)
9-1-5: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A violation of the Code is a misdemeanor2. (Ord. 93, 2nd Series, 3-11-2008)
Chapter 2
UNIFORM FIRE CODE
9-2-1: FIRE CODE ADOPTED:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 146/200
The 1998 edition of the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code is hereby adopted as though set forth verbatim
herein. One copy of said Code shall be marked "City of Sleepy Eye - Official Copy" and kept on file in
the Office of the City Clerk and open to inspection and use by the public. (Ord. 60, 2nd Series, 1-4-
2000)
9-2-2: STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE AND EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS:
No bulk plants for storage of flammable or combustible liquids, or bulk storage of liquefied petroleum
gas, not established on the effective date of this section, shall be permitted without the approval of the
Council and the Fire Chief; except, that the Fire Chief may allow up to one hundred (100) pounds
liquefied petroleum cylinders. No storage of explosives or blasting agents shall be permitted. (1988
Code § 10.32; amd. 1996 Code)
9-2-3: PENALTY:
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs
an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, or performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure
is prohibited or declared unlawful by a Code adopted by reference by this chapter, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific
provisions hereof. (1988 Code § 10.99)
Chapter 3
MOVING BUILDINGS
9-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, as used in this chapter shall have the meanings stated:
COMBINED MOVING PERMIT: A permit to move a building on both a street and a highway.
HIGHWAY: A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic which is a State trunk highway, County State-aid
highway, or County road.
HIGHWAY MOVING PERMIT: A permit to move a building on a highway for which a fee is charged
which does not include route approval, but does include regulation of activities which do not involve
the use of the highway; which activities include, but are not limited to, repairs or alterations to a
Municipal utility required by reason of such movement.
MOVING PERMIT: A document allowing the use of a street or highway for the purpose of moving a
building.
STREET: A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic which is not a State trunk highway, County Stateaid
highway or County road.
STREET MOVING PERMIT: A permit to move a building on a street for which a fee is charged which
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 147/200
does include route approval, together with use of the street and activities including, but not limited to,
repairs or alterations to a Municipal utility required by reason of such movement. (1988 Code § 4.02)
9-3-2: APPLICATION:
The application for a moving permit shall state the dimensions, weight, and approximate loaded height
of the structure or building proposed to be moved, the places from which and to which it is to be
moved, the route to be followed, the dates and times of moving and parking, the name and address of
the mover, and the Municipal utility and public property repairs or alterations that will be required by
reason of such movement. In the case of a street moving permit or combined moving permit the
application shall also state the size and weight of the structure or building proposed to be moved and
the street alterations or repairs that will be required by reason of such movement. All applications shall
be referred to the Public Utilities and Police Departments. All applications for street and combined
moving permits shall also be referred to the Police Department and no such permits shall be issued
until route approval has been obtained from such departments. (1988 Code § 4.02)
9-3-3: MOVING PERMIT; FEE:
A. Permit Required: The moving permit shall state date or dates of moving, hours, routing, movement
and parking. Permits shall be issued only for moving buildings by building movers licensed by the
State of Minnesota; except, that a permit may be issued to a person moving his own building, or a
person moving a building which does not exceed twelve feet (12') in width, twenty five feet (25') in
length, or sixteen feet (16') in loaded height.
B. Fee: Fees to be charged shall be separate for each of the following: 1) a moving permit fee to cover
use of streets and route approval, and 2) a fee equal to the anticipated amount required to
compensate the City for any Municipal utility and public property (other than streets) repairs or
alterations occasioned by such movement. All permit fees shall be paid in advance of issuance.
(1988 Code § 4.02)
9-3-4: BUILDING PERMIT; CODE COMPLIANCE:
Before any building is moved from one location to another within the City, or from a point of origin
without the City to a destination within the City, regardless of the route of movement, it shall be
inspected and a building permit shall have been issued for at least the work necessary to bring it into
full compliance with the State Building Code. (1988 Code § 4.02)
9-3-5: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
A. Street Moving Permit: It is unlawful for any person to move a building on any street without a
moving permit from the City.
B. Highway Moving Permit: It is unlawful for any person to move a building on any highway without a
highway moving permit from the City.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 148/200
C. Payment Of Taxes And Utility Charges: It is unlawful to move any building (including a
manufactured home) if the point of origin or destination (or both) is within the City, and regardless
of the route of movement, without having paid in full all real and personal property taxes, special
assessments and Municipal utility charges due on the premises of origin and filing written proof of
such payment with the City. (1988 Code § 4.02)
Chapter 4
BUILDING MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY
STANDARDS
9-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and the general welfare of the
people of this City. The general objectives include, among others, the following:
A. To protect the character and stability of all buildings and property within the City.
B. To correct and prevent conditions that adversely affect or are likely to adversely affect the life,
safety, general welfare, and health, including the physical, mental and social well-being of
persons occupying buildings within Sleepy Eye.
C. To provide minimum standards for cooking, heating, and sanitary equipment necessary to the
health and safety of occupants of buildings.
D. To provide minimum standards for light and ventilation, necessary to health and safety.
E. To prevent the overcrowding of dwellings by providing space standards per occupant for each
dwelling.
F. To provide minimum standards for the maintenance of existing buildings, and to thus prevent
slums and blight.
G. To preserve the value of land and buildings throughout the City.
With respect to rental disputes, and except as otherwise specifically provided by the terms of this
chapter, it is not the intention of the City Council to intrude upon the fair and accepted contractual
relationship between tenant and landlord. The City Council does not intend to intervene as an
advocate of either party, nor to act as an arbiter, nor to be receptive to complaints for tenant or
landlord which are not specifically and clearly relevant to the provisions of this chapter. In the absence
of such relevancy with regard to rental disputes, it is intended that the contracting parties exercise
such legal sanctions as are available to them without the intervention of City government. Neither in
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 149/200
enacting this chapter is it the intention of the City Council to interfere or permit interference with legal
rights to personal privacy. (Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
9-4-2: APPLICATION:
Every building, as well as its premises, and all occupied premises within Sleepy Eye shall conform to
the requirements of this chapter, irrespective of when such buildings may have been constructed,
altered, or repaired. (Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
9-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A structure subordinate to the main or principal building which is not
authorized nor used for living or sleeping by human occupants and which is located on the premises.
APPROVED: Acceptable to this jurisdiction.
BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
COMPLIANCE OFFICIAL: The Building Official, Code Enforcement Officer, or Police Chief.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof, designed or used predominantly for residential occupancy
of a continued nature, including one-family dwellings, two family dwellings, and multiple family
dwellings, but not including hotels and motels.
DWELLING UNIT: A single residential accommodation which is arranged, designed, used, or if vacant,
intended for use exclusively as a domicile for one family. Where a private garage is structurally
attached, it shall be considered as part of the building in which the dwelling unit is located.
FAMILY: A. One or more persons each related to the other by blood, marriage, or adoption, or a group
of not more than four (4) persons not all so related, maintaining a common household in a dwelling
unit and using common cooking and kitchen facilities.
B. Group or foster care of not more than six (6) wards or clients by an authorized person or
persons, related by blood, marriage, or adoption, together with their domestic servants or
gratuitous guests, all maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit approved and certified
by the appropriate public agency.
FLUSH WATER CLOSET: An approved toilet system with a bowl and trap made in one piece
connected to the City water and sewer system.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation,
cooking, and consumption of food.
HABITABLE BUILDING: Any building or part thereof that meets minimum standards for use as a home
or place of abode by one or more persons.
HABITABLE ROOM: A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 150/200
cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, furnace
rooms, unfinished basements, (those without required ventilation, required electrical outlets and
required exit facilities), pantries, utility rooms of less than fifty (50) square feet of floor space, foyers,
communicating corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces and workshops, hobby and recreation
areas in parts of the structure below ground level or in attics.
HEATED WATER: Water heated to a temperature of not less than one hundred twenty degrees
Fahrenheit (120°F), or such lesser temperature required by government authority, measured at the
faucet outlet.
KITCHEN: A space which contains a sink with counter working space, adequate space for installing
cooking and refrigeration equipment, and adequate space for storage of cooking utensils.
MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLING: A dwelling or portion thereof containing three (3) or more dwelling
units.
NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING: All other buildings or structures other than dwellings or dwelling units.
OCCUPANT: Any person (including owner or operator) occupying any structure, building or part
thereof, dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises.
PERMISSIBLE OCCUPANT LOAD: The maximum number of persons permitted to occupy a building
or space within a building.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or joint venture or organization of
any kind.
REFUSE: All putrescible and non-putrescible waste solids including garbage and rubbish.
REPAIR: To restore to a sound and acceptable state of operation, serviceability or appearance.
RODENT HARBORAGE: Any place where rodents can live, nest, or seek shelter.
ROOMING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used for living or
sleeping but not for cooking and eating purposes.
SAFETY: The condition of being reasonably free from danger and hazards which may cause
accidents and diseases.
STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of
work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.
SUBSTANDARD BUILDING: Any dwelling which does not conform to the minimum standards
established by City ordinances. (Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
9-4-4: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS:
No owner or person shall occupy or let another person occupy any building, unless it and the
premises are clean, sanitary, fit for human occupancy and comply with all applicable legal
requirements of the State of Minnesota and the City of Sleepy Eye. (Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 151/200
9-4-5: MAINTENANCE OF SHARED OR PUBLIC AREAS:
Every owner of a building shall maintain in a clean, sanitary, and safe condition the shared or public
areas of the building or premises thereof. (Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
9-4-6: MAINTENANCE OF OCCUPIED AREAS:
All occupants of a building shall maintain in a clean, sanitary, and safe condition that part or those
parts of the building and premises thereof that they control. (Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
9-4-7: STORAGE AND DISPOSAL OF RUBBISH:
All occupants of a building shall store and dispose of all their rubbish in a clean, sanitary, and safe
manner as described in title 4 of this Code. (Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
9-4-8: STORAGE AND DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE:
All occupants of a building shall store and dispose of all their garbage in a clean, sanitary, and safe
manner as described in title 8 of this Code within seven (7) days. (Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
9-4-9: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PEST EXTERMINATION:
Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit or an occupant of a nonresidential
building containing a single unit shall be responsible for the extermination of vermin infestations and/or
rodents on the premises. Every occupant of a nonresidential building containing more than one unit
shall be responsible for such extermination whenever their unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding, however, whenever infestation is caused by the failure of the owner to maintain a
building in a reasonable rodent proof or reasonable vermin proof condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
Whenever extermination is the responsibility of the owner, the extermination must be performed by a
licensed pest control contractor. (Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
9-4-10: RODENT HARBORAGE PROHIBITED IN OCCUPIED AREAS:
No occupant of a building shall accumulate boxes, lumber, scrap metal, or any other similar materials
in such a manner that may provide a rodent harborage in or about any dwelling unit or building. Stored
materials shall be stacked neatly. (Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
9-4-11: SANITARY MAINTENANCE OF FIXTURES AND FACILITIES:
Every occupant of a building shall keep all supplied fixtures and facilities therein in a clean and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 152/200
sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and
operation thereof. (Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
9-4-12: MINIMUM HEATING CAPABILITY AND MAINTENANCE:
In every dwelling unit or rooming unit when the control of the supplied heat is the responsibility of a
person other than an occupant, a temperature of at least sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°F) shall
be maintained three feet (3') above the floor. (Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
9-4-13: REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE:
Every occupant and/or owner shall be responsible for the removal of snow or ice from the parking lots,
sidewalks, and driveways on the premises. Individual snowfalls of three inches (3") or more; or
successive snowfalls accumulating to a depth of three inches (3"), shall be removed from parking lots
and driveways within forty eight (48) hours after the cessation of snow to a depth of one inch (1"), and
shall be removed from steps and walkways within the time specified in title 7 of this Code. (Ord. 83,
2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
9-4-14: MAINTENANCE OF DRIVING AND PARKING AREAS:
The owner of a building shall be responsible for providing and maintaining in good condition,
delineated parking areas and driveways. In a residential zone, parking is not permitted on surfaces
that are dirt or grass-covered. This section shall not be applicable during snow emergencies. (Ord.
121, 2nd Series, 7-8-2014)
9-4-15: MAINTENANCE OF YARDS:
The owner shall be responsible for providing and maintaining premises yards consistent with this
Code. (Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
9-4-16: FOUNDATIONS, EXTERIOR WALLS AND ROOFS:
The foundation, exterior walls, and exterior roof shall be substantially water tight and protected against
vermin and rodents and shall be kept in sound condition and repair. Every exterior wall shall be free of
deterioration, holes, breaks loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other which might admit rain or
dampness to the interior portion of the walls or the exterior spaces of the building. All exterior wood
surfaces, other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by paint
or other protective covering or treatment. If the exterior surface is unpainted or determined by the
Code Enforcement Officer to be paint blistered, the surface shall be painted. If the exterior surface of
the pointing on any brick, block or stone wall is loose or has fallen out, the surface shall be repaired.
(Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
9-4-17: WINDOWS, DOORS AND SCREENS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 153/200
Every window, exterior door and other exterior openings shall be substantially tight and shall be kept
in sound condition and repair. Every window, other than a fixed window or storm window, shall be
capable of being easily opened. Every window, door and frame shall be constructed and maintained in
such relation to the adjacent wall construction as to completely exclude rain, wind, vermin, and
rodents from entering the building. Every openable window shall be supplied with 16-mesh screens
during the insect season and shall be equipped with an approved lock if located less than six feet (6')
above grade. (Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
9-4-18: FACILITIES TO FUNCTION:
Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility required under City ordinances, and every chimney
and flue, shall be installed and maintained and shall function effectively in a safe, sound and working
condition. (Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
9-4-19: PERMISSIBLE OCCUPANCY PER DWELLING UNIT:
The maximum permissible occupancy of any dwelling unit shall be determined as follows:
A. For the first two (2) occupants, two hundred twenty (220) square feet of habitable room floor space
and for every additional occupant thereof, at least one hundred (100) square feet of habitable room
floor space.
B. In no event shall the total number of occupants exceed two (2) times the number of habitable
rooms, less kitchen, in the dwelling unit.
C. Not more than one family shall occupy a dwelling unit. (Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
9-4-20: BASEMENTS NOT PERMISSIBLE FOR LIVING:
Basements unfinished shall not be occupied for the purpose of living. (Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
9-4-21: COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS:
Whenever possible, a building inspection shall be initiated within three (3) business days of receipt of
any complaint alleging a particular building to be substandard. Whenever the Code Enforcement
Officer has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and has found and determined that such
building is a substandard building, he shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, rehabilitation,
vacation, or demolition of the building. (Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
9-4-22: NOTICE AND ORDER:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 154/200
The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a notice and order directed to the record owner of the
building. The notice and order shall contain:
A. The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which
the building is located.
B. A statement that the Code Enforcement Officer has found the building to be substandard with a
brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous.
C. A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
1. If the Code Enforcement Officer has determined that the building or structure must be repaired
the order shall require that all required permits be secured therefore and the work physically
commenced within such time (not to exceed 30 days from the date of the order) and completed
within such time as the Code Enforcement Officer shall determine is reasonable under all
circumstances.
2. If the Code Enforcement Officer has determined that the building or structure must be vacated,
the order shall require that the building or structure shall be vacated within a certain time from
the date of the order as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
D. Statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work (without vacation being required)
is not commenced within the time specified the Code Enforcement Officer:
1. Will order the building vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is
completed; and
2. May proceed to cause the work to be done and charge the cost thereof against the property or
its owner.
E. Statements advising that any person having record title or legal interest in the building may appeal
from the notice and order any actions of the Code Enforcement Officer. (Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-
2006)
9-4-23: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by any notice or order of the Code Enforcement Officer issued under this
chapter may file a petition with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the notice or order.
A. Upon receipt of the review, the City Manager, or his designee, shall set a date for a hearing and
give the petitioner at least five (5) days prior written notice of the date, time and place of the
hearing.
B. At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show cause why the notice or order
should be modified or withdrawn. The petitioner may be represented by counsel or petitioners of
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 155/200
choosing at his/her expense.
C. The hearing shall be conducted by the City Manager, provided he did not participate in the drafting
of the order. (Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
9-4-24: APPEAL TO COUNCIL:
Any decision rendered pursuant to section 9-4-23 of this chapter may be appealed to the City Council
(Housing Board). A petitioner seeking a decision must file written notice of appeal with the City Clerk
within ten (10) days after the decision of the City Manager. The matter will thereupon be placed on the
City Council agenda as soon as practical. The City Council shall review the findings of fact and
conclusions to determine whether they were correct. The City Council may modify, reverse or affirm
the decision of the City Manager upon the same standard set forth in the previous appeals section.
(Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
9-4-25: ENFORCEMENT:
Violation of this chapter shall be a petty misdemeanor and/or remedied by the guidelines set forth by
this chapter. (Ord. 83, 2nd Series, 3-14-2006)
Title 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
TITLE; PURPOSE; DEFINITIONS
10-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known, cited and referred to as the SLEEPY EYE CITY ZONING ORDINANCE
except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as "this title". (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
This title is adopted for the purpose of:
A. Protecting the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
B. Promoting orderly development of the residential, commercial, industrial, recreational and public
areas.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 156/200
C. Providing adequate light, air and convenience of access of property.
D. Providing for the compatibility of different land uses and the most appropriate use of land
throughout the City.
E. Preventing overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures by regulating the use of
land and buildings and the bulk of buildings in relation to the land and buildings surrounding them.
(Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of these regulations, the following terms, phrases, words and their definitions shall
have the meaning given in this section. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense;
words in the singular number shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the singular.
ACCESSORY USES: A land use related, but subordinate to the main use of the property, including
but not limited to garages, fences, parking lots, gardening, and landscaping.
BED AND BREAKFAST INNS: An owner or manager occupied single-family dwelling where lodging in
up to five (5) guest rooms and breakfast are provided to the traveling public by the resident owner or
manager for compensation.
BLOCK: That property abutting on one side of a street and lying between the two (2) nearest
intersecting or intercepting streets or subdivided acreage.
BOATHOUSE: A structure designed and used solely for the storage of boats or boating equipment.
BUILDING LINE: A line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high water level at the required setback
beyond which a structure may not extend.
COMMERCIAL USE: The principal use of land or buildings for the sale, lease, rental, or trade of
products, goods, and services.
COMMISSIONER: The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.
CONDITIONAL USE: A land use which is only allowed in a district if it is listed as such and after public
hearing and additional City review with appropriate conditions and restrictions attached to the permit.
DECK: A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached railings, seats, trellises, or other
features, attached or functionally related to a principal use or site and at any point extending more
than three feet (3') above ground.
DWELLING: A structure used for human occupancy.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: Three (3) or more attached single-family dwellings.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A detached dwelling, built as a single housekeeping unit occupied by
individuals living as a family as distinguished from a group occupying a lodging facility.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 157/200
DWELLING SITE: A designated location for residential use by one or more persons using temporary
or movable shelter, including camping and recreational vehicle sites.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: Two (2) attached single-family dwellings.
EXTRACTIVE USE: The use of land for surface or subsurface removal of sand, gravel, rock, industrial
minerals, other nonmetallic minerals, and peat not regulated under Minnesota Statutes sections 93.44
to 93.51.
FEEDLOT: The raising of livestock or poultry in any confined area or pasture where the intensity of
use is such that natural vegetation cannot be maintained.
FOREST LAND CONVERSION: The clear cutting of forested lands to prepare for a new land use
other than reestablishment of a subsequent forest stand.
HARDSHIP: The property in question cannot be put to a reasonable use if used under the conditions
allowed by the official controls; the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the
property not created by the landowner; and the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the locality. Economic considerations alone shall not constitute a hardship if a reasonable
use for the property exists under the terms of this title.
HEIGHT OF STRUCTURE: The vertical distance between the highest adjoining ground level at the
structure or ten feet (10') above the lowest ground level, whichever is lower, and the highest point of a
flat roof or average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof.
HOME OCCUPATION: A land use conducted basically within a dwelling and carried on by the
inhabitants thereof which is clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the lot and does
not change the character thereof.
INTENSIVE VEGETATION CLEARING: The complete removal of trees or shrubs in a contiguous
patch, strip, row, or block.
LAND USE: A structure on the land or an activity taking place on the land.
LOT: A parcel of land designated by plat, metes and bounds, registered land survey, auditors plot, or
other accepted means and separated from other parcels or portions by said description for the
purpose of sale, lease, or separation.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
LOT WIDTH: The shortest distance between lot lines measured at the structure of the building line.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling
mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty feet (40') or more in length, or when erected on
site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems
contained therein; except that the term includes any structure which meets all the requirements and
with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary and
complies with the standards established under Minnesota Statutes chapter 327. "Secretary" means
the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development or the head of any
successor agency with responsibility for enforcement of Federal laws relating to manufactured homes.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: Any site, lot, field, or tract of land upon which two (2) or more
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 158/200
occupied manufactured homes are located either free of charge or for compensation, and includes
any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of
the manufactured home park.
NONCONFORMITY: The legal use, structure or parcel of land already in existence, recorded, or
authorized before the adoption of official controls or amendments thereto that would not have been
permitted to become established under the terms of the official controls as now written, if the official
controls had been in effect prior to the date it was established, recorded or authorized.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL: The boundary of public waters and wetlands, and shall be an
elevation delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time
to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes
from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the ordinary high water
level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel. For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary
high water level is the operating elevation of the normal summer pool.
PERMITTED USE: A land use that is permitted with no additional hearings if the standards of this title
are adhered to.
PUBLIC WATERS: Any "water" as defined in Minnesota Statutes section 103G.005, subdivisions 14
and 15. However, no lake, pond, or flowage of less than ten (10) acres in size in municipalities and
twenty five (25) acres in size in unincorporated areas need be regulated for the purposes of parts
6120.2500 to 6120.3900. A body of water created by a private user where there was no previous
shoreland may, at the discretion of the local government, be exempted from parts 6120.2500 to
6120.3900.
RESIDENTIAL BUSINESS: A land use that is clearly secondary to the residential use of the lot but
that generates traffic, noise, odor or discharges or involves structures that are more intense than
those normally found in the neighborhood.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between a structure, sewage treatment system, or other
facility and an ordinary high water level, sewage treatment system, top of a bluff, road, highway,
property line, or other facility.
SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM: A septic tank and soil absorption system or other individual or
cluster type sewage treatment system as described and regulated in chapter 7080.
SEWER SYSTEM: Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force main, and all other
constructions, devices, appliances, or appurtenances used for conducting sewage or industrial waste
or other wastes to a point of ultimate disposal.
SHORE IMPACT ZONE: Land located between the ordinary high water level of a public water and a
line parallel to it at a setback of fifty percent (50%) of the structure setback.
SHORELAND: Land located within the following high water level of a lake, pond, or flowage; and three
hundred feet (300') from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a flood plain designated by
ordinance on a river or stream, whichever is greater. The limits of shorelands may be reduced
whenever the waters involved are bounded by topographic divides which extend landward from the
waters for lesser distances and when approved by the Commissioner.
SHORELAND ALTERATION: Any activity that changes the natural condition of the land in the
shoreland zone, including vegetation removal, earth moving, agricultural cultivation, storm sewer
structures, retaining walls, roads, driveways and parking areas.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 159/200
SIGNS, ADVERTISING: Signs advertising for something associated with a different site than the sign
site.
SIGNS, DIRECTIONAL: Signs utilized solely for directional purposes, limited to name, turn, mileage
and arrow graphic and with a maximum size of thirty two (32) square feet.
SIGNS, IDENTIFICATION: Signs identifying the name of the business or persons occupying the site
where the sign is.
SIGNS, TEMPORARY: Signs used for a temporary period of time, including festival banners, political
signs and real estate signs.
STEEP SLOPE: Land where agricultural activity or development is either not recommended or
described as poorly suited due to slope steepness and the site's soil characteristics, as mapped and
described in available County soil surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and
construction techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the provisions of these
regulations. Where specific information is not available, steep slopes are lands having average slopes
over twelve percent (12%), as measured over horizontal distances of fifty feet (50') or more, that are
not bluffs.
STREET: Public right-of-way which can be used for vehicular traffic, including roads and highways but
not including alleys.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed which requires permanent location on the ground, including but
not limited to buildings, towers, fences, roads, walls, decks and dense vegetation groupings such as
hedges and windbreaks.
STRUCTURE ALTERATION: Any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing
walls, columns, beams, or girders.
SUBDIVISION: Land that is divided for the purpose of sale, rent, or lease, including planned unit
development.
VARIANCE: Permission to vary from dimensional standards after proper public hearing and City
review.
WATER ORIENTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A small, above ground building or other
improvement, except stairways, fences, docks, and retaining walls, which, because of the relationship
of its use to a surface water feature, reasonably needs to be located closer to public waters than the
normal structure setback. Examples of such structures and facilities include boathouses, gazebos,
screen houses, pump houses, and detached decks.
WETLAND: A surface water feature classified as a wetland in the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service Circular No. 39 (1971 edition), which is hereby incorporated by reference, is available through
the Minitex interlibrary loan system, and is not subject to frequent change.
YARD, FRONT: All yards on the street side of the lot (not including alleys).
YARD, REAR: The yard opposite of the street. On a corner lot, there is no rear yard.
YARD, REQUIRED: The area described when a minimum setback is required.
YARD, SIDE: All yards on adjoining lot lines or alleys that are not front yards or rear yards. (Ord. 15,
2nd Series, 2-26-1992; amd. Ord. 23, 2nd Series, 9-6-1994)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 160/200
Chapter 2
ZONING ADMINISTRATION
10-2-1: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The City Council shall appoint a Zoning Administrator, whose responsibilities shall be as follows:
A. Issue zoning permits, and make and maintain records thereof.
B. Conduct inspections of buildings and use of land to determine compliance with the terms of this
title.
C. Maintain permanent and current records of this title, including but not limited to all maps,
amendments and conditional uses, variances, appeals, and applications therefor.
D. Institute in the name of the City, any appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator as
provided for in this title. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-2-2: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS:
A. Appointments: The City Council is hereby appointed as the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. The
Chair (or other appointed fill-in) of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Zoning
Administrator are hereby appointed as nonvoting advisory members.
B. Duties: The Board of Adjustment and Appeals has the following powers and duties with respect to
this title:
1. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by an Administrative Officer in the enforcement of this title.
2. To hear requests for variances from provisions of this title. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-2-3: CIRCUMSTANCES FOR GRANTING A VARIANCE:
A. The property in question cannot be put to a reasonable use if used under conditions allowed by the
official controls.
B. The plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to his property not created by the
landowner.
C. The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 161/200
D. Economic considerations alone shall not constitute an undue hardship if reasonable use for the
property exists under the terms of this title.
E. Conditions may be imposed in the granting of variances to ensure compliance and to protect
adjacent properties.
F. A variance may not be granted for any use that is not permitted under this title for property in the
zone where the affected person's land is located.
G. Undue hardship, as used in connection with the granting of a variance, includes direct sunlight for
solar energy systems. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-2-4: VARIANCES AND APPEALS PROCEDURE:
The procedure for taking action on a variance or an appeal shall be as follows:
A. Filing Of Application: An application for a variance or an appeal of the requirement, decision, or
determination of an Administrative Officer shall be filed with the City Clerk stating the peculiar
difficulties claimed. A map or drawing may be required to be part of the findings and records.
B. Request Referred: The request shall be referred to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals for
consideration and public hearing.
C. Notice Of Hearing: The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall cause to be published, a notice of
public hearing, in the official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing.
D. Notification Of Property Owners: The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall cause the adjoining
property owners to the site of the proposal, and the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources if
in the Shoreland Zone, to be notified by letter at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing.
E. Public Hearing; Decision: The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall hold the public hearing and
within a reasonable time make its order deciding the matter and shall serve a copy of such order
upon the appellant or petitioner by mail. A copy of the order shall also be sent to the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources within ten (10) days of final action if in Shoreland Zone.
F. Decision Final: The decisions of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals are final subject to judicial
review in the District Court.
G. Record Kept: The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall provide for a record of its proceedings
which shall include the minutes of its meetings, its findings, and the action taken on each matter
heard by it, including the final order.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 162/200
H. Variance Filed: A certified copy of a variance granted, including the legal description of the property
involved, shall be filed with the County Recorder of the County in which the Municipality is located.
(Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-2-5: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
A. Commission Established: As set forth in the City Charter:
There shall be a City Planning and Zoning Commission which shall consist of seven (7)
members who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the majority of the Council,
none of whom shall hold any other office or position in the City government. The City Attorney and
City Engineer shall serve as ex officio members but shall not have the power of voting and shall
not be deemed to be regularly appointed members. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
elect its own chairman and any other officers it sees fit from its appointive members. The powers,
duties, rules and regulations thereof, shall be established by ordinances.
B. Duties:
1. Engage in land use planning activities.
2. Prepare and recommend action on this title.
3. Review and recommend action on all requests for amendments to this title and conditional use
permits.
4. Hold public hearings on the above.
5. Review zoning permits. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-2-6: CONDITIONAL USES:
A. Specific Criteria; Immediate Property: A conditional use listed in this title may be permitted,
enlarged or altered in accordance with the standards and conditions of this title. Also, no
conditional use shall be permitted unless the City Council shall find:
1. That the conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the
immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted.
2. That the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of surrounding vacant property for predominant uses in the area.
3. That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary facilities have been or are
being provided.
4. That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide sufficient off-street parking and
loading space to serve the proposed use.
5. That adequate measures have been or will be taken to prevent or control offensive odor, fumes,
dust, noise and vibration, so that none of these will constitute a nuisance, and to control lighted
signs and other lights in such a manner that no disturbance to neighboring properties will result.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 163/200
6. That proper facilities are provided which would eliminate any traffic congestion or traffic hazard
which may result from the proposed use.
7. The demonstrated need for the proposed use.
8. The proposed use is in compliance with any Land Use Plan adopted by the City.
9. Proof of compliance with applicable State Codes and regulations and any inspections connected
therewith. Examples include, but are not limited to the following: the Minnesota Department of
Health regulates food services and campgrounds, lodging facilities have State safety
regulations, day care services have State license requirements and there is a State Electrical
Code.
B. General Criteria; Surrounding Property: In addition to those standards and requirements expressly
specified by this title, additional conditions considered necessary to protect the best interests of the
surrounding area or the City as a whole, may be imposed. The conditions may include but are not
limited to the following:
1. Ingress and egress to the property and proposed structures thereon with particular reference to
automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case
of fire or catastrophe;
2. Off-street parking and loading areas where required with particular attention to the items in
subsection B1 of this section and the economic, noise, glare, or odor effects of the conditional
use on adjoining properties and properties generally in the area;
3. Refuse and service areas, with particular reference to the items in subsections B1 and B2 of this
section;
4. Utilities, with reference to locations, availability and compatibility;
5. Screening and buffering with reference to type, dimensions, and character;
6. Signs if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic safety, economic
effect, and compatibility and harmony with properties in the district;
7. Required yards and other open space;
8. General compatibility with adjacent properties and other property in the area. (Ord. 15, 2nd
Series, 2-26-1992)
10-2-7: CONDITIONAL USE PROCEDURE:
The procedure for taking action on a conditional use application shall be as follows:
A. Application Filed: An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed with the City Clerk.
B. Site Plan: The application shall be accompanied by a site plan of the proposed use showing such
information as may be necessary or desirable, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Site plan drawn to scale showing parcel and building dimensions,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 164/200
2. Location of all buildings and their square footages,
3. Curb cuts, driveways, access roads, parking spaces and off-street loading areas,
4. Existing topography,
5. Finished grading and drainage plan,
6. Sanitary sewer and water plan with estimated use per day,
7. Soil type or soil limitations for the intended use,
8. A map showing all principal land use within two hundred fifty feet (250').
C. City Council To Study: The application and related file shall be referred to the City Council for study
concerning the effect of the proposed use on the Land Use Plan and on the character and
development of the neighborhood.
D. Public Hearing: The City Council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing, in the
official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the date of hearing.
E. Notice: The City Council shall cause all property owners within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the
site of the proposal, and the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources if in Shoreland Zone, to
be notified by letter notice at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing.
F. Decision: The City Council shall hold the public hearing, and within a reasonable time make its
order deciding the matter and shall serve a copy of such order upon the appellant or petitioner by
mail. A copy of the order shall also be sent to Minnesota Department of Natural Resources within
ten (10) days of final action if in the Shoreland Zone.
G. Compliance Required: Any use permitted under the terms of any conditional use permit shall be
established and conducted in conformity to the terms of such permit and of any conditions
designated in connection therewith. Noncompliance could result in termination of the conditional
use permit.
H. Validity: A conditional use permit issued hereunder shall become void one year after it was granted
unless made use of.
I. Status Amendment: A conditional use permit shall remain in effect as long as the conditions agreed
upon are observed, but nothing shall prevent the City from enacting or amending this title to
change the status of conditional uses.
J. Filed With County: A certified copy of any conditional use permit shall be filed with the County
Recorder of the County in which the City is located for record. The conditional use permit shall
include the legal description of the property included. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-2-8: AMENDMENTS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 165/200
An amendment to the text of this title or to a zone boundary may be initiated by the City Council, the
City Planning and Zoning Commission, or by petition of an affected property owner. A petition by a
property owner shall be filed with the City Clerk. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-2-9: AMENDMENT PROCEDURE:
The procedure for taking action on an amendment to this title shall be as follows:
A. Notice: All petitions for taking action on an amendment to this title shall be as follows:
1. The City Council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing in the official newspaper
at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. When the petition involves changes in
zone boundaries affecting an area of five (5) acres or less, a similar notice shall be mailed at
least ten (10) days before the day of the hearing to each owner of affected property and property
situated wholly or partly within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the property to which the petition
relates.
2. Notice of all proposed amendments in the Shoreland Zone shall be mailed at least ten (10) days
before the hearing to the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
3. For the purpose of giving mailed notice, the person responsible for mailing the notice may use
any appropriate records to determine the names and addresses of owners. A copy of the notice
and a list of the owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be attested to by the
responsible person and shall be made a part of the records of the proceedings. The failure to
give mailed notice to individual property owners, or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the
proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt was made to comply.
B. Public Hearing: The City Council shall hold the public hearing and make a decision within sixty (60)
days from the date of the hearings.
C. Amendments Following Denial: No petition of a property owner for an amendment to this title shall
be considered by the City within the one year period immediately following a previous denial of
such request, except the City may consider a new petition if in the opinion of the Planning and
Zoning Commission new evidence or a change of circumstances warrant it.
D. Notification To State: Notice of the final amendments shall be mailed to the Minnesota Department
of Natural Resources within ten (10) days of the decision if the site is in the Shoreland Zone. (Ord.
15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
Chapter 3
ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS
10-3-1: ZONING PERMITS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 166/200
A. Permit Required: Hereafter no person shall erect, alter, or move any structure or part thereof or
engage in shoreland alteration without first securing a zoning permit therefor. Zoning permits are
permissive only and only as relating to this title. No liability shall be incurred by the City upon the
granting thereof.
B. Alterations: For purposes of zoning permits, alterations mean any change in the outside dimension
of a structure. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
C. Structures Exempt: (Rep. by Ord. 79, 2nd Series, 5-10-2005)
D. Permit Posted: Zoning permits shall be posted on the site before construction commences.
E. Validity: Permits are valid for a year. If not complete, a reapplication must be made or the
unfinished structure shall be removed. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-3-2: FEES:
Any person applying for a zoning permit, filing a petition for an amendment to this title, requesting a
variance, conditional use permit or a change in regulations within any district shall pay a prescribed
fee according to a schedule established by the City Council. Fees shall be set annually by the City
Council by resolution. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-3-3: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this title are severable. If a section, sentence, clause or phrase of this title is
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the decision shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions of this title. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-3-4: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense. The City may through the issuance of an injunction stop any
violation of this title. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PROVISIONS
10-4-1: INTERPRETATION OF ZONING TITLE:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 167/200
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and welfare. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series,
2-26-1992)
10-4-2: COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER REGULATIONS:
Where the conditions of this title are comparable with conditions imposed by any other Federal, State
or County law, ordinance, statute or regulation, the regulations which are more restrictive shall prevail.
(Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-4-3: CONFORMANCE TO TITLE:
No structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, nor
shall any building or land be used except for the purpose permitted in the district in which the building
or land is located. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-4-4: PLATTING REQUIREMENTS:
No permit will be issued for any land parcel subdivided after the effective date of this title that has not
been officially platted in accordance with State law and recorded in the County Recorder's Office,
accompanied by certified resolution of approval by the City Council, with the following exceptions:
A. Parcels that are five (5) acres or larger with no public road or right-of-way involved.
B. Simple splitting of a previously platted parcel where all of the residential parcels meet minimum lot
size requirements for the zoning district. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
Chapter 5
ZONING DISTRICTS; MAP
10-5-1: CLASSIFICATION OF ZONES:
The land areas of the City have been divided into zoning districts that vary in their regulation of land
uses. Land use activities must conform to the specific zone regulations of the zoning district as well as
the pertinent overall regulations found in other portions of this title. For the purpose of this title, the
following zones are hereby established:
R General Residential
M Multi-Family Residential
C Downtown Commercial
B Business/Industrial
I General Industrial
S Shoreland Overlay (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 168/200
10-5-2: LOCATION OF ZONES:
The boundaries for the zones listed in this title are indicated on the Zoning Map which is hereby
adopted by reference. The boundaries shall be modified in accordance with Zoning Map amendments
which shall be adopted by reference. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-5-3: ZONING MAP:
The Zoning Map or Zoning Map amendment shall be dated with the effective date of the ordinance
that adopts the map or map amendment. A certified print of the adopted map or map amendment shall
be maintained in the Office of the Zoning Administrator. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-5-4: ZONE BOUNDARIES:
Unless otherwise specified, zone boundaries are section lines; subdivision lines; lot lines; center line
of street or railroad rights-of-way; or such lines extended. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-5-5: ANNEXED TERRITORY:
All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the City shall be zoned in accordance with the Land
Use Plan. Consideration of zoning other than in accordance with the Land Use Plan should not be
done without amending the Land Use Plan. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-5-6: GENERAL DIMENSION STANDARDS:
The following standards shall apply in all zones unless special standards are listed for the specific
zone. Where special standards are listed for a zone the special standards override those shown
below.
A. Front Yard Requirements: Minimum of twenty five feet (25') from the street right-of-way.
B. Rear Yard Requirements: Minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the lot depth.
C. Side Yard Requirements: Minimum of seven and one-half feet (71/2').
D. Residential Zone Setback: Structures associated with all uses other than single-family residential
shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from lot lines adjoining residential zones.
E. Lot Size Requirements:
1. Lot Width: Minimum of seventy five feet (75') for lot width.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 169/200
2. Lot Depth: Minimum of one hundred feet (100') for lot depth.
3. Area: Minimum of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet plus another four thousand
four hundred (4,400) square feet for each additional dwelling unit.
F. Dwelling Requirements: Minimum width and length of twenty feet (20'). All dwellings must be placed
on a foundation.
G. Access Requirements: All structures must be on lots that have a minimum frontage of twenty five
feet (25') on a public street (not including alleys). (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
Chapter 6
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. R GENERAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE
10-6A-1: PURPOSE:
The R District is intended to be comprised basically of present and future low density housing,
augmented with compatible medium density housing and appropriate miscellaneous uses. These
additional uses are conditional and are to be further regulated by applying conditional use standards.
(Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-6A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses, including temporary signs.
Government owned recreation and governmental uses.
Home occupations.
One- and two-family dwellings.
Service utilities.
State licensed foster homes or group homes serving six (6) or fewer mentally retarded or physically
handicapped persons.
Truck gardening and raising of field crops, excluding the raising of livestock. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-
26-1992; amd. Ord. 22, 2nd Series, 8-2-1994)
10-6A-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Bed and breakfast inns.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 170/200
Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, churches and schools.
Multiple-family dwellings up to eight (8) units.
Raising of livestock but excluding feedlots.
Recreation provided by a nonprofit organization to serve part or all of the public need.
Residential businesses, identification and directional signs.
Seasonal lodging facilities.
State licensed residential facilities serving from seven (7) through sixteen (16) retarded or physically
handicapped persons.
Utility transmission structure.
Other uses as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission to be similar in scope and
intensity to those listed above. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992; amd. Ord. 22, 2nd Series, 8-2-1994;
Ord. 23, 2nd Series, 9-6-1994)
10-6A-4: SPECIAL STANDARDS:
A. Structures Over Twenty Five Feet: All structures over twenty five feet (25') in height shall have a
minimum side yard requirement of fifteen feet (15'). (Ord. 55, 2nd Series, 6-1-1999)
B. Use Other Than Single Family; Minimum Side Yard: All structures associated with uses other than
single-family residential shall have a minimum side yard requirement of twenty feet (20').
C. Height Of Structures: All structures except churches and agricultural structures must not exceed
thirty five feet (35') in height. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
ARTICLE B. M MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
10-6B-1: PURPOSE:
The M District is created in order to preserve some land that can develop to serve the City's multifamily
needs without creating incompatible situations. To protect this goal permitted uses are few and
conditional uses should be weighed in view of their impact with future multi-family development. The
Land Use Plan also shows potential areas that could be rezoned to M if conditions are found
favorable. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-6B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses and temporary signs.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 171/200
Home occupations.
Multi-family housing, three (3) to eight (8) units.
Service utilities.
Truck gardening and raising of field crops, excluding the raising of livestock. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-
26-1992)
10-6B-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Bed and breakfast inns.
Multi-family housing over eight (8) units.
Nursing homes, hospitals, sanitariums and churches.
One- and two-family dwellings.
Public school, recreational and governmental uses.
Raising of livestock excluding feedlots.
Residential businesses and identification signs.
Seasonal lodging facilities.
State licensed residential facilities serving the retarded or physically handicapped.
Utility transmission structures.
Other uses as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission to be similar in scope and
intensity to those listed above. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992; amd. Ord. 23, 2nd Series, 9-6-1994)
10-6B-4: SPECIAL STANDARDS:
A. Off-Street Parking: There shall be a minimum of one off-street parking stall for each dwelling unit.
B. Garbage And Service Areas To Be Screened: The garbage pickup areas and service features of
dwelling units shall be screened or be in the rear of the complex. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
ARTICLE C. C DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL ZONE
10-6C-1: PURPOSE:
The C Zone is meant to allow for continuance of the traditional commercial/residential mix in the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 172/200
existing downtown core and portions of the more sparsely developed adjacent areas. (Ord. 15, 2nd
Series, 2-26-1992)
10-6C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses and temporary and identification signs.
Additions and alterations to existing residential structures.
Amusement and entertainment establishments.
Eating and drinking establishments.
Offices, professional services.
Repair and maintenance services, excluding car, implement, marine and motorcycle sales/service.
Retail, wholesale trades.
Service utilities.
Truck gardening and raising of field crops, excluding the raising of livestock. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-
26-1992)
10-6C-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Assembly of previously manufactured parts.
Bed and breakfast inns.
Gas stations and auto repair, excluding salvage yards.
Public schools, recreation and governmental uses.
Raising of livestock but excluding feedlots.
Single- and multi-family dwellings (up to 8).
Utility transmission structures.
Warehousing, but not of flammable, explosive or hazardous materials.
Other uses as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission to be similar in scope and
intensity to those listed above. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992; amd. Ord. 23, 2nd Series, 9-6-1994)
ARTICLE D. B BUSINESS/INDUSTRIAL ZONE
10-6D-1: PURPOSE:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 173/200
The B Zone is meant to allow for mixed areas that are basically commercial but have light industry
mixed in. It is also meant to allow for those commercial activities that tend to need more land area
than normally found in the downtown area. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-6D-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses and temporary, identification and directional signs.
Additions and alterations to existing residential structures.
Amusement and entertainment establishments.
Assembly of previously manufactured parts.
Auto, implement and marine sales/service.
Eating and drinking establishments.
Gas stations.
Hotels, motels and lodging facilities.
Offices and professional services.
Repair and maintenance services.
Retail, wholesale trades.
Service utilities.
Truck gardening and raising of field crops excluding raising of livestock.
Warehousing and wholesale merchandising. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-6D-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Advertising signs.
Bed and breakfast inns.
Home occupation and residential business.
Industrial offices.
Manufactured home park.
Manufacturing of previously processed materials but no on-site storage of flammable, explosive or
hazardous materials other than those being used.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 174/200
Raising of livestock, but excluding feed lots.
Single- and multi-family residential (up to 8).
Truck/bus terminals and construction equipment storage yards.
Utility transmission structures.
Welding operations.
Other uses as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission to be similar in scope and
intensity to those listed above. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992; amd. Ord. 23, 2nd Series, 9-6-1994)
10-6D-4: SPECIAL STANDARDS:
A. Minimum Setback: Minimum setback from County and State highway rights-of-way shall be fifty feet
(50').
B. Off-Street Parking: There shall be ample off-street parking to accommodate parking needs
generated by the business. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
ARTICLE E. I INDUSTRIAL ZONE
10-6E-1: PURPOSE:
The I Zone is meant to allow for continuance and expansion of the existing industrial uses and to
provide regulations for planned industrial and in the event that it becomes annexed to the City. (Ord.
15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-6E-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses and temporary and identification signs.
Assembly or warehousing, and fabrication of previously manufactured parts and welding operations.
Automobile, truck and farm machinery repair garages, excluding salvage yards.
Industrial offices.
Manufacturing of previously processed materials and no on-site storage of flammable, explosive or
hazardous materials other than those being used.
Truck/bus terminals and construction equipment storage yards.
Truck gardening and the raising of field crops, excluding the raising of livestock.
Utility service and transmission structures.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 175/200
Warehousing and wholesale merchandising. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-6E-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Advertising signs.
Junk yards, auto reduction yards and open storage yards.
Manufacturing and processing of products from raw materials.
Raising of livestock but excluding feedlots.
Recycling and storage or mixing of chemicals or minerals or agri-products.
Storage or warehousing of flammable, explosive or hazardous material.
Other uses as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission to be similar in scope and
intensity to those listed above. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-6E-4: SPECIAL STANDARDS:
A. Off-Street Parking: There shall be ample off-street parking to accommodate parking needs
generated by the business.
B. Setbacks:
1. Structures shall be set back a minimum of fifty feet (50') from lot lines adjoining residential
zones.
2. Minimum setback from County and State highways shall be fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 15, 2nd Series,
2-26-1992)
ARTICLE F. S SHORELAND OVERLAY ZONE
10-6F-1: PURPOSE:
The S Zone is intended to provide additional standards for shoreland development to protect Sleepy
Eye Lake from damaging land uses and to conform with State regulations. Sleepy Eye Lake is a public
water classified as general development. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-6F-2: PERMITTED USE:
The same as permitted in the underlying zoning district, except that multi-family residential over four
(4) units are not permitted. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 176/200
10-6F-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The same as conditionally permitted in the underlying zoning district, except that multi-family
residential over four (4) units are not permitted. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-6F-4: SPECIAL STANDARDS:
A. Minimum Lot Areas (In Square Feet):
Riparian Lots Nonriparian Lots
With no sewer:
Single 20,000 40,000
Duplex 40,000 80,000
Triplex 60,000 120,000
Quad 80,000 160,000
With sewer:
Single 15,000 10,000
Duplex 26,000 17,500
Triplex 38,000 25,000
Quad 49,000 32,500
B. Minimum Lot Widths (In Feet):
Riparian Lots Nonriparian Lots
With no sewer:
Single 100 150
Duplex 180 265
Triplex 260 375
Quad 340 490
With sewer:
Single 75 75
Duplex 135 135
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 177/200
Triplex 195 190
Quad 255 245
C. Minimum Setbacks:
From ordinary high water level: Seventy five feet (75') for unsewered and fifty feet (50') for sewered
development. Also, nonresidential uses must be set back double the applicable amount or be
substantially screened from view from the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer,
leaf-on conditions.
From ordinary high water level: Fifty feet (50') for sewage treatment systems.
From cemetery, unplatted: Fifty feet (50').
D. Structure Elevation: The lowest floor shall be at a level at least three feet (3') above the highest
known water level or three feet (3') above the ordinary high water level, whichever is higher. (Ord.
15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
Chapter 7
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS
10-7-1: DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS:
The district regulations hereinafter set forth in this section qualify or supplement, as the case may be,
the district regulations appearing elsewhere in this title. In no case shall any of the following
exceptions be utilized to encroach into the ordinary high water setback areas.
A. Chimneys, Steeples, Flagpoles And Similar Objects: Chimneys, church steeples, towers, aerials,
flagpoles and similar objects not used for human occupancy are not subject to the building height
limitations of this title.
B. Architectural Features: Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, canopies, sunshades,
gutters, chimneys and flues can project up to two feet (2') into a required yard, but in no case shall
they be closer than two feet (2') to the lot line.
C. Buildings On Abutting Lots: If there are buildings on abutting lots and the buildings have yards of
less than the required minimum setback for the zone, the minimum setback of the front yard for the
intervening lot need not exceed the average setback of the front yards of the abutting lots.
D. Open, Unenclosed Porch Or Deck: An open unenclosed porch or deck no higher than one foot (1')
above ground level may project into a required yard for a distance not exceeding ten feet (10'), but
in no case shall it be closer than two feet (2') to the lot line.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 178/200
E. Storage Sheds: Storage sheds, behind dwellings no larger than one hundred twenty (120) square
feet in floor area, may encroach into the rear and side yard setback areas but not closer than two
feet (2') from lot lines.
F. Detached Garages And Similar Allowed Accessory Uses: Detached garages, screen porches,
sheds and similar allowed accessory uses behind dwellings may encroach into the rear and side
yard setback areas but no closer than four feet (4') from lot lines.
G. Bituminous And Brick Slabs: At grade concrete, bituminous and brick slabs are not subject to
setback requirements, but must be within property lines.
H. Nonresidential Structures: Nonresidential structures in the Downtown Commercial Zone may
encroach into the required side and rear yard areas if the adjoining use to the yard in question is
either a public right-of-way or a nonresidential use.
I. Fences: Setback requirements do not apply to fences, but they must be within property lines. (Ord.
15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
J. Non-Enclosed Steps And Landings: Non-enclosed steps and landings can encroach into required
yard areas as follows, but in no case shall any part, including steps, be closer than two feet (2') to
the lot line:
1. Up to thirty six (36) square feet of landing may be placed in the front yard but in no event shall
extend more than six feet (6') from the front of the house.
2. Up to a four foot (4') by five foot (5') structure in the side yards. (Ord. 98, 2nd Series, 5-12-2009)
10-7-2: NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES:
Where at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, lawful uses of land or structures
exist which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this title, the uses may be continued
so long as they conform to the following requirements:
A. Alterations And Extensions: A nonconforming use or structure may be continued but may not be
altered or extended. The extension of a nonconforming use to a portion of a structure which was
arranged or designed for the nonconforming use at the time of passage of this title is not an
enlargement or expansion of a nonconforming use. A nonconforming structure which conforms
with respect to use may be altered or extended if the alteration or extension does not cause the
structure to deviate further from the standards of this title.
B. Discontinuation: If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of one year, further use of the
property shall conform to the requirements of this title.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 179/200
C. Replacement: If a nonconforming use is replaced by another use, the new use shall conform to this
title.
D. Destruction: If a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use is
destroyed by any cause to an extent exceeding fifty percent (50%) of its fair market value as
indicated by the records of the County Assessor, a future structure or use on the site shall conform
to this title.
E. Legal But Nonconforming Defined: Any structure which will, under this title, become nonconforming
but for which a building permit has been lawfully granted prior to the effective date of this title or
amendment thereof and continues to completion within one year shall thereafter be a legally
existing nonconforming structure.
F. Maintenance: Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing or related to a lawful
nonconforming use and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming
use.
G. Nonconforming Lots: Lots of record that are nonconforming in area can be built on with proper
variances but all such lots that are contiguous and with a common owner at the time of the
adoption of the ordinance codified in this title shall be combined to create lots of proper size in
order to receive a building permit. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
Chapter 8
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
10-8-1: APPLICATION:
A. Public Welfare Protected: No land or building in any district shall be used or occupied in any
manner creating dangerous, injurious, noxious, or otherwise objectionable conditions which could
adversely affect the surrounding areas or adjoining premises.
B. Compliance With Standards: All land uses, whether permitted or conditionally permitted will
conform with the standards set forth here in this chapter in addition to conforming with the
standards found in the zoning district sections. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-8-2: FIRE HAZARDS:
Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable or explosive materials shall be protected by
adequate firefighting and fire-prevention equipment and by such safety devices as are normally used
in the handling of any such material. Such hazards shall be kept removed from adjacent activities to a
distance which is compatible with the potential danger involved. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-8-3: SEWAGE FACILITIES:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 180/200
Where public sewers exist, development shall utilize them. Where sewers are not constructed or in
operation, all sewage facilities shall be connected to approved septic tanks and disposal fields in
conformance with Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Individual Sewage Treatment Standards. No
tiles, sump pumps, roof gutters or other stormwater collection device shall be connected to the
community sanitary sewage facilities. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-8-4: VIBRATION:
No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible without instruments on any adjoining lot or
property. The standard shall not apply to vibrations created during the process of construction. (Ord.
15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-8-5: AIR POLLUTION:
No pollution of air by fly-ash, dust, vapors, odors, smoke, or other substances shall be permitted which
are harmful to health, animals, vegetation, or other property, or which can cause excessive soiling. For
the purpose of this title, the regulations and standards adopted by the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency shall apply. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-8-6: REFUSE:
All waste material, debris, refuse, or garbage shall be kept in an enclosed building or properly
contained in a closed container designed for such purposes. The owner of vacant land shall be
responsible for keeping such land free of refuse. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-8-7: RADIOACTIVITY OR ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCE:
No activity shall emit dangerous radioactivity at any point, or electrical disturbance adversely affecting
the operation of any equipment at any point other than that of the creator of such disturbance. (Ord.
15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-8-8: SIGNS:
The following regulations shall apply to all signs and all use districts:
A. Identification, Directional Or Traffic-Control Signs: Only official identification, directional or trafficcontrol
signs shall be allowed within the public right-of-way.
B. Unacceptable Signs: No sign shall be permitted on rocks, trees, or on any public utility pole.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 181/200
C. Advertising Signs: Any advertising sign which is not kept in a reasonable state of repair shall be
removed by the City after notice to the owner of the sign and like notice to the property owner and
hearing thereon.
D. Prohibited Lighting: No sign shall be permitted which gives off an intermittent or rotating beam of
light.
E. Temporary Signs: Temporary signs must be removed when the occasion, real estate sale or
election is complete. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-8-9: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
All the following shall apply in order to qualify as a home occupation:
A. Allowable Space: Maximum floor use of five hundred (500) square feet.
B. Employees: No more than one person outside of household employed.
C. Traffic Generated: No more than four (4) vehicle trips per day of extra traffic.
D. Nuisance Avoided: No noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable off
premises.
E. Identification: No signs other than house number and name of resident as commonly found on
mailboxes.
F. Zoning Compliance: No other outside appearances other than what is normally allowed in the zone.
(Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-8-10: RESIDENTIAL BUSINESSES:
All of the following shall apply in order to qualify as a residential business:
A. Floor Area: Maximum floor area of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet.
B. Employees: No more than three (3) persons outside of home employed.
C. Traffic Generated: No more than twenty (20) vehicle trips per day of extra traffic.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 182/200
D. Identification: No signs other than one identification sign no greater than sixteen (16) square feet in
size.
E. Considerations Addressed: In reviewing the conditional use permit, the City shall also consider any
noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, sight, electrical interference that would adversely affect
permitted uses in the vicinity. If an adverse effect is determined to result from the proposed use,
then the proposal shall be denied or the adverse effect should be eliminated or mitigated. This may
include special conditions attached to the use permit including, but not limited to: hours of
operation, parking standards, extra setbacks for buffer, screening and fencing. (Ord. 15, 2nd
Series, 2-26-1992)
10-8-11: SHORELAND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following standards shall apply in the Shoreland Zone:
A. Individual Septic Systems And Water Supply:
1. All septic systems not in conformity with this title and MPCA Rule chapter 7080 shall be brought
into conformity prior to issuance of any permit or variance related to the site.
2. All septic systems not in conformity with this title and MPCA Rule chapter 7080 shall be
upgraded within one year of the passage of this title to conform to the provision hereof and
MPCA Rule chapter 7080.
3. Any public or private supply of water for domestic purposes must meet or exceed standards for
water quality of the Minnesota Department of Health and the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency.
4. Private wells must be located, constructed, maintained, and sealed in accordance with or in a
more thorough manner than the Water Well Construction Code of the Minnesota Department of
Health.
B. Water-Oriented Accessory Structures: Each lot may have one water-oriented accessory structure
not meeting the normal structure setback in this title if this water-oriented accessory structure
complies with the following provisions:
1. The structure or facility must not exceed ten feet (10') in height, exclusive of safety rails, and
cannot occupy an area greater than two hundred fifty (250) square feet. Detached decks must
not exceed eight feet (8') above grade at any point;
2. The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary high water level must be at least ten feet
(10');
3. The structure or facility must be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and
adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks or color, assuming summer,
leaf-on conditions;
4. The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails, but must not be enclosed or used as a storage
area;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 183/200
5. The structure or facility must not be designed or used for human habitation and must not contain
water supply or sewage treatment facilities; and
6. As an alternative for general development and recreational development waterbodies, wateroriented
accessory structures used solely for watercraft storage, and including storage of related
boating and water-oriented sporting equipment, may occupy an area up to four hundred (400)
square feet provided the maximum width of the structure is twenty feet (20') as measured
parallel to the configuration of the shoreline.
C. Stairways, Lifts, And Landings; Design Requirements: Stairways and lifts are the preferred
alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs and steep
slopes to shore areas. Stairways and lifts must meet the following design requirements:
1. Stairways and lifts must not exceed four feet (4') in width on residential lots. Wider stairways
may be used for commercial properties, public open space recreational properties, and planned
unit developments;
2. Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots must not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in
area. Landings larger than thirty two (32) square feet may be used for commercial properties,
public open space recreational properties, and planned unit developments;
3. Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts, or landings;
4. Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either constructed above the ground on posts or pilings, or
placed into the ground, provided they are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of
soil erosion;
5. Stairways, lifts, and landings must be located in the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots,
as viewed from the surface of the public water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever
practical; and
6. Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for physically handicapped persons are also
allowed for achieving access to shore areas; provided, that the dimensional and performance
standards of subsections C1 to C5 of this section are complied with in addition to the
requirements of Minnesota Regulations, chapter 1340.
D. Significant Historic Sites: No structure may be placed on a significant historic site in a manner that
affects the values of the site unless adequate information about the site has been removed and
documented in a public repository.
E. Steep Slopes: The City must evaluate possible erosion impacts and development visibility from
public waters before issuing a permit for construction of sewage treatment systems, roads,
driveways, structures, or other improvements on steep slopes. When determined necessary,
condition must be attached to issued permits to prevent erosion and to preserve existing
vegetation screening of structures, vehicles, and other facilities as viewed from the surface of
public waters, assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation.
F. Vegetation Alterations:
1. Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of structures and sewage treatment systems
and the construction of roads and parking areas regulated by this title are exempt from the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 184/200
vegetation alteration standards that follow.
2. Removal or alteration of vegetation, except for agricultural and forest management uses as
regulated in this title is allowed subject to the following standards:
a. Intensive vegetation clearing within the shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes is
not allowed. Intensive vegetation clearing for forest land conversion to another use outside of
these areas is allowable if an erosion control and sedimentation plan is developed and
approved by the Soil and Water Conservation District in which the property is located.
b. In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes, limited clearing of trees and shrubs and
cutting, pruning, and trimming of trees is allowed to provide a view to the water from the
principal dwelling site and to accommodate the placement of stairways and landings, picnic
areas, access paths, livestock watering areas, beach and watercraft access areas, and
permitted water-oriented accessory structures or facilities; provided, that:
(1) The screening of structures, vehicles, or other facilities as viewed from the water,
assuming summer, leaf-on conditions are not substantially reduced;
(2) Along rivers, existing shading of water surface is preserved; and
(3) The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of trees, limbs, or branches that
are dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards.
c. Use of fertilizer and pesticides in the Shoreland Management District must be done in such a
way as to minimize runoff into the shore impact zone or public water by the use of earth,
vegetation, or both.
G. Topographic Alterations/Grading And Filling:
1. Construction Permits: Grading and filling and excavations necessary for the construction of
structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways under validly issued construction permits
for these facilities do not require the issuance of a separate permit. Grading and filling standards
in this section must be incorporated into the issuance of permits for construction of structures,
sewage treatment systems, and driveways.
2. Requirements: Notwithstanding subsection G1 of this section, a grading and filling permit will be
required for:
a. The movement of more than ten (10) cubic yards of material on steep slopes or within shore
or bluff impact zones; and
b. The movement of more than fifty (50) cubic yards of material outside of steep slopes and
shore and bluff impact zones.
3. Considerations And Conditions: The following considerations and conditions must be adhered to
during the issuance of construction permits, grading and filling permits, conditional use permits,
variances and subdivision approvals:
a. Grading or filling in any Type 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 or 8 wetland must be evaluated to determine how
extensively the proposed activity would affect the following functional qualities of the wetland:
(1) Sediment and pollutant trapping and retention;
(2) Storage of surface runoff to prevent or reduce flood damage;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 185/200
(3) Fish and wildlife habitat;
(4) Recreational use;
(5) Shoreland or bank stabilization; and
(6) Noteworthiness, including special qualities such as historic significance, critical habitat for
endangered plants and animals, or others.
b. Alterations must be designed and conducted in a manner that ensures only the smallest
amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest time possible;
c. Mulches or similar material must be used, where necessary, for temporary bare soil coverage,
and a permanent vegetation cover must be established as soon as possible;
d. Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before they reach any surface water
feature must be used;
e. Altered areas must be stabilized to acceptable erosion control standards consistent with the
field office technical guides of the local Soil and Water Conservation Districts of the United
States Soil Conservation Service;
f. Fill or excavated material must not be placed in a manner that creates an unstable slope;
g. Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes must be reviewed by qualified
professionals for continued slope stability and must not create finished slopes of thirty percent
(30%) or greater;
h. Fill or excavated material must not be placed in bluff impact zones;
i. Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of public waters must first be authorized by
the Commissioner under Minnesota Statutes section 103G.245;
j. Alterations of topography must only be allowed if they are permitted or conditional uses and do
not adversely affect adjacent or nearby properties; and
k. Placement of natural rock riprap, including associated grading of the shoreline and placement
of a filter blanket, is permitted if the finished slope does not exceed three feet (3') horizontal to
one foot (1') vertical, the landward extent of the riprap is within ten feet (10') of the ordinary
high water level, and the height of the riprap above the ordinary high water level does not
exceed three feet (3').
4. Connections To Public Waters: Excavations where the intended purpose is connection to a
public water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons, and harbors, must be controlled by local
shoreland controls. Permission for excavations may be given only after the Commissioner has
approved the proposed connection to public waters.
H. Placement And Design Of Roads, Driveways, And Parking Areas:
1. Public and private roads and parking areas must be designed to take advantage of natural
vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening from view from public waters.
Documentation must be provided by a qualified individual that all roads and parking areas are
designed and constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters consistent with the
field office technical guides of the local Soil and Water Conservation District, or other applicable
technical materials.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 186/200
2. Roads, driveways, and parking areas must meet structure setback and must not be placed
within bluff and shore impact zones, when other reasonable and feasible placement alternatives
exist. If no alternatives exist, they may be placed within these areas, and must be designed to
minimize adverse impacts.
3. Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and access-related parking areas
may be placed within shore impact zones, provided the vegetative screening and erosion control
conditions of this subsection are met. For private facilities, the grading and filling provisions of
this title must be met.
I. Stormwater Management: The following general and specific standards shall apply:
1. General Standards:
a. When possible, existing natural drainageways, wetlands, and vegetated soil surfaces must be
used to convey, store, filter, and retain stormwater runoff before discharge to public waters.
b. Development must be planned and conducted in a manner that will minimize the extent of
disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential, and reduce and delay runoff volumes.
Disturbed areas must be stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities or
methods used to retain sediment on the site.
c. When development density, topographic features, and soil and vegetation conditions are not
sufficient to adequately handle stormwater runoff using natural features and vegetation,
various types of constructed facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices,
dikes, waterways, and ponds may be used. Preference must be given to designs using
surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and manmade materials
and facilities.
2. Specific Standards:
a. Impervious surface coverage of lots must not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the lot area.
b. When constructed facilities are used for stormwater management, documentation must be
provided by a qualified individual that they are designed and installed consistent with the field
office technical guide of the local Soil and Water Conservation Districts.
c. New constructed stormwater outfalls to public waters must provide for filtering or settling of
suspended solids and skimming of surface debris before discharge.
J. Agricultural Use Standards: General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, truck
farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses if steep slopes and shore bluff
impact zones are maintained in permanent vegetation or operated under an approved
conservation plan (Resource Management Systems) consistent with the field office technical
guides of the local Soil and Water Conservation Districts or the United States Soil Conservation
Service, as provided by a qualified individual or agency. The shore impact zone for parcels with
permitted agricultural land uses is equal to a line parallel to and fifty feet (50') from the ordinary
high water level.
K. Conditional Uses: Conditional uses allowable within shoreland areas shall be subject to the review
and approval procedures, and criteria and conditions for review of conditional uses established
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 187/200
community-wide. The following additional evaluation criteria and conditions apply with shoreland
areas:
1. Evaluation Criteria: A thorough evaluation of the waterbody and the topographic, vegetation, and
soils conditions on the site must be made to ensure:
a. The prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of public waters, both during and
after construction;
b. The visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed from public waters is limited;
c. The site is adequate for water supply and on-site sewage treatment; and
d. The types, uses, and numbers of watercraft that the project will generate are compatible in
relation to the suitability of public waters to safely accommodate these watercraft.
2. Conditions Attached To Conditional Use Permits: The City, upon consideration of the criteria
listed above and the purposes of this title shall attach such conditions to the issuance of the
conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this title. Such conditions
may include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Increased setbacks from the ordinary high water level;
b. Limitations on the natural vegetation to be removed or the requirements that additional
vegetation be planted; and
c. Special provisions for the location design, and use of structures, sewage treatment systems,
watercraft launching and docking areas, and vehicle parking areas.
L. Subdivision/Platting Provisions:
1. Land Suitability: Each lot created through subdivision, authorized under this title, must be
suitable in its natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration. Suitability analysis by
the local unit of government shall consider susceptibility to flooding, existence of wetlands, soil
and rock formations with severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential, steep
topography, inadequate water supply or sewage treatment capabilities, near-shore aquatic
conditions unsuitable for water-based recreation, important fish and wildlife habitat, presence of
significant historic sites, or any other feature of the natural land likely to be harmful to the health,
safety, or welfare of future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the community.
2. Consistency With Other Controls: Subdivisions must conform to all official controls of this
community. A subdivision will not be approved where a later variance from one or more
standards in official controls would be needed to use the lots for their intended purpose. In areas
not served by publicly-owned sewer and water systems, a subdivision will not be approved
unless domestic water supply is available and a sewage treatment system consistent with this
title and MPCA chapter 7080 can be provided for every lot. Each lot shall meet the minimum lot
size and dimensional requirements, including at least a minimum contiguous lawn area, that is
free of limiting factors sufficient for the construction of two (2) standard soil treatment systems,
where public sewer is unavailable. Lots that would require use of holding tanks must not be
approved.
3. Information Requirements: Subdivision applications will include the following information:
a. Topographic contours at ten foot (10') intervals or less from United States Geological Survey
maps or more accurate sources, showing limiting site characteristics;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 188/200
b. The surface water features required in Minnesota Statutes section 505.02, subdivision 1, to be
shown on plats, obtained from United States Geological Survey quadrangle topographic maps
or more accurate sources;
c. Adequate soils information to determine suitability for building and on site sewage treatment
capabilities for every lot from the most current existing sources or from field investigations
such as soil borings, percolation tests, or other methods;
d. Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply; extent of anticipated vegetation
and topographic alterations; near shore aquatic conditions, including depths, types of bottom
sediments, and aquatic vegetation; and proposed methods for controlling stormwater runoff
and erosion, both during and after construction activities; and
e. Location of 100-year floodplain areas from existing maps or data. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-
1992)
10-8-12: MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS:
All manufactured home parks shall be in conformance with Minnesota State Statutes and Minnesota
Department of Health Regulations. Additionally the following standards shall apply:
A. Lots Combined: Substandard lot (or pad) sizes shall be combined if necessary to accommodate
newer manufactured homes.
B. Location: Manufactured home parks shall be located such that the traffic can be directly handled by
a State/County highway or a City arterial street.
C. Structure Setback: There shall be a one hundred foot (100') structure setback from property lines
adjacent to residential zoned areas.
D. Separation Requirements: Required minimum separation requirements between the homes and all
added structures except uncovered decks no higher than one foot (1') from the ground grade:
Side separation - Twenty feet (20').
End separation - Ten feet (10').
E. Minimum Site Size: Five (5) acre minimum site size. (Ord. 15, 2nd Series, 2-26-1992)
10-8-13: GARAGES, OUTBUILDINGS AND OTHER APPURTENANCES:
A. Side Wall: In a residential and multiple dwelling zone or in any zone with a lot with a residential
dwelling, garages constructed or altered after the effective date of this title may have a side wall of
not more than ten feet eight inches (10'8") in height. The ten foot eight inch (10'8") side wall is
measured from the floor of the garage to the top plate. (Ord. 32, 2nd Series, 12-5-1995)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 189/200
B. Size Limitation: A garage may be eight hundred forty (840) square feet in size or ten percent (10%)
of the lot size up to one thousand eight (1,008) square feet. No more than one structure not
attached to a house will be allowed in the event an eight hundred forty (840) to one thousand eight
(1,008) square foot garage is constructed or located on a lot. The total square footage of
outbuildings on a lot will be limited to eight hundred forty (840) square feet or ten percent (10%) of
the lot size up to one thousand eight (1,008) square feet. (Ord. 70, 2nd Series, 11-6-2001)
C. Satellite Dishes And Solar Panels: Satellite dishes and solar panels must comply with building
setback requirements. Satellite dishes must be behind main structures on lots. (Ord. 32, 2nd
Series, 12-5-1995)
D. Residential Setbacks: Residential setbacks apply in a commercial zone when there is a residential
neighbor. This applies to commercial and residential structures. (Ord. 11, 2nd Series, 5-7-1991)
10-8-14: FENCES:
A. The following definitions shall apply to this section:
FENCE: Any barrier constructed of rails, timbers, wires, boards, stone walls, hedge, metal or any
combination of those materials or any materials which the fence viewers decide are equivalent to
these materials.
HEDGE: A dense row of shrubs forming a boundary.
SPLIT RAIL FENCE: A fence consisting of vertical posts not greater than thirty six inches (36") in
height connected by not more than two (2) horizontal rails that are not greater than six inches (6")
in width with the top of horizontal rails being no higher than thirty inches (30").
B. All fences shall be constructed or erected in a complete and substantial manner and of materials
reasonably suited to the purpose for which the fence is proposed. A fence shall be maintained in a
condition of reasonable repair and shall not be constructed or maintained in a manner that is
dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare. All fences whether constructed, erected, or
replaced shall comply with this section. No barbwire or electric fences or similar special purpose
fences shall be allowed without a conditional use permit from the City.
C. All front yard fences are prohibited, except on corner lots, which constitute two (2) front yards. On a
corner lot one of the front yards shall be considered a side yard as determined by the City. On the
side yard as determined, a fence may be constructed with a twenty five foot (25') setback (same as
for building setback). Decorative corners on corner lots such as split rail or plantings are allowed
as long as they are less than twenty feet (20') in both directions, do not exceed thirty inches (30")
in height and do not constitute a traffic hazard and visibility hazard as determined by the Chief of
Police. No fence shall constitute a traffic hazard.
D. All fences which are constructed, replaced, or erected will require a building permit. A building
permit shall be prepared and submitted to the City on such form as the City may prescribe
accompanied by any fee which the City may establish by resolution.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 190/200
E. No fences shall be constructed or erected higher than six feet (6') except where residential adjoins
commercial or industrial property where an eight foot (8') fence may be constructed or erected.
F. All fences shall be constructed, erected, or maintained at least two feet (2') off all alley right-ofways.
No fence shall be constructed, erected, or maintained on utility easements.
G. Side yard fences shall be constructed, erected, and maintained at least twelve inches (12") from
the adjoining property. The finished side of all fences shall face the adjoining property or right-ofway.
A survey may be required by the City before placing a fence within twelve inches (12") of the
adjoining property or right-of-way. Survey costs are the responsibility of applicant. No survey will
be required if the fence is to be located on or within twelve inches (12") of the adjoining property or
right-of-way and the owners of the adjoining property or right-of-way have entered into a written
agreement approving the proposed location of the fence. Such written agreement must be
recorded in the Office of the County Recorder, Brown County, Minnesota.
H. All fences shall conform to the City on adopted Building Code.
I. All fences which are presently in violation of these regulations will be allowed to continue unless
more than twenty percent (20%) of the fence is repaired, replaced or reconstructed. Current fences
that are determined by the Chief of Police to be considered a potential threat to public health or
safety shall be removed or changed to comply with this section after the property owner has been
given the right to be heard by the City Council. (Ord. 79, 2nd Series, 5-10-2005)
Title 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
LOT DIVISION
11-1-1: LOT DIVISION:
A. No plat, replat, subdivision or division of an existing parcel of land within the City shall be filed or
accepted for filing by the Brown County Recorder unless it is accompanied by a certified copy of a
resolution adopted by the Council approving such plat, re-plat, subdivision or division.
B. The provisions of this section shall apply to all lands currently within the City, or such additional
areas as the City may assert or acquire jurisdiction over in the future. (1988 Code § 2.73)
APPENDICES
APPENDIX A: ANNEXATIONS
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 191/200
Ordinance
Number
Date Of
Adoption
Brief Description
22 7-5-1905
Remmele's 2nd Addition.
38 11-8-
1906
Romberg's Addition.
134 11-7-
1952
Meyer's Addition.
136 4-10-
1953
Lot 2 of Lot N of SW 1/4, 32-110-32.
141 11-3-
1953
Broich's 1st Addition.
148 5-3-1955
Stimpert's 2nd Addition.
213 10-6-
1971
Part of SW 1/4, 32-110-32.
223 10-3-
1972
Lot 4 of E 1/2 of SE 1/4, 31-110-32.
242 3-1-1977
Lot 1 of Lot N of SW 1/4, 32-110-32.
246 10-4-
1977
Lots 5 and 6 of E 1/2 of SE 1/4, 31-110-32.
251 7-5-1978
Parcel abutting Lot 7, Block 1, Friton's 1st Addition.
252 7-5-1978
Lot D-1 of NW 1/4 of NE 1/4, Lots M and N of Lot J of NE-W, 29-110-
32.
257 6-5-1979
Parcel abutting Lot 1 of NE 1/4 of SE 1/4, 31-110-32.
261 7-1-1980
Tract in SE 1/4, 31-110-32.
283 4-4-1985
Parcel abutting Block 1, Nursing Home Addition.
284 5-7-1985
Lots B-3-A and B-3-B of NW 1/4 of NE 1/4, 32-110-32.
285 5-24-
1985
Part of Lot M-4 of M-2 and Lot M-6 of M-1 of SW 1/4 of SE 1/4, 29-
110-32.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 192/200
xxx xxx (Amended by Ord. 289, 11-5-1985; Ord. 293, 4-1-1986)
286 6-4-1985
Tract in Lot N of SW 1/4, 32-110-32.
290 11-5-
1985
Lot 7 of E 1/2 of SE 1/4, 31-110-32.
305 9-1-1987
Tract in N 1/2 of SE 1/4, 31-110-32.
14, 2nd
Series
10-11-
1991
Southerly 530 feet of the westerly 340 feet excepting therefrom the
southerly 40 feet of the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4, Section 29, Township
110N, Range 32 West.
17, 2nd
Series
12-1-
1992
That part of the West half of the Southeast quarter of Section 29,
Township 110 North, Range 32 West.
35, 2nd
Series
8-6-1996
Lot 1, Block 1, Haala's First Addition in the SW 1/4, Section 32,
Township 110, Range 32, Brown County, Minnesota, along with Third
Avenue SW and First Avenue S, adjoining said Lot 1.
38, 2nd
Series
5-6-1997
Lot 1, Block 1, Advertising Unlimited First Addition, N 1/2 of SE 1/4,
Section 31, Township 110N, Range 32 West, Brown County,
Minnesota.
40, 2nd
Series
11-4-
1997
Commencing at the Southeast Corner of Lot 1 Block 5, Friton's Third
Addition to the City of Sleepy Eye, Brown County, Minnesota; thence
North 89 degrees 50 minutes 22 seconds West, an assumed bearing,
along the south line of Friton's Third Addition, Friton's Second
Addition and Stimpert's Addition a distance of 1,134.16 feet to the
east line of First Avenue South; thence South 00 degrees 05 minutes
25 seconds West along said east line of First Avenue South a
distance of 637.57 feet; thence South 89 degrees 50 minutes 23
seconds East to the east line of said balance of Lot N; thence
Northerly along said east line of the balance of Lot N to the north line
of said balance of Lot N; thence Westerly along said north line to the
east line of said Friton's Third Addition; thence Southerly along said
east line of Friton's Third Addition to the point of beginning, containing
41.7 acres more or less and being subject to easements of record in
said county and state.
49, 2nd
Series
8-4-1998
Lots A, H, I, N, J, K and L, all in the SE 1/4, Sec. 29, Twp. 110N,
Range 32 West, and Lot M-6, EXCEPTING the East 434.3 ft. thereof
of the SE 1/4, Sec. 29, Twp. 110N, Range 32 West, Brown County,
Minnesota.
71, 2nd
Series
5-14-
2002
North 232 feet of Lot F of NW1/4 of NE1/4, Section 32, Twp. 110,
Range 32, Brown County, Minnesota.
3-2003 2-11-
2003
Lot A of Government Lot 4 in Section 30, Township 110N, Range
32W, Brown County, Minnesota.
4-2003 3-11- The East 80 ft. of SE1/4 of SW1/4, Sec. 30, Twp. 110, Rge. 32, Brown
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 193/200
2003 County, MN., and the East 80 ft. of that part of Gov't Lot 4 being
southerly of Lot A of Gov't Lot 4, Sec. 30, Twp. 110, Rge. 32, Brown
County, MN.
7-2003 9-9-2003
Lot M-5 (also known as Lot M-5 of M-1) SE1/4, Sec. 29, Twp. 110,
Range 32, Brown County, Minnesota.
76, 2nd
Series
1-11-
2005
Lot 2 of Lot F of the NW 1/4 and Lot E of the NW 1/4, Section 31, Twp.
110N, Range 32W, Brown County, Minnesota.
78, 2nd
Series
5-10-
2005
Lot 2, Block 1, Berkner's Fourth Subdivision in the NW1/4 of Section
31, Township 110N, Range 32W, Brown County, Minnesota; and
that part of the balance of Lot F of the Northwest Quarter of Section
31, Township 110 North, Range 32 West, Brown County, Minnesota,
as described in the ordinance.
103, 2nd
Series
7-13-
2010
Part of Lot N of the SW1/4 of Section 32, Twp. 110N, Range 32W,
Brown County, Minnesota, as described in the ordinance.
104, 2nd
Series
7-13-
2010
Lot I, Lot J, Lot K-2, and part of the balance of Lot K, of the Northeast
Quarter of Section 32, Township 110 North, Range 32 West,
according to the recorded plat thereof, Brown County, Minnesota, as
described in the ordinance.
109, 2nd
Series
9-13-
2011
The North 180 feet of Lot G of the NW1/4 of the NE1/4, Section 32,
Twp. 110, Range 32, Brown County, Minnesota.
130, 2nd
Series
- Description on file in the City.
APPENDIX B: CHARTER AMENDMENTS
Ordinance
Number
Date Of
Adoption Charter Section
207 10-7-1970 Section 2.10
208 10-7-1970 Sections 2.03, 2.07 and 2.08.
229 8-6-1974 Section 11.06a.
48, 2nd Series 7-7-1998 Total charter.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 194/200
APPENDIX C: FRANCHISES
Ordinance
Number
Date Of
Adoption
Brief Description
39 4-5-1907
Railroad franchise to Chicago and North Western Railway Co.
(Amended by Ord. 50, 11-1-1921; Ord. 71, 7-1-1930)
221 8-1-1972
Grants community antenna television franchise to Sleepy Eye CATV,
Inc.
(Amended by Ord. 258, 11-6-1979; Ord. 260, 1-2-1980; Ord. 263, 11-
6-1980; Ord. 276, 12-6-1983; Ord. 301, 12-18-1986)
253 9-5-1978
Grants gas franchise to Minnesota Gas Co.
(Amended by Ord. 50, 2nd Series, 10-6-1998)
19, 2nd
Series
9-7-1993
Granting a cable TV franchise to DD cable holdings.
(Amended by Ord. 59, 2nd Series, 12-7-1999)
89, 2nd
Series
3-13-
2007
Grants gas franchise to CenterPoint Energy.
95, 2nd
Series
2-10-
2009
Extends cable TV franchise with Mediacom through December 4,
2016.
APPENDIX D: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Ordinance
Number
Date Of
Adoption Brief Description
307 3-1-1988 Storm sewer.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 195/200
APPENDIX E: PROPERTY SALES
Ordinance
Number
Date Of
Adoption
Brief Description
160 5-2-1961
S. 10 ft. of Lot E of Outlot 9, Allison's Addn of Outlots in Gov't Lot 3,
29-110-32.
161 7-6-1961
Lot B-1 of SW 1/4 of SE 1/4, 30-110-32.
162 8-1-1961
Lot 2-B-1 of Gov't lot 5 and Lot 1-C of Gov't Lot 1, 8-109-32.
178 11-2-
1965
Lot A of Outlot 27 of Gov't Lot 6, 30-110-32 (with restriction).
216 3-7-1972
Lot 6 of SW 1/4 of NE 1/4, 31-110-32.
223 10-3-
1972
E. 74.02 ft. of Lot B-4 of SW-1/4 of SE 1/4, 30-110-32.
244 6-9-1977
Lot A of SE 1/4 of NE 1/4, Section 19 and Lots B and " of SW 1/4 of
NW 1/4, Section 20, 109-32.
268 9-1-1981
Parcel abutting Lot A of Outlot 27 of Gov't Lot 6, 30-110-32.
275 11-1-
1983
Lot 12 and W. 2 ft. of Lot 11, Block 1, Brackenridge's 1st Addn.
279 5-1-1983
Lot 17, Block 25, Original Plat.
288 11-5-
1983
Lot 1 and E. 6 ft. of Lot 2, Block 37, Original Plat.
292 3-17-
1986
Lot 2, Block 1, Subd. of Block 1, Nursing Home Addn.
302 2-3-1987
Real estate described in lease to Advertising Unlimited, Inc.
(industrial develop. rev. bonds of 1972).
2, 2nd
Series
8-2-1988
Lot 2, Block 1, Americana Addition.
12, 2nd
Series
5-7-1991
Lot B-4, excepting therefrom the East 74.02 feet of the SW 1/4 of SE
1/4, Section 30, Township 110 Range 32.
39, 2nd 7-1-1997 The South 30 feet of the West 140 feet of Locust Street, Outlot 1, City
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 196/200
Series of Sleepy Eye, reserving to the City of Sleepy Eye an easement over
the North 20 feet of said description.
57, 2nd
Series
8-3-1999
Parcel 1. S 1/2 of Lot A of Lots 4, 5 and 6 of Outlot 24, Allison's
Second Addition of Outlots, in Gov't Lot 6, Sec. 30, Twp. 110, Range
32, City of Sleepy Eye, Brown County, MN.
Parcel 2. N 1/2 of Lot A of Lots 4, 5 and 6 of Outlot 24, Allison's
Second Addition of Outlots, in Gov't Lot 6, Sec. 30, Twp. 110, Range
32, City of Sleepy Eye, Brown County, MN.
67, 2nd
Series
5-1-2001
Lots 6, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 and the vacated portion of alley; all in
block 12, original plat, city of Sleepy Eye.
72, 2nd
Series
7-9-2002
That portion of the balance of Lot M-4 of Lot M-2 of the SW1/4 of the
SE1/4 of Section 29, Twp. 110N, Range 32W which lies southerly of a
line commencing at the NE Corner of Lot M-5 of M-1 of the SW1/4 of
the SE1/4, Section 29, Twp. 110N, Range 32W, and thence heading
easterly to the NW Corner of Seven Gables Addition, City of Sleepy
Eye, and there terminating and excepting therefrom the right-of-way
of Trunk Highway #14 as now located and established.
75, 2nd
Series
9-28-
2004
West 66 feet of Lot J of the SE1/4, Section 29, Township 110, Range
32, Brown County, Minnesota.
81, 2nd
Series
2-14-
2006
Lots 9, 10, 11, and 12, Block 2, Nelson's Second Addition, City of
Sleepy Eye.
99, 2nd
Series
6-9-2009
Lot 3, West half of Lot 2, Block 3, Nelson's First Addition, City of
Sleepy Eye, Brown County, Minnesota.
102, 2nd
Series
7-2-2010
Lot 12, Block 10, Brackenridge's First Addition, City of Sleepy Eye,
Brown County, Minnesota.
106, 2nd
Series
6-14-
2011
Lots 6 and 7, Block 23, Original Plat, City of Sleepy Eye, Brown
County, Minnesota.
108, 2nd
Series
7-7-2011
Commencing at the Southwest Corner of Lot F of the NW1/4 of the
NE1/4, Section 32, Twp. 110, Range 32, as the point of beginning;
thence East on the South line of said Lot F and continuing across the
South line of Lot G of the NE1/4 of Section 32, Twp. 110, Range 32,
286.5 feet to the West line of Schreiner's First Addition; thence South
along the West line of Schreiner's First Addition 65 feet; thence West
286.5 feet and parallel to the above described Lot F and Lot G;
thence North 65 feet to the point of beginning, Brown County,
Minnesota.
114, 2nd
Series
5-13-
2013
Lot I, Lot J, Lot K-2, and part of the balance of Lot K, of the Northeast
Quarter of Section 32, Township 110 North, Range 32 West,
according to the recorded plat thereof, Brown County, Minnesota, as
described in the ordinance.
116A, 2nd 12-9- Lots 5, 6, and 7, Block 1, Nelson's Second Addition, the City of
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 197/200
Series 2013 Sleepy Eye, Brown County, Minnesota.
124, 2nd
Series
11-10-
2014
Lot 1 and East 6 feet of Lot 2, Block 37, Original Plat, City of Sleepy
Eye, Brown County, Minnesota.
129, 2nd
Series
3-31-
2016
Description on file in the City.
APPENDIX F: VACATIONS
Ordinance
Number
Date Of
Adoption
Brief Description
157 1961 Part of Oak Street (Sale to George J. Woolrik).
163 8-1-1961
Parts of Third Street and Second Street between Burnside and
Brackenridge Streets, and alleys in Blocks 23, 24 and 25,
Brackenridge's 4th Addition.
182 1966 Part of Oak Street, Outlot No. 2 (Sale to Lampert Lumber Co.).
186 5-27-
1967
Part of Oak Street, Outlot No. 3 (Sale to Sleepy Eye Grain and Feed
Co.).
197 10-1-
1968
Part of Fifth Avenue S.E.
200 5-6-1969
Part of Oak Street, Outlot No. 4.
215 12-7-
1971
Part of 5th Avenue S.E.
228 8-6-1974
Part of Carroll Street and 5th Avenue N.E.
233 7-1-1975
Part of Burnside Street S.W.
241 11-2-
1976
Part of 4th Avenue N.E.
247 10-17-
1977
Part of 5th Avenue N.E. (Sale to Pietrus Foods).
254 2-6-1978
Part of Oak Street.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 198/200
256 4-5-1979
Part of 5th Avenue N.E. north of Carroll Street.
265 3-3-1981
Part of Oak Street (Sale to Sleepy Eye Telephone Co.).
266 4-9-1981
Alley in Block 2, Parkview Addition, W. 40 feet of alley in Block 2,
Haala and
Lambrecht's Addition and reservation of utility easement.
278 4-3-1984
Alley in Block 27, Original Plat.
280 7-3-1984
Alley in Outlot 26, Gov't Lot 6, Allison's 2nd Addition.
281 3-5-1985
Part of 2nd Avenue S.W.
296 9-2-1986
North and south alley, Block 1, Brackenridge 1st Addition.
29, 2nd
Series
8-1-1995
Part of Third Avenue Northeast.
44, 2nd
Series
5-5-1998
Portion of Tenth Avenue Northeast.
64, 2nd
Series
10-31-
2000
Easement abutting on Prescott Street NW.
66, 2nd
Series
5-1-2001
Portion of the east-west alley in block 12, original plat, city of Sleepy
Eye.
68, 2nd
Series
10-2-
2001
Portion of the alley located in block 5, Brackenridge's third addition,
city of Sleepy Eye.
1-2004 1-13-
2004
Portion of Birch Street NE and two utility easements adjacent thereto.
APPENDIX G: ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
Ordinance
Number
Date Of
Adoption Brief Description
24, 2nd Series 9-12-1994 Rezone from general industrial to business/industrial.
33, 2nd Series 5-7-1996 Rezone from business/industrial to residential.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 199/200
53, 2nd Series 3-2-1999 Rezone from general industrial to general residential.
56, 2nd Series 7-6-1999 Rezone from multi-family residential to general residential.
61, 2nd Series 2-1-2000 Rezone from residential to business/industrial.
63, 2nd Series 5-2-2000 Rezone from general industrial to business/industrial.
73, 2nd Series 9-17-2002 Rezone from residential to business/industrial.
87, 2nd Series 12-12-2006 Rezone from residential to business/industrial.
91, 2nd Series 8-14-2007 Rezone from residential to general industrial.
92, 2nd Series 2-12-2008 Rezone from business/industrial to residential.
110, 2nd Series 2-14-2012 Rezone from residential to general industrial.
112, 2nd Series 1-24-2013 Rezone from multi-family to business/industrial.
115, 2nd Series 6-11-2013 Rezone from business/industrial to residential.
119, 2nd Series 3-11-2014 Rezone from residential to business/industrial.
126, 2nd Series 8-20-2015 Rezone from residential to downtown commercial.
APPENDIX H: MISCELLANEOUS SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Ordinance
Number
Date Of
Adoption
Brief Description
158 1961 Bench marks and monuments established.
159 1961 Utility services.
174 7-7-1964
Ordinance codification.
185 3-7-1967
Street names.
43, 2nd
Series
4-7-1998
Dedicating certain lands for street purposes.
2-2003 2-11-
2003
Purchase Lot 7, Block 1; Lot 10, Block 2; and Lots 9 and 10, Block 1;
all in Nelson's Second Addition, City of Sleepy Eye from Brown
County, Minnesota.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1064 200/200
85, 2nd
Series
9-11-
2006
Exchange small parcels of real estate in right-of-way of Third Avenue
North, City of Sleepy Eye.
90, 2nd
Series
5-8-2007
Establishing Haala's Sixth Addition, City of Sleepy Eye.
94, 2nd
Series
8-12-
2008
Transferring easement on property located north of 612 Third Avenue
NW.
111, 2nd
Series
12-11-
2012
Establishing Kiefer's Tenth Addition, City of Sleepy Eye.
113, 2nd
Series
2-12-
2013
Establishing Snow First Subdivision, City of Sleepy Eye.
116, 2nd
Series
9-10-
2013
Establishing Snow Second Addition, City of Sleepy Eye.
120A, 2nd
Series
7-8-2014
Establishing Kiefer's Eleventh Addition, City of Sleepy Eye.
125, 2nd
Series
3-25-
2015
Establishing Snow Third Addition, City of Sleepy Eye.
127, 2nd
Series
4-8-2016
Establishing Sleepy Hollow Fifth Addition, City of Sleepy Eye.
128, 2nd
Series
3-31-
2016
Exchange real estate.
132, 2nd
Series
9-27-
2016
Establishing Janni First Addition, City of Sleepy Eye.